As a teenager in Paris in the 1960's, Serge Weinberg had no intention of becoming a garment maker like his father. ''I was leftist -- May 1968,'' he said. ''I wasn't interested in the apparel business, or any kind of business.''
But now Mr. Weinberg, the chief executive of Pinault-Printemps-Redoute, is in fashion up to his ears -- some would say over his head -- as he deals with the future of Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent.
For Mr. Weinberg, who was virtually invisible in the fashion world until a few months ago, the pressures could not be greater. Not only must he find successors for Domenico de Sole and Tom Ford, the team that built Gucci into a glamorous brand, but, in the long term, he has to show investors that P.P.R. did not err by selling off profitable assets to finance the $8 billion investment in Gucci that plunged the company into the luxury goods market.
As months pass without successors to Mr. Ford and Mr. de Sole, analysts warn, P.P.R. could see an erosion of investor confidence. But despite the thirst for news about who will lead Gucci, Mr. Weinberg said in an interview in Paris last month that no announcement would be made until after Mr. Ford shows his final collection in mid-March.
What most interests the fashion world is whether the cautious, exacting Mr. Weinberg possesses the tolerance for the creative process, which by nature is messy and optimistic. ''I'm not sure that 'precise' is such a good quality to have for fashion,'' said Karl Lagerfeld, the designer at Chanel who speaks regularly with François Pinault, P.P.R.'s founder. ''We're not talking about potatoes, after all. And a hot potato can go cold.''
Mr. Weinberg, who is working alongside Mr. Pinault's son, François-Henri Pinault, to find new leadership for Gucci, will not discuss the details of his search. But he has had conversations with Alexander McQueen, the British designer whose label is owned by Gucci and who is seen as a candidate to design Saint Laurent -- provided the feisty Mr. McQueen can be persuaded to take the job. Narciso Rodriguez, an American designer, has been reported to be a leading candidate for Gucci. Both designers declined to comment.
Mr. Weinberg, 52, is in this spot because two months ago he and Mr. de Sole, the chief executive of Gucci, and Mr. Ford, its creative director, could not agree on who should run Gucci -- its owner or its architects. Mr. Ford and Mr. de Sole had insisted on being allowed to run Gucci and its subsidiaries, which include Saint Laurent, without intervention from P.P.R., a demand that Mr. Weinberg refused to meet. Both Mr. Ford and Mr. de Sole, who declined to comment for this article, will leave in April when their contracts expire.
The decision by P.P.R. to let go the two people most closely identified with the brand's fortunes stunned the fashion world, and at the same time, raised questions about Mr. Weinberg's knowledge of the high-stakes luxury business.
Within Gucci, senior executives say there is a prevailing sense that Mr. Weinberg does not fully understand the factors that went into the brand's success and that he saw in the obsessive Mr. Ford only a demanding star.
''I think Serge sees the outside, the flash, and doesn't understand the work behind it-- the tensions, what it means to be stuck six days before a show and have to throw out a collection,'' a senior Gucci executive said. ''He doesn't have a clue about that.''
Mr. Weinberg said, ''Let's not forget one thing, I'm not going to be C.E.O. of the Gucci Group.'' He admits to being surprised, as he delves into Gucci and Saint Laurent, at the complexity of the creative process, but, he says, these concerns will rest on the managers he hires.
Nor is it clear that Mr. Weinberg even accepts the widely held premise that brands like Gucci need star talent. He said that when it came to Gucci, people bought the brand rather than a designer, suggesting that Mr. Ford's successor could be an anonymous figure from within Gucci's ranks.
''Tom is the example of a designer whose vision is very strong, undoubtedly,'' Mr. Weinberg said. ''But everybody should be reminded that Gucci started with a totally unknown designer.''
In his modestly outfitted Paris office, where one wall holds a moody abstract canvas by the Russian émigré painter Yuri Kuper and another has a framed cartoon that says, in French, ''I regret nothing,'' Mr. Weinberg acknowledged that the fashion world, which has confounded many a superior brain with its impractical way of thinking, presents a new challenge to him.
''I have to learn, I'm conscious about that,'' he said. ''I'm listening carefully, I'm asking questions, I'm starting to test my thoughts.'' He added, with a smile: ''Every type of business universe tends to develop a self-consciousness toward newcomers, or at least is designed to prevent newcomers from entering. Maybe the barriers to entry into fashion are higher than in other worlds.''
Mr. Weinberg has successfully crossed other divides. A product of two elite French universities, he started his career in the d'Estaing government, rising to chief of staff to the finance minister, Laurent Fabius. He then worked in the broadcasting and leisure businesses. He was an investment banker in 1990 when François Pinault, then on his way to building Europe's largest nonfood retailer, hired him to run an African shipping unit.
Mr. Weinberg took over as P.P.R.'s chief executive in 1995, running a sprawling conglomerate empire that included Printemps department stores, the Fnac electronics chain and the Redcats home-shopping network and, in 1999, Gucci. Under his watch, the company's sales more than doubled to about 27.4 million euros in 2002 (about $35 million in today's currency).
In conversation, he is soft-spoken, precise and, occasionally, sarcastically funny. He presents the face of a cold manager, which is partly deliberate. Being an ''active pessimist,'' Mr. Weinberg said, he questioned whether image -- the fashion world's favorite amulet -- really provided magic, noting that some star names have failed to get a reasonable amount of sales. (One such name, though he tactfully did not mention her, is Stella McCartney; her brand, owned by Gucci, had losses in the latest year of $8 million.)
''The reality is he has a great sense of what's going on,'' said Maurice Lévy, the chief executive of Publicis, the advertising agency, and a friend of Mr. Weinberg for 20 years. Mr. Weinberg prefers small dinner parties where he can ''communicate'' and admits that, until recently, his main contact with high fashion has been his model-slim wife, Nicole. ''She's almost a fashion professional,'' he said.
Ron Frasch, the chief executive of Bergdorf Goodman, said he was impressed by Mr. Weinberg's familiarity with the store and its merchandise, though the two met for the first time only in December, when Mr. Weinberg was in New York. ''He absolutely knew what he was talking about,'' Mr. Frasch said.
More than one American retailer expressed amazement at not having met Mr. Weinberg -- or François Pinault, whom they have glimpsed at fashion shows -- sooner. But Mr. Ford and Mr. de Sole did not want anyone else representing Gucci. They formed a unified front, with decisions and information passing between them and a small group of managers. People in both camps say that Mr. de Sole often found Mr. Weinberg's questions meddlesome and rebuffed him.
''I think one of the big problems is that P.P.R. has really not been able to get inside Gucci,'' a London-based analyst said.
In contrast to his daring boss, Mr. Weinberg is often depicted as the dry numbers type, known for demanding high goals, and facts, but also for giving unit-level managers autonomy.
''I've never seen Serge try to micromanage,'' said Laurence Danon, the chairman of Printemps, whom Mr. Weinberg recruited three years ago from the adhesives industry. The Paris flagship has been recently renovated, with more emphasis on fashion, cosmetics and customer service.
Still, there is room for improvement. Before Christmas, racks of Alexander McQueen and Stella McCartney clothes could be found clumped in a corner near a skywalk, without signs or trappings -- a tough way to sell $600 tops and $1,800 jackets.
It remains to be seen how Mr. Weinberg will reconcile the demands of designers with his views. He was against Mr. Ford's designing both Gucci and Saint Laurent, and presumably this will be a condition for successors -- that they work on only one label, requiring stars like Mr. McQueen to give up their own lines.
But the best candidates are likely to be resistant. A P.P.R. spokesman was skeptical about continuing speculation in London that P.P.R. will try to force Mr. McQueen to Saint Laurent by threatening to sell his brand. A Gucci executive was equally dubious, saying, ''They can't use a stick on McQueen.''
Simon Irwin, a retail analyst at BNP Paribas Bank, said P.P.R. certainly had reason to push the British star. ''They're not getting enough leverage out of the McQueen brand,'' Mr. Irwin said. ''I think it would be a good decision to move him to Saint Laurent. It hasn't done Marc Jacobs any harm.'' Mr. Jacobs is the designer at Louis Vuitton, as well as his own label, and though he had problems adjusting to the corporate structure of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, it also brought him wider fame and influence.
Mr. Irwin added: ''What are McQueen's options? In this environment, there are far more sellers of niche brands than buyers.''
Mr. Weinberg's friends say that despite his relative unfamiliarity with the business, he is capable of making the best long-term decisions for the company.
''I'm pretty sure Serge will pick the right people,'' said his friend, Mr. Lévy, though he thinks that Mr. Weinberg needs to ''immerse himself in the fashion world a little bit more.''
On that point Mr. Weinberg is divided. ''I've always thought I should be sitting between two chairs -- to me, that's the best and most comfortable situation,'' he said. ''The day I become part of one world is to be a prisoner of all the prejudices that exist in any kind of world.'' Come April, he may be forced to take a chair.
