Schools Superintendent Vincent T. Beni was back on the job Friday after arraignment on misdemeanor charges of stalking and harassing a former girlfriend, school officials said.
On Thursday, Dr. Beni, 54, pleaded not guilty in White Plains City Court to charges of second-degree aggravated harassment and stalking in the fourth degree after turning himself over to the police.
Dr. Beni was released without bail by Judge Barbara Leak, who also issued an order barring him from any contact with the woman, whom the authorities declined to identify.
Officials of the Irvington Union Free School District said Dr. Beni was at a conference on Friday and would continue with his duties as the case proceeded through the court system. Penny Delany, school board president, said she had received no calls from parents regarding the superintendent's arrest.
''We believe that the presumption of innocence must be observed,'' she said, reading a statement released by the board. ''The board notes that the allegations appear to be unrelated to Dr. Beni's duties as superintendent of schools and that they do not involve district staff or students.''
The board expressed confidence in Dr. Beni's ability to run the district until his June retirement, which was announced last October. ''We'll be monitoring the situation,'' Ms. Delany said.
According to a police report from Nov. 30, 2003, Dr. Beni made harassing phone calls to his former girlfriend and may have been driving near her home in White Plains. A similar report was filed on Dec. 19.
The police said the woman, identified as a 46-year-old employee of the Mamaroneck school district, told them that she and Dr. Beni, who is married, had a relationship that ended last summer.
''This is a boyfriend-girlfriend thing that went too far,'' said Inspector Daniel Jackson, a spokesman for the White Plains police.
Kevin Kitson, Dr. Beni's lawyer, was unavailable for comment, his office said. The Journal News reported that Mr. Kitson said Dr. Beni and the woman had had a relationship for five years. ''It's just unfortunate that what amounts to a social problem, because of her complaint, turned into a criminal problem,'' Mr. Kitson said.
The aggravated harassment charge carries a maximum penalty of one year in jail, while the stalking charge carries a maximum sentence of six months in jail.
Dr. Beni has been a superintendent for 17 years, the last six of those in Irvington. He also has a part-time business, Focus Consulting, that assists school districts in searches for new superintendents.
