The Big Three are putting a bullish face on 2004, predicting that a wave of new products, aided by an improving economy, will increase earnings and might even cool off their price war.
The first week of the year is always a big one in Detroit, opening with the press preview of the North American International Auto Show, where the industry shows off its new cars and trucks with plenty of pomp, rock and smoke machines.
Then the automakers get down to the business of the business as General Motors, the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler division of DaimlerChrysler meet with analysts and lay out their financial forecasts.
The view from the auto show floor showed that the brutal battle for market share will continue in the United States, the most lucrative auto market.
The traditional domestic industry has not been faring well, with its share down to 60.2 percent last year from 61.7 percent in 2002, according to the AutodataCorporation.
In the past, the Big Three invented their way out of trouble by creating new categories, like sport utility vehicles and minivans, while the Japanese focused on producing high-quality entries into existing markets.
Now, with no breakthrough segments on the horizon, automakers are attacking each other's traditional areas of strength, with the Japanese redoubling their efforts on pickup trucks and the Big Three trying to win back buyers of passenger cars.
That could make this year's economic climate crucial in meeting profit goals, but automakers may have to continue to rely heavily on incentives to bring customers into showrooms.
''The Big Three expect an improving economy to support better pricing in 2004; we don't,'' Gary Lapidus, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, wrote in a report. He says that weaker household spending will pressure sales and prices and that it will be difficult to maintain sales levels in the robust range of 17 million cars and trucks nationwide, as the industry expects.
''If the industry wants to sell 17 million vehicles, it can, if it lowers the price enough,'' he said.
Incentives have already been at record highs and show few signs of abating. Through November 2003, incentives by the domestic automakers averaged $3,310 for each vehicle, compared with $2,440 in the period a year earlier, according to Edmunds.com. That compared with $941 a vehicle from the Japanese brands in 2003, which have lower incentives for a variety of reasons, including better quality reputations and favorable exchange rates.
General Motors, which includes brands like Chevrolet, Pontiac, Cadillac and Hummer, dug itself into a hole in 2003 when sales lagged in the first quarter after a big sales push in December 2002. With no interest in repeating an early slump, G.M. has rolled out aggressive incentives already, extending to five-year interest-free loans on most of its sport utility vehicles and pickup trucks.
That is on top of GM HotButton, a new promotional campaign that will give away 1,000 G.M. vehicles to customers who visit showrooms. At $50 million, the campaign is double what G.M. typically spends on a summer drive or year-end push and considerably more than at the beginning of the year. Technically speaking, it is not a sales incentive because the $50 million comes out of the advertising budget.
Then again, the company will count these 1,000 vehicle giveaways as sales.
Chrysler has its own new sweeping incentives, adding a $2,000 rebate on top of four-year zero percent financing deals. Ford is expected to announce a new marketing program next week.
The hope is that some of Detroit's new products, including new passenger car entries from each of the Big Three, will mitigate the price war when they are introduced later in the year.
''A lot of our production in '04 is going to be new products, over 20 percent,'' said Rick Wagoner, G.M.'s chairman and chief executive. ''We put that against what seems to be, by all measures, an improving economic environment, and I think it suggests that at least the environment for some mitigation in the growth of incentives looks pretty good.''
Nicholas V. Scheele, Ford's chief operating officer, said on Friday that the rising tide of incentives had also been offset in part by customers' trading up to more expensive models as everything becomes cheaper.
On Friday, Ford forecast 2004 earnings of $1.20 to $1.30 a share, better than last year's but at the low end of analysts' expectations. Executives say the company's two-year-old turnaround plan will return the company to decent, if not standout, levels of profitability within a couple of years.
Ford expects its automotive business to start generating profits again this year. Over all, the company is expecting a slight profit for 2003 after losing $6.4 billion over the previous two years.
''We're not where we need to be yet, but we're further along than many people realize,'' said William Clay Ford Jr., Ford's chairman and chief executive. ''This is the year we're going to keep building on that momentum and delivering on our commitments.''
