Italian financial police searched the Milan offices of Bank of America on Friday as they sought evidence about the role that banks and auditors might have played in the collapse of Parmalat. And a top Parmalat executive, Giovanni Bonici, returned to Italy from Venezuela to face questioning from prosecutors.
A Milan prosecutor and investigators spent nearly eight hours at Bank of America's offices and left with dozens of cartons, a day after one of the bank's former employees was questioned.
Parmalat began to unravel on Dec. 19, when it disclosed that a Bank of America account that supposedly held nearly $5 billion of its money did not exist. Investigators widened their investigation of Parmalat this week to focus on the role that Italian and foreign banks and advisers may have played.
The scandal at Parmalat has roiled one of the most prominent symbols of its ambitions, the Parma AC soccer team. On Friday, Stefano Tanzi, the son of Calisto Tanzi, Parmalat's jailed founder, was forced to resign as president of the team. Stefano's cousin, Paolo, also resigned. Three other board members quit previously.
The resignations will result in the dissolution of the board, leaving the club in the control of the court-appointed administrators of Parmalat. The company intends to sell the club as part of its restructuring plan, but a lawyer for the company, Umberto Tracanella, said ''There's a future for Parma.''
Parma, bolstered by big spending from Parmalat, became a power in Italian soccer in the 1990's, winning three Italian cups and two UEFA Cups in Europe. On Saturday, the team is scheduled to play its first home game, against Inter Milan, since Parmalat filed for bankruptcy last month.
Stefano Tanzi left the team's stadium after the board meeting, refusing to comment before entering a silver Audi and driving away.
Another former member of the board of Parma was Fausto Tonna, Parmalat's former finance officer, who this week spent three days in marathon interrogations with investigators in Parma describing in detail financial techniques that were used to create the appearance of assets and hide debts.
Transcripts of those interviews show that Mr. Tonna identified several people from the company who were aware of Parmalat's deteriorating finances.
''Calisto Tanzi asked me never to tell the board of directors the seriousness of the situation and the exact techniques used to hide it,'' Mr. Tonna said, according to the transcripts.
Some members of Parmalat's board were aware that the company's financial situation was gradually deteriorating, based upon budget and monthly management reports, the transcripts show.
Nine people, including Calisto Tanzi, have been arrested in the Parmalat case. Mr. Bonici, the former head of Parmalat's operations in Venezuela, turned himself in to prosecutors and was jailed on Friday after briefly appearing at the Parma courthouse. Mr. Bonici was also president of Bonlat, a Parmalat unit that investigators say was at the center of a web of offshore front companies.
His arrest order was issued on Dec. 31, but he had remained in Venezuela while his lawyer, Antonino Tuccari, negotiated his return.
In an interview, Mr. Tuccari said Mr. Bonici was not guilty of a criminal act, but he said that Mr. Bonici might have violated some administrative laws and should face some administrative penalties. Mr. Bonici was often asked to sign the last sheet of financial documents without seeing the entire set, his lawyer said. If he did not do it, Mr. Tuccari said, ''they would have found someone else to do it.''
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
