As Jason Kidd left the Wachovia Center on Friday night, his left hand was buried deep in the pocket of his leather coat.
Only once did he take his hand out of the pocket, to hug an old friend, briefly revealing a swollen middle finger that was covered by a black sleeve.
The Nets said that X-rays showed no break and that Kidd had a sprain, which came during Friday's 97-81 loss to the Philadelphia 76ers. Kidd promised to play in the next game, Wednesday against Washington, but at the time he was hurt, the injury appeared more severe.
In the fourth quarter of an already painful performance, Kidd's left hand hit Derrick Coleman's forearm while Kidd was trying to receive a give-and-go pass from Richard Jefferson. Kidd doubled over and went to the locker room, where he spent the last seven minutes of the game icing the finger.
''It hurt,'' Kidd said. ''I'm just glad it's not broken. It will be sore for a couple of days, but I'll be ready to go. Nothing went our way tonight.''
Kidd said he would experiment with taping two fingers together, and he suggested the injury could not hurt his shooting: he was 3 of 13 from the field against the 76ers. Rodney Rogers, starting for the suspended forward Kenyon Martin, missed eight shots in a row during one stretch.
When the Nets walked into the Wachovia Center, they immediately complained of a chill in the air. Kidd pondered whether he could wear an extra layer of clothing on the court, and Brian Scalabrine asked an arena official if he could turn up the heat.
Glenn Robinson complied. During a sizzling first half, he made 11 of 15 shots and scored 24 of his season-high 26 points. It did not even matter that Allen Iverson had flulike symptoms and did not make his first field goal until 2 minutes 13 seconds remained in the third quarter. Robinson took advantage of Jefferson and boosted his team to a quick 51-29 lead.
''I don't remember too many games besides probably Larry Bird, or somebody like that, scoring 26 points all on jumpers,'' Iverson said.
Jefferson said of Robinson, ''I've got to come out and play better against him next time.''
Nets Coach Byron Scott spoke with Jefferson after the game and said he had been ''a little soft'' guarding Robinson in the first half. The Nets usually counter with Martin in such situations, but he was at home, serving the first game of his two-game suspension for fighting with the Los Angeles Clippers' Corey Maggette on Tuesday.
Scott called Martin ''our emotional leader,'' and without him the Nets showed little spunk. They allowed Philadelphia to take target practice from the perimeter, shooting 55.6 percent from 3-point range, and they were badly outrebounded, 48-30, which is how their lack of energy usually manifests itself.
The Nets never made a comeback and never got within 13 points in the second half. This was their only game in a seven-day span, but they apparently wanted the whole week off.
''From the beginning, we didn't have the intensity we've had recently,'' Scott said. ''We were almost going through the motions.''
The Nets went bowling Wednesday and to a team dinner Thursday, but their bonding exercise was temporarily halted in Philadelphia. Just as the Nets seemed to have meshed, the 76ers tore them apart and dealt them their worst loss since a 47-point fiasco in Memphis, which was followed by an outburst that Kidd directed at Scott.
Once again, Kidd was the center of attention after another blowout. And once again, the long-term effects are still unknown.
REBOUNDS
EDDIE GRIFFIN was placed on the injured list Friday even though Coach BYRON SCOTT initially thought he might be able to play right away. Scott put Griffin through a workout in Philadelphia and discovered he was out of shape and is probably a couple of weeks away from playing. The Nets have restricted news media access to Griffin and surrounded him with a support team that includes a representative from the N.B.A. Players Association and a counselor the club hired to help him get settled. Griffin went to dinner with the Nets on Thursday and compared his new team with his old one, the Houston Rockets. ''I can tell it's more like all the guys get along,'' Griffin said. . . . After failing to land CHARLIE WARD, the Nets re-signed ROBERT PACK to a 10-day contract and activated ZORAN PLANINIC for the first time since Dec. 12. Ward signed a two-year contract with the San Antonio Spurs on Friday, and the second year is his option. . . . AARON WILLIAMS, who pulled a groin muscle three weeks ago, played for the first time in 10 games.
PRO BASKETBALL
