The Defense Department said Friday that it had designated Saddam Hussein a prisoner of war, a legal status that sets standards for how he is treated and allows the International Committee of the Red Cross to see him.
A Pentagon spokesman, Bryan Whitman, said Mr. Hussein ''is an enemy prisoner of war, and he'll continue to be an enemy prisoner of war unless and until his status is determined to be otherwise.''
A Red Cross official, Christophe Girod, said his organization had been talking with Pentagon officials about getting access to Mr. Hussein, under the rights granted to prisoners of war by the Geneva Conventions. He said his organization had received ''no negative signal'' in response, but had not yet been promised access.
At the same time, senior American officials said the Federal Bureau of Investigation had become increasingly involved in questioning Mr. Hussein, signaling that the authorities now view him as a potential defendant in a legal proceeding as well as an intelligence source.
While the Central Intelligence Agency remains in overall control, the F.B.I. involvement reflects C.I.A. reluctance to allow covert officers to take part in interrogations that could force them to appear as court witnesses. In contrast, F.B.I. agents are trained to interview suspects in preparation for prosecutions.
Since Mr. Hussein's capture on Dec. 13, American officials have for the most part clamped a tight lid on information about him. Four members of the Iraqi Governing Council were allowed to see him briefly to help confirm that he was, in fact, Saddam Hussein. And some people have seen photographs of his jail cell at an undisclosed location in Iraq, reporting that it appears to be a windowless room with a shower and floor-to-ceiling white tile walls.
One American official described the interrogation of the former Iraqi dictator as ''a chess game'' with him in which agents would seek admissions about his role in assassinations, mass killings and other abuses of power, knowing that he had little incentive to speak candidly.
A prosecution of Mr. Hussein would not necessarily rely on information from his interrogation. A large body of documentary material and witnesses, supporting charges of atrocities by his government over two decades, has already been assembled by human rights groups and the United States government.
The Bush administration has said Mr. Hussein will eventually be turned over to a new Iraqi government, and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell reiterated that pledge on Friday, saying Mr. Hussein would be ''put on trial with international observers participating.''
In a television interview with an Israeli reporter, Mr. Powell also said, ''We are certainly treating everybody in our custody in accordance with basic rights and expectations of international agreements that we have.''
Ruth Wedgwood, an expert on the Geneva Conventions who is a professor at Johns Hopkins University, said a declaration of prisoner-of-war status would impose some strictures on the manner in which Mr. Hussein could be interrogated.
The Geneva Conventions prohibit both unpleasant and unequal treatment of prisoners, Ms. Wedgwood said, meaning for example that Mr. Hussein could not be threatened with punishment or promised improved conditions in return for cooperation.
As for Mr. Hussein, Ms. Wedgwood said, ''Frankly, he's such a hard-core thug that he's going to tell you what he wants to, and not otherwise.''
''It's mostly a political decision,'' she said. 'Thug though he is, treating him as opposing commander in chief may have some positive reception in the Arab world.''
American commanders in Iraq have said for weeks that Mr. Hussein would be treated as a prisoner of war while legal experts determined his status.
On Friday, a senior Defense Department official said that a review by administration lawyers that was completed this week had determined that it was important ''to be precise about his status'' and that Mr. Hussein did indeed meet that qualification.
After releasing photographs of a disheveled Mr. Hussein shortly after his capture, American military and civilian officials provided some details about the early hours of his time in custody. But little additional information emerged until Friday, when American and British officials said his C.I.A. interrogators had been taking a gentle approach in their questioning of him, consistent with the plans to treat him as if he was a prisoner of war.
Mr. Hussein has refused to cooperate with American interrogators, and has provided little or no useful information to them. Still, the officials said they were hopeful that he might begin to cooperate, and they said the documents found with him at his hiding place near Tikrit were continuing to yield rich intelligence dividends, providing clues about the organization of the Iraqi insurgency.
One alternative to declaring Mr. Hussein a prisoner of war would have been to identify him as an unlawful combatant, according to military officials. That status -- the one assigned by American officials to suspected terrorists being held at Guantánamo Bay and other locations around the world -- would leave him without protection under the Geneva Conventions.
Assigning Mr. Hussein prisoner-of-war status would also require that he be repatriated to a new Iraqi government after the United States declares an end to hostilities, Mr. Girod of the Red Cross said.
A Defense Department spokesman, Maj. Michael Shavers of the Air Force, said it was a matter of Mr. Hussein's military role.
''The bottom line is that Saddam Hussein was the leader of the old regime's military forces, and therefore he was a member of the military, and he was captured,'' Major Shavers said. ''That makes him an enemy prisoner of war.''
The first details about Mr. Hussein's interrogation were provided by a British official who spoke on condition of anonymity at a briefing in London. American officials in Washington, who also spoke on condition of anonymity, provided general corroboration of that account.
Since Mr. Hussein's capture, American commanders in Iraq have said it has become easier to obtain information from Iraqis about the insurgency. But attacks against American targets have continued.
Mr. Powell declined to say when Mr. Hussein might be turned over to Iraqi custody, but he suggested that it could happen as early as July, when a a provisional Iraqi authority is to be installed.
''We believe the credibility of the new Iraqi government will be measured by how they handle this horrible dictator,'' Mr. Powell said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: CAPTIVE  Correction:  January 12, 2004, Monday  A front-page article on Saturday about the status of Saddam Hussein as a prisoner of war misattributed a radio interview in which Secretary of State Colin L. Powell spoke about Mr. Hussein's treatment. Mr. Powell spoke with CBS News, not with an Israeli reporter.
