It is not easy guiding your team from under the guillotine, but Don Chaney will try Saturday night at Madison Square Garden.
On Friday, the day after he endured ''Fire Chaney'' chants during an embarrassing blowout loss to Houston at home, he addressed his tenuous status as Knicks coach at the team's practice facility.
He managed a laugh when he was informed that the team's former president, Scott Layden, lasted a year and a half after Knick fans first began chanting ''Fire Layden''. Chaney also understands that, drastic roster changes aside, directing a team that is 14-23 -- and 71-111 during his tenure -- is not exactly grounds for a third contract extension.
A demoralizing loss Saturday night at the Garden to Milwaukee could result in his firing by Isiah Thomas, who has already shipped off almost half the roster since being named team president two weeks ago.
''I don't believe in excuses,'' Chaney said.
''My job is to win. It doesn't matter if we have new people or we have hurt guys. My job is to win. I know that Isiah has a job to do as well. He has to make a decision based on patience or no patience.''
Given the speed in which Thomas acquired Stephon Marbury and dealt Antonio McDyess, released players he deemed expendable and remodeled the organization, Chaney cannot be feeling good about his prospects.
Chaney and Thomas spoke after practice, but Thomas did not speak to newspaper reporters.
If Chaney were to be removed in the next week, he would become the latest coach released in what is surely America's most demanding sports market -- a market that in the last year alone has claimed the jobs of the Giants' Jim Fassel, St. John's Mike Jarvis, the Rangers' Bryan Trottier and the Islanders' Peter Laviolette -- and that list doesn't cover Mets General Manager Steve Phillips and Layden.
Many of the players supported Chaney. They blamed themselves for a horrendous first quarter against the Rockets; the score was 23-2 at one point.
They kept talking about the need for time, so that a rhythm could develop between Marbury and his new teammates.
Marbury, an All-Star point guard, was acquired from Phoenix this week and did not showcase his offensive wares in losses to Cleveland and the Rockets.
''You want to make it work so much you press to make every shot,'' Allan Houston said. He added that he and Keith Van Horn needed to stop settling for jumpers that chip paint off the rim and begin receiving the ball in the post, where they can use their arsenals better.
On one hand, the Knicks are playing in one of the most abysmal, parity-stricken basketball conferences in the history of the game -- the Eastern Conference, where 18-19 Boston is good for second in the Atlantic Division.
The Knicks should have at least two months before they are in danger of being mathematically eliminated from playoff contention.
But falling 10 games under .500 in early January does not bode well. So Chaney is caught walking that fine line between waiting for new players to coalesce and needing victories, immediately.
The thinking around New York and the N.B.A. is that there is only one chance for a commuted sentence: a victory followed by a few more.
As to who would walk the sideline if Chaney were removed soon, Thomas jumps to the forefront. Perhaps the greatest little man in the history of the game, Thomas has created a fair amount of buzz since his hiring, and the idea of his bringing in a prominent name that would detract from his own star does not seem likely.
So a marquee coach like Doc Rivers seems out for now.
Chuck Daly, 74, a Hall of Fame coach who got along famously with Thomas in Detroit and won two championships with him, is certainly out of the picture.
In a telephone interview Friday, he told a New York Times reporter that he had not spoken to Thomas recently and ''had no interest in the job.''
Brendan Malone, a Knicks assistant who coached under Thomas in Toronto, is the most likely candidate to emerge from the bench should Thomas not take the job or bring in another candidate.
Either way, Chaney's days on the job seem numbered unless the Knicks change course quickly.
Almost like Tim Floyd in Chicago during the post-Jordan years, Chaney was pegged to lead the Knicks through lean times when he replaced Jeff Van Gundy in December 2001.
He has been a solid company man, and has been grateful that the Knicks have shown confidence in his abilities this long.
But when asked whether he would feel cheated if he were fired with this new roster -- easily the most healthy and talented collection of players Chaney has had in New York -- he nodded, yes, he would.
''I think if I have a chance to finish with this team, we'll be in the playoffs,'' he said.
''I think if we get together, we definitely have a chance to be a playoff team, no question about it. It would be very disappointing if I'm not here to share that.''
PRO BASKETBALL
