New York City officials agreed yesterday to take the extraordinary step of permanently closing an exit ramp off the West Side Highway to accommodate the developer Donald Trump's vision for his $3 billion project on the Upper West Side.
The project, known as Trump Place, is expected to stretch from 59th Street to 72nd Street and include 17 waterfront buildings, 5,700 apartment units, 137,800 feet of retail space and a 21.5-acre park. Several buildings have been finished and tenants have begun moving in.
A key element of Mr. Trump's plan has been the construction of a new north-south throughway, called Riverside Boulevard, that would run parallel to West End Avenue on the east and offer unimpeded passage from Riverside Drive at 72nd Street to 12th Avenue at 59th Street.
To make room for the crucial link at 72nd Street, however, Mr. Trump's plan required the closing of the northbound exit ramp off Route 9A because it was in the way, and yesterday city officials signed off on the closing.
Neighborhood groups and local politicians expressed outrage yesterday at the decision to close the ramp, saying that officials have agreed to redraw the city map to accommodate one person's project. Assemblyman Scott M. Stringer, Congressman Jerrold L. Nadler and City Councilwoman Gale A. Brewer recently met with city officials to lobby against the closing.
''This benefits one individual, Donald Trump,'' said Mr. Stringer, who represents the Upper West Side. ''And the reality is, there is a potential for a traffic nightmare.''
Mr. Trump's complex was approved more than a decade ago, after a protracted struggle. But construction on the project has taken time, as he has fought off lawsuits and community opposition, and when he finally asked last February that he be allowed to proceed with the closing of the exit ramp, the New York City Department of Transportation told him he needed to provide new information to prove that traffic, air quality and other conditions had not changed significantly.
''I was a little surprised when all of a sudden they said, 'Why don't we review this. Maybe we don't want to do it,' '' Mr. Trump said yesterday in a telephone interview. ''This was something that was agreed to, signed and sealed.''
Only a small section of the boulevard has been built, as Mr. Trump has been coordinating roadwork with completion of the buildings. Recently he began working on Building A, which is on 72nd Street and requires the ramp to be closed.
The developer eventually came back with an assessment that conditions had not changed significantly, and city officials took several months to study it. Yesterday, they issued a letter reauthorizing the closing, provided that Mr. Trump redraw the lanes on West End Avenue to include a turning lane. This will help mitigate the extra traffic on the road, before the full length of the boulevard is finally completed in 2012, officials said.
West End Avenue now has two lanes in each direction, and parking lanes on both sides. The street is already wide enough to hold more lanes, officials said. Lines will be repainted so that there will be three lanes in both directions, along with the turning lane. This will probably mean, however, that parking will be prohibited from 7 to 10 a.m. on the southbound side and 4 to 7 p.m. on the northbound side, something that has upset residents.
Residents are afraid the closing of the exit ramp will force extra traffic onto West End Avenue, which they say is already overburdened with vehicles. Residents also have complained that traffic on Route 9A would back up at the next exit to the north, 79th Street, where they say traffic congestion already exists.
''Our streets really can't handle all the automobiles that we have,'' said Dale Brown, a member of the West 79th Street Museum Block Association.
But city officials said their analysis showed that traffic congestion would not worsen significantly after the ramp closing. Only about four cars per minute use the exit during rush hour, said Michael Primeggia, deputy commissioner of traffic operations for the city's Transportation Department.
''In Manhattan, that's a sneeze,'' he said.
In contrast, more than nine cars a minute use sections of busy north-south avenues, he said.
Several community groups had pushed city officials to consider alternative plans that they said would allow the exit ramp to coexist with the completed boulevard, but officials said the plans did not hold up after analysis.
''It seems to me that they're thumbing their noses at the whole west side,'' said Madeleine Polayes, the president of the Coalition for a Livable West Side, one of the groups fighting the closing. ''We'll do what we want to do. We don't have to listen to anybody.''
