The promoter and lawyer for the superwelterweight boxer Shane Mosley yesterday disputed a report that an investigation by the F.B.I. and the New York Police Department had found evidence that his fight last September against Oscar De La Hoya might have been fixed.
''Under no circumstance, no way, no how, was this fight fixed,'' Gary Shaw, Mosley's promoter, said during a conference call. ''It was close. It could have gone either way.''
The Daily News reported yesterday that a 20-month investigation into boxing had uncovered evidence that scales were tampered with and medical documents had been forged. The story did not specify which boxers or promoters were involved, or how many fights it had investigated. Late in the investigation, the F.B.I. came upon information about the De La Hoya-Mosley bout last Sept. 13 in Las Vegas.
Several law enforcement officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that Bob Arum, the head of Top Rank, which promotes De La Hoya, is one of the targets of the F.B.I.'s investigation. They said the inquiry has centered on allegations of fixed fights, in some cases possibly as a result of forged medical documents.
Judd Burstein, Mosley's lawyer, said, ''The idea that Bob Arum would fix a fight against his own fighter is ridiculous.''
Mosley won the unanimous decision, but in the immediate aftermath De La Hoya insisted he had won and demanded an investigation. Arum suggested that the fight was fixed, but subsequently apologized for making the accusations.
On Tuesday, the office of Arum's Top Rank organization in Las Vegas was raided by six F.B.I. agents who seized 10 computers, documents and videotaped fights, but what they were seeking was not specified in their search warrants, Lee Samuels, a spokesman for Arum, said yesterday. The computers have been returned, he said.
Todd Palmer, a spokesman for the Las Vegas division of the F.B.I., confirmed the raid and the existence of the investigation by the bureau and the New York police.
Top Rank released a statement that said: ''Upon Mr. Arum's return to Las Vegas, he stated that Top Rank has done nothing wrong. Top Rank does not know the scope of the government's investigation. Top Rank is lawfully cooperating with that investigation.''
Burstein and Shaw said they had not been contacted by the F.B.I. or any other law enforcement organization. Marc Ratner, executive director of the Nevada State Athletic Commission, also said he had not been contacted by law enforcement.
''Quite simply, I'm perplexed,'' Ratner said from Las Vegas. ''I don't know who they're after.'' He said the accusation that the De La Hoya-Mosley fight was fixed was nonsensical. He added that because the bout came late in the investigation, he believes that the F.B.I.'s principal focus is on other fights.
Two boxing executives, who spoke on condition of anonymity, suggested that the F.B.I. might be looking at fights that Top Rank promoted for Telefutura, a network run by the Spanish-language Univision. Arum promotes many Hispanic boxers.
But Kathy Duva, the chief executive of Main Events, a rival promoter to Top Rank, said: ''I'd love Arum's Telefutura dates, but the outcome of a Telefutura fight is meaningless. They're just a way to keep your fighters busy.''
A New York City detective, who was asked to join the investigation by the F.B.I.'s Las Vegas division, posed undercover as a New York crime figure and worked with a bureau agent who posed as his driver and enforcer, one official said. The Daily News said the pair moved in organized crime circles and luxurious night spots in Las Vegas.
Duva discounted the idea that organized crime had a significant hold on boxing. She also disputed how productive it would be to investigate whether scales were rigged so that boxers from different weight divisions could fight each other.
''The other guy has to step on the same scale,'' she said. ''If you could show me how to rig it, I'd be happy to know. If you knock off five pounds for your guy to make weight, the other guy is five pounds lighter, too.''
The promoter Don King said he had no knowledge of the investigation, but said by telephone, ''I always feel sorry for people who are raided by the F.B.I., even if there's always a cheering section when I am.''
BOXING
