This afternoon at Nassau Coliseum, the Rangers arrive at the halfway point of yet another season that may be headed nowhere.
Nearly 10 seasons have passed since the Rangers won the Stanley Cup championship in 1993-94, their first since 1940. Six seasons have come and gone since the Rangers last qualified for the playoffs in 1996-97, despite having record payrolls in the National Hockey League.
That streak of missing the playoffs seems headed for a dubious franchise record of seven consecutive seasons. The Rangers, who have lost three of their last four games, are in 10th place in the Eastern Conference with a mediocre record of 16-16-5-3. That puts them two positions out of a playoff spot. Only their payroll, in excess of $80 million this season, puts them at or near the top of the league.
In what has become something of a winter ritual, opposing players and coaches, the general managers of other teams and even a referee who presided over a recent Rangers defeat are asking the same question: What is wrong with the Rangers?
It is not clear if Coach Glen Sather, in his fourth season as the team's president and general manager, has the answer.
On Thursday morning, before the Rangers' 3-2 loss to Carolina, Sather was asked if he was frustrated that he had been unable to turn the team around. He replied that he was more disappointed than frustrated and that he was ''not ready to throw in the sponge and say, 'No, I can't fix things.' ''
Still, one of Sather's rival general managers, who asked that his name not be used, said this week that it was hard to discern what Sather's approach was at the moment.
''I'm not sure what philosophy they're building that team on right now,'' he said. ''When Glen was in Edmonton, the philosophy there from the early going was that the team was built on speed and skill. Even when, because of money problems, they couldn't keep their skill, it was clear the philosophy in Edmonton was building with speed.''
The Rangers, however, are considered slow, and that was clearly a handicap in an embarrassing 5-0 loss to Calgary on Monday at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers do have some size, which is considered an asset in the more physical Eastern Conference, but they are not particularly physical when defending their own goal. And that is one of the reasons they continue to struggle.
But there are plenty of other reasons, too. The goaltending has been inconsistent since Mike Richter sustained the first of a series of injuries in February 2000. Richter retired before this season. The current goalies, Mike Dunham and Jussi Markkanen, have not stolen many games for the team. And on a roster filled with prominent names like Aleksei Kovalev, Eric Lindros and Petr Nedved, the team's leading goal-scorer is the captain, Mark Messier, who turns 43 on Jan. 18.
Sather, who was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1997 as a ''builder,'' made his reputation in Edmonton as the architect of the Oilers dynasty that won five Stanley Cups from 1983 to 1990. But so far, Sather has not been able to construct anything of note in New York. In significant ways, his approach and results have not differed much from that of his predecessor, Neil Smith. In the latter part of his tenure, Smith acquired any number of highly paid, veteran players who, for whatever reason, did not make much of an impact. Sather has done the same.
What has been missing for years is an influx of young players ready to play hard and prove themselves.
A prominent player agent recently noted that the three most successful hockey teams of the last decade, Detroit, the Devils and Colorado, ''have allowed young guys to get in their lineups while they are competing for Stanley Cups.''
''The Rangers, meanwhile, haven't been competing for Stanley Cups,'' the agent said, nothing that the younger players still cannot crack the lineup.
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, the Rangers now have the third oldest roster in the 30-team league, averaging 29 years 314 days. Just two players on the active roster are 25 or younger.
One of those, the 22-year-old rookie forward Chad Wiseman, made his Rangers debut Thursday night. The other, the 25-year-old rookie forward Jed Ortmeyer, was a free-agent signing out of the University of Michigan. The second-year forward Jamie Lundmark, 22, has been out since Dec. 4 with sprained knee ligaments. The third-year goaltender Dan Blackburn, 20, is out indefinitely with nerve damage in a shoulder. And defenseman Dale Purinton, 27, is a frequent scratch. That leaves just one player in the regular Rangers lineup who was drafted by the team.
That player is 35-year-old defenseman Brian Leetch, the Rangers' first-round draft choice in 1986.
''The analogous team is the Yankees,'' the same agent said. ''Their core players are guys they developed and drafted. They go out and sign big-name players as supplements to their core group. In hockey, Colorado, Detroit, the Devils -- they've drafted their key players. The Rangers haven't done that.''
Sather said Thursday that it took a minimum of three years to develop a minor league system and that when he arrived in New York ''there was one prospect in the entire organization,'' and that was Lundmark. But while Sather waits for younger players to develop, and perhaps put them in the lineup, he has been unable to find enough older players willing to do the dirty work in the corners or along the boards.
''Most teams that have had success have a cluster of guys who, shift in, shift out, do all the leg work of getting the puck to the gifted offensive players or of going out and shutting down the other team's gifted offensive players,'' the rival general manager said. The Rangers don't.
When Sather replaced Smith in June 2000, he signed what is believed to be a seven-year contract at $5 million a season. He might have chosen to rip up the team and rebuild from scratch, but like Smith before him, he concluded that neither the team's owners nor the fans would have the patience for that approach. So he did not try it.
To Sather's credit, the Rangers' farm system is getting stronger. Fedor Tjutin (who sprained knee ligaments on Thursday and is out four to six weeks) and Dominic Moore are serving valuable apprenticeships at the Rangers' American Hockey League affiliate in Hartford; Henrik Lundqvist and Petr Prucha continue to develop in Europe; and draft picks like Hugh Jessiman, now at Dartmouth, and Nigel Dawes, who now plays in the Canadian junior league, have shown immense promise.
''I think we're making some progress,'' Sather said Thursday.
Still, it has been incremental. The Madison Square Garden chairman, James L. Dolan, ran out of patience with Sather's basketball counterpart, Scott Layden, who was recently fired as general manager and president of the Knicks. But there are no signs that Sather is in trouble. It is highly unlikely Sather will return as coach after this season, but that will be his choice.
Whether Sather can depart the bench with a Rangers playoff appearance to his credit will be decided over the next 42 games.
HOCKEY
