Chris Kraft is all for the moon, but he's not too sure about Mars. To the moon and back was six days. Mars you had to figure almost two years.
''It's right and rational to go back to the moon,'' said Mr. Kraft, 79, NASA's director of manned flight operations through the heady days of Apollo. ''Mars if you go with humans you need large robotic machines.''
Space City, as Houston proudly styles itself for its Johnson Space Center that controls manned missions, was abuzz Friday over reports that President Bush was about to announce a major step-up in the struggling space program.
Some saw it as a shrewd trial balloon, others wondered whether schools and day care centers would be shortchanged. But many voiced elation. ''It's great!'' said the new mayor, Bill White, who saw an opportunity to boost science education for youngsters and dispel some of the grimmer news here, from the breakup of the space shuttle Columbia last February to the Enron debacle.
Coming on top of NASA's transmissions of riveting color photos from Mars, the accounts stirred a kind of moon-and-Mars mania from Cape Canaveral to other centers of aeronautics and science.
''I love it!'' said Craig Baker, a mechanical engineer at the Kennedy Space Center as well as an amateur astronomer. ''I think it's high time. We're past time for doing that. I think the moon is a wonderful platform for doing astronomy, getting up and above the atmosphere and having a stable place, and it's also a wonderful opportunity to increase the knowledge base on how to live and do things out in space.''
Some said NASA needed a bold new stroke to dispel the specter of Columbia and other setbacks. ''I have friends that want to be astronauts,'' said Charlie Fox, an undergraduate engineering student at the University of Minnesota in Duluth and a founding member of the Mars Society there. ''But they don't want to be astronauts, if we continue what we've been doing in recent years. They want to go to the moon. They want to go somewhere else.''
The eagerness may be even greater here. And why not? Houston, after all, was the first word broadcast from the moon. (''Houston, Tranquility Base here, the Eagle has landed.'') Sports teams carry names like the Astros, the Rockets, the Aeros and the Comets and play (or used to) in the Astrodome. It was here in a speech at Rice University in 1962 that President John F. Kennedy told Americans, ''We choose to go to the moon.''
So the retired aerospace workers who guide some 1,500 visitors a day through the space center walked a little taller Friday. Astronauts, active and retired, traded phone calls wondering what the news held in store for them and the nation.
Mr. Kraft said he spoke to Walter Cunningham, pilot on Apollo 7 in 1968, a year before the moon landing. They argued politely. ''He wants to go to Mars,'' said Mr. Kraft. ''He didn't think going back to the moon was necessary.''
Mr. Kraft, whose memoir, ''Flight: My Life in Mission Control'' came out in 2001, called the moon ''a fantastic place particularly the back side, to look into the universe.'' He said a solar power plant on the moon could produce enough energy, when transmitted by microwave to earth, ''to meet every electrical need in the world.''
But, he said, ''it takes going to the moon to do it.''
Hans Mark, NASA deputy administrator from 1981 to 1984 and former chancellor of the University of Texas in Austin, voiced partiality for a Mars mission. But he cautioned: ''This is a typical trial balloon. The White House issues a statement that it is going to say XYZ. Opposition weighs in and they calibrate a response.''
He knows, he said he did the same thing for President Ronald Reagan before writing the president's promise of a space station into the 1984 State of the Union Address.
He also noted that the first President Bush promised a return to the moon in 1989 but that nothing came of it.
But he said ''there is a totally compelling reason for going to Mars,'' a chance to compare rocks from its first billion years to earth's oldest rocks to settle the question of whether life existed or exists on other planets. ''If life started on Mars,'' he said, ''then, dammit, it could happen anywhere.''
In Traverse City, Mich., Bernice Steadman followed the news with wistfulness. In 1961, she and 24 other women, all accomplished pilots, were invited to apply as astronauts. They reported to Albuquerque, she and 12 others passed their physicals -- and then, she said, they were summarily dropped. ''The president said, 'No way,' '' she said. ''It was not very fair to us.'' She recounts the story in a 2001 memoir, ''Tethered Mercury.'' Now at 78, she runs a car taxi service and still dreams of space flight. ''I haven't learned a thing I guess,'' she laughed.
Last Saturday, more than 2,000 members of the Planetary Society founded by the astronomer Carl Sagan gathered at the Pasadena Convention center to watch the landing of the Mars rover.
In the back, in a wheelchair, sat the science fiction legend Ray Bradbury. The Rover, he said, should be the first step toward a manned exploration of Mars. ''The robot's not good enough,'' he said, ''It's a beginning. Real men have got to go because they can judge. A robot cannot judge. The moment we land on Mars, all the people of the world will weep with joy. It's not just America -- all of us will be landing on Mars.''
AMERICA IN SPACE: HOUSTON
