NASRY ISKANDER, after dedicating a lifetime to preserving the mummies in the Egyptian Museum, boils his work down to one straightforward thought.
''It is much better to work with the dead,'' he says, sitting in a squat room tucked away in the bowels of the grand neo-classical building. ''They give you less trouble.''
In fact, Mr. Iskander finds a certain paradox working with the shrunken, desiccated bodies of the men and women who ruled Egypt about 3,500 years ago. While they are among the biggest draws for tourists, they have traditionally been a kind of tolerated stepchild in Egyptology. Archaeologists tend to be more interested in hieroglyphics, say, or glittering funeral masks, than in skin and bones.
''That is very short-sighted, because the mummy is the center of our civilization,'' he says. ''Everything you see was built for the mummies -- the coffins, the tombs, the pyramids, the temples.''
Mr. Iskander, 61, reached the mandatory retirement age last year and left his official job as head of research and conservation in the Department of Antiquities. But he still serves as a consultant on several crucial projects involving both human and animal mummies.
If human remains barely interest most researchers, this is doubly true for animals. The ancient Egyptians mummified everything from tiny shrews to dogs to crocodiles for one of four reasons. The animals were either symbols of a god, temple offerings, household pets the deceased wanted along in the afterlife, or food for the eternal journey.
Mr. Iskander, an avuncular figure sporting a rim of white hair, devoted much of the 1980's and 1990's to making sure the royal mummies were preserved. That done, he turned his attention over the past five years to the museum's rich animal collection. (The word mummy comes from the ancient Greek word for wax.)
He and a colleague, Salima Ikram, an Egyptologist at the American University in Cairo, shuttered the animal mummy room and began studying more than 165 beasts.
The room was quietly reopened last month with new showcases. The hulking crocodiles are no longer casually tossed on top of the cabinets gathering dust, for instance. But the museum directors decided the whole display remained too cramped and now plan a more glamorous official opening at a later date.
Some new displays show Mr. Iskander's impish sense of humor -- like the label on a set of ribs wrapped in linen as an afterlife snack. ''Clearly barbequed ribs have been popular for a long time,'' the typed card reads.
Mr. Iskander dates his interest in mummies from 1943.
Not only was he born into an illustrious clan of Coptic Christian scientists from Alexandria that year, but his late Uncle Zaky also made the breakthrough discovery on the chemical processes that kept mummies preserved. Some of the ducks, pigeons and rabbits that he successfully mummified in the 1940's are still on display in the Museum of Mummification, which Mr. Iskander helped set up in Luxor a few years ago.
WHEN he was a child, Mr. Iskander remembers, there were conversations around the dinner table with his uncle describing stuff like the terrible smells emanating from his laboratory vessels in his efforts to match various ancient techniques.
Mr. Iskander obtained degrees in physics and mathematics from the University of Alexandria in 1965, but immediately entered the field of antiquities.
He did not get his first mummy until 1972, and the process of preserving that queen hooked him for life. He just looked at her for two months, he said, afraid to touch her and unsure where to start. The only advice his illustrious uncle gave was to read a lot and to wear a mask -- just in case a body shut away for thousands of years emitted bacteria.
The face and body of the queen, Hanuttawi, was covered with a disfiguring white powder. The scientist soon discovered certain affinities between modern plastic surgeons and the mummifiers of old.
To make the dead queen look young and robust, they injected her face with animal fat. Over the centuries, the fat had reacted with the salt used to dry out the body, producing a kind of detergent -- hence the white powder dusting the queen's skin.
Ancient Egyptians believed fervently in resurrection. The rulers and the well-to-do thus spent their lifetimes ensuring that their bodies would be preserved in death. If the body decayed, they feared, the soul would, too.
When Mr. Iskander started his career, the 27-odd royal mummies in the Egyptian Museum were kept in ordinary display cases. Some had been encased in wax in an effort to preserve them, others bombarded with gamma rays to forestall any sudden blossoming of bacteria.
The original mummification process was intended to keep the bodies so dry that the bacteria that would normally eat the body could not survive. But after being in darkened tombs with little oxygen for thousands of years, the dehydrated nobles were suddenly exposed to bright lights, debilitating pollution and the sweaty bodies of thousands of tourists every year. Eternal life seemed doomed.
Plus, new sources of unexpected trouble cropped up incessantly as Cairo exploded into a sprawling metropolis. Take the case of the Mysteriously Moving Mummy Cases.
Mr. Iskander's staff reported that some burial objects placed around the mummies were moving around overnight. Nobody really suspected a poltergeist, but it took some time before Mr. Iskander and a few colleagues solved the mystery. The construction of a new subway tunnel under the museum was making the objects do the shimmy.
Given all these factors, it seemed clear that the mummies would rapidly turn to dust. So Mr. Iskander set to work with the Getty Museum in Los Angeles designing special cases that control oxygen, temperature, pollution, motion and a host of other factors.
The fruit of his labors was harvested in 1994, with the opening of the first mummy room at the Egyptian museum. A second room, housing 12 more mummies, was supposed to follow in two years. (It is only now nearing completion.)
A DEEP reverence overcomes Mr. Iskander when he enters the mummy room.
''I never hear any voices, but I feel that I am flying around with these people, that their spirits are around me in the air,'' he answers when asked how he relates to the 11 dead kings and queens. ''I feel that I am standing before magnificent people all the time.''
It was these rulers, after all, who built the Pyramids and other myriad wonders. Mr. Iskander knows the rulers by their faces -- the king with the facial wounds from where he was fatally wounded in battle, the one with visible smallpox scars and so on. He confesses that he sometimes talks to the mummies, but only to reassure them that they are in safe hands.
Having reached an age where death is no longer unthinkable, Mr. Iskander allows that he wants to be mummified, too, but doubts it will happen.
''Who would do the job for me -- it's illegal in Egypt,'' he grins. ''I spent most of my life working to preserve others, why not me?''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
