Does the Barnes Foundation, with its trove of Renoirs, Cézannes, Matisses and other Impressionist and modern masterpieces, really need to leave the small town for the big city in order to survive?
Only a little more than eight years ago, the Barnes reopened after a top-to-bottom renovation of its 79-year-old mansion in Merion, a suburb on Philadelphia's Main Line. Yet now, if the foundation's board and its allies in Philadelphia's political and philanthropic elite get their way, the collection will be uprooted from leafy Latch's Lane and replanted along Philadelphia's unlovely main thoroughfare, the Benjamin Franklin Parkway, already home to the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Rodin Museum as well as the proposed site of a new Calder Museum.
The move requires court approval because the foundation's founder, Dr. Albert C. Barnes, stipulated in the charter that the approximately 3,800 objects displayed in his Merion gallery remain exactly where he left them. According to the Barnes's board, deviating from this mandate is the only way to ensure the collection's survival. Because of bad management, bad luck and inordinate legal expenses that were partly incurred in numerous disputes with its residential neighbors, the Barnes is down to its last pennies, kept solvent only by $3.1 million in ''bridge funding'' provided by the Pew Charitable Trusts and the Annenberg and Lenfest foundations. A move to Philadelphia would bring bigger audiences -- and some $150 million (including $50 million in endowment) that Pew has promised to try to raise for the collection if it moves to Pew's home city.
A judge is expected to rule later this month on whether the Barnes's difficulties justify defying its benefactor's wishes. One hopes the court will decide to keep the Barnes where it is. Anything else would reduce it from a unique haven created by a passionate collector to just another museum.
For starters, there's no way an enlarged Barnes in downtown Philadelphia could come close to matching the serene setting of the original. The building now on one of the proposed Barnes sites in Philadelphia is the city's detention center for juvenile offenders -- a far cry from the bucolic surroundings, complete with arboretum and horticulture school, where Dr. Barnes ensconced his collection and art-education program.
Compounding the insult to the integrity of Dr. Barnes's creation is a bizarre scheme to replicate it. The proposed Philadelphia Barnes would harbor a suite of galleries configured just as they are in Merion. Matisse's famous mural, ''La Danse,'' may well be reproduced, according to Barnes officials, rather than moved from the Merion space for which it was commissioned. Dr. Barnes wouldn't even allow visitors to sketch the works in his collection, yet this bastion of authenticity may soon be transformed into a cluster of replicated galleries whose signature work could be an enormous faux Matisse.
What's more, there are a number of steps the Barnes can take to make it possible to survive financially in Merion.
The foundation could begin by selling unused or little-used assets. Chief among these: the foundation's 137-acre property in Chester County, for which the Barnes was recently offered $12 million. Auctioning off some of the foundation's ancillary collections -- some 5,200 objects and documents -- could also generate cash. The Barnes provenance would give these objects market cachet far in excess of their artistic or historic importance. While art museums are supposed to use sale proceeds solely for acquisitions, not operations, the Barnes considers itself an educational institution (and it doesn't acquire new works). In addition, legal strictures against selling the Barnes Foundation's holdings apply only to works on view in the galleries.
There's certainly room for improvement in the Barnes's management, which has been exposed, through publicly released audits and court documents, as chronically chaotic. Better financial management would improve the foundation's chances with philanthropists, who have, according to the Barnes's own legal brief, ''expressed an unwillingness to contribute to the foundation as long as a potential for conflicts and mismanagements remains in place.'' Some reforms have been instituted, but more needs to be done. Expanding its board to 15 members from 5, as the Barnes has asked the court to allow, might give access to a wider range of donors.
Barnes officials should also persuade the 32 individuals, foundations and corporations that have pledged $100 million toward the proposed Philadelphia project to instead contribute the much smaller amount that would be needed to keep the Barnes in place.
Finally, there are a host of other possible moneymakers: double the $5 admission fee; increase public visiting days from the current three a week and the maximum number of visitors from the current 400 a day; organize a fund-raising tour of hidden treasures from the ancillary collections; put a new emphasis on selling handbooks and catalogs of the collection; strive to mend fences with neighboring residents, whose complaints about the Barnes have engendered many harmful legal restrictions and lawsuits over the years.
Judicial or local approval would be needed for some of these remedies. But judges may look less favorably on dismantling and reassembling the Barnes than on making modifications that would respect Dr. Barnes's intent and preserve the intense, intimate art experience his galleries provide. In recent court hearings the foundation's officials dismissed many of these suggested remedies, individually, as inadequate to the task. But combined, they could garner the $50 million that officials say is needed to maintain the galleries and programs in Merion. If these more modest proposals were adopted, the famously irascible founder might merely squirm, rather than roll over, in his grave.
Op-Ed Contributor Lee Rosenbaum is a contributing editor at Art in America magazine.
