The Devils scored on their first shot, and Ken Daneyko Night was off to a flying start.
Then the electricity on a special night left Continental Arena, literally, and the Tampa Bay Lightning scored three third-period goals to beat the stumbling Devils, 4-1.
The pregame ceremony honoring Daneyko, the Devils' longtime defenseman who retired last summer, had been hampered by a malfunctioning microphone.
Then the start of the second period was delayed for 15 minutes. A transformer in nearby Totowa, N.J., shorted out, causing a power surge at Continental Arena.
The capacity crowd of 19,040 could have lived with those glitches had the Devils (20-10-9-1) won the game.
They were booed after Martin Brodeur allowed two goals in a nine-second span in the third period.
''From power outages to bad microphones, it was one of those nights,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
Tampa Bay (18-15-6-1) had taken a 2-1 lead on Cory Stillman's goal 1 minute 22 seconds into the third period off a nice pass from center Brad Richards.
The Devils, playing without defenseman Scott Stevens, who was out with flulike symptoms, then gave up goals to Dave Andreychuk at 6:38 and Fredrik Modin at 6:47.
''I think what I'm mad about is that we kind of gave up,'' Patrik Elias said.
The Devils have lost two games in a row for the first time since Oct. 22, their fifth game of the season. They are 2-4-2-1 since a 5-2 victory Dec. 19 over Buffalo.
''We'll get out of it eventually,'' Brodeur said. ''You just don't want it dragging around too long.''
Daneyko was honored in a brief ceremony before the opening face-off. He promised he would keep his remarks short, and he did.
He thanked his family, his coaches, his teammates and the fans. The capacity crowd booed when it became apparent that his No. 3 sweater would not be retired.
He received a painting from the team and a wide-screen television from his teammates, and he handled a malfunctioning microphone in stride.
''I never in my wildest dreams thought I would play 20 years, let alone with one team,'' Daneyko said in a news conference before the ceremony.
The red carpet that had been rolled out for Daneyko's ceremony had barely been rolled back up when Devils center Scott Gomez scored on the first shot of the game.
It sailed over the left shoulder of Tampa Bay goaltender John Grahame at 1:28 for Gomez's fifth goal. Gomez had not scored in the previous seven games.
The Devils had two breakaways before the game was six minutes old. But Elias flubbed his shot, and Brian Gionta missed his. Tampa Bay then rustled up some energy.
''They're a team that gets in your face real quick,'' Burns said.
Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski broke his stick on a shot, and Rafalski smothered a shot by the Lightning right wing Martin St. Louis at the Devils' end.
But St. Louis, who will be a starter in the N.H.L. All-Star Game, poked the puck free and beat Brodeur with one minute left in the first period. The Devils went downhill from there.
''Regardless of the night, you don't want to lose,'' Rafalski said.
HOCKEY
