Beginners hardly ever lead a trump. Experts do so more often, but they pick their spots. One large book has been written on this subject, but it is sufficient to know a few guidelines.
Consider a trump lead if dummy is likely to score ruffs or if other leads seem risky. If defenders are well-stocked with high cards, a trump lead may be appropriate. It was indicated on the diagramed deal from the board-a-match teams at the New York Winter Regional Championships last month and was reported by Michael Radin, who held the East cards.
The bidding started quietly with one diamond from South and a takeout double from West. North's one-spade bid required partnership agreement. Traditionally this was nonforcing, indicated a five-card suit and denied the high-card strength to redouble.
In the modern style, used here, it suggested a hand that would have responded one spade in the absence of a double. It was therefore forcing, with a four-card suit possible and no strength limitation.
East should usually double in this situation with four cards or more in the suit bid on his right. This is partly because the partnership might wish to play in that strain, and partly because it might expose a psychic.
South then unmasked his batteries with an abrupt leap to five diamonds. Radin doubled this on the theory that his eight high-card points and his partner's promised values should provide enough defense.
The opening lead was now crucial. South had eight trump tricks plus two aces. With any plain-suit lead he would be able to maneuver a heart ruff in the dummy. But Susan Wexler, one of the country's best female players, chose the diamond queen with the West cards. It seemed unlikely that any side-suit defensive tricks would escape if they were not taken immediately.
The declarer won the first trick with the ace, and realized that an immediate heart lead would make the defense easy: Either defender would be able to win and play a second trump. He therefore crossed to the spade ace and called for the heart five, a good play. He planned a duck that would give West the lead. That player was unlikely to have the missing trump, because the normal lead with a doubleton queen would have been the low card.
Unfortunately for South, Radin alertly produced his jack, dooming the contract. The declarer won with the ace and continued with the deuce. East was now able to take his queen and play his diamond five. South was stuck with the nine-seven of hearts, and eventually had to lose two tricks to West's king-eight.
The defense had to be exactly right, starting with a trump lead, to allow West's heart eight to demonstrate its power and defeat the game.
BRIDGE
