A British citizen who was arrested last August in a sting operation pleaded not guilty Friday to federal charges that he plotted to sell shoulder-fired missiles that he knew were to be used against commercial airliners in the United States, as well as a so-called dirty bomb, to people he believed to be terrorists.
The man, Hemant Lakhani, 69, a London resident of Indian ancestry, entered his plea Friday before Judge Katherine S. Hayden of Federal District Court. The judge ordered that he continue to be held without bail pending an April 26 hearing on pretrial motions.
Christopher J. Christie, the United States attorney for New Jersey, who plans to prosecute the case against Mr. Lakhani personally, said the investigation that led to his arrest was continuing, but that he expected the trial to begin by the summer.
According to the indictment obtained on Dec. 18, Mr. Lakhani is said to have arranged the sale of Russian-made Igla-S portable, shoulder-fired missiles to men he believed to be representing a Somali terrorist group affiliated with Al Qaeda. He is accused of suggesting multiple attacks on cities and aircraft in the United States with weapons he said he could provide, as well as offering to obtain a radioactive ''dirty bomb,'' anti-aircraft guns, tanks and radar systems for his shadowy customers.
Henry E. Klingeman, Mr. Lakhani's lawyer, said that he would mount an entrapment defense for his client using the federal government's admission in the indictment that its own undercover operatives and a cooperating witness served as both buyer and seller, providing both ends of a deal in which they charge Mr. Lakhani was the middleman.
Mr. Klingeman said his client, an importer and exporter of women's clothing, was not the ''significant arms dealer'' that Mr. Christie and other investigators have maintained he was. His only other arms deal was a 1999 arrangement in which he brokered the legal sale of an armored personnel carrier to the government of Angola.
''My client wouldn't know an M-1 tank from a water tank,'' said Mr. Klingeman, who said Mr. Lakhani and his family were fairly well-known members of London's south Asian, Hindu community. ''This sale would not have existed if the U.S. government had not concocted it, and they just targeted the wrong guy for reasons we just don't yet know.''
Mr. Christie, whose background was in civil rather than criminal law, said that the case represented a number of firsts in the domestic war on terrorism and as such he felt it important to personally join the team of prosecutors handling the case. For one thing, he said, it represented the first cooperation between United States and Russian law enforcement agencies, which got wind of Mr. Lakhani's trolling among Russian organized crime circles in search of weapons.
''This is the fruit of one of the most exhaustive terrorist investigations we have had since I have been in office,'' he said. ''We have to do this kind of case and be successful in order for members of the public to be confident that we are fighting terrorism.''
Two men who were arrested with Mr. Lakhani and charged with money laundering in connection with the alleged arms deal are Yehuda Abraham, a 75-year old New York City jeweler, and Moinuddeen Ahmed Hameed, 38, an Indian citizen. Mr. Abraham was released on $10 million bond and Mr. Hameed remains in custody.
Mr. Klingeman said that he planned to seek bail for Mr. Lakhani, but was not optimistic given the high bail set for Mr. Abraham, who prosecutors maintain was on the periphery of the arms deal that they said was conceived during 2002 and 2003.
