Inside the Family Corner Restaurant on 31st Street in Astoria, Queens, the question yesterday was what to do with the $400 that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg wants to give homeowners as a rebate on the 18.5 percent property tax increase from 2002.
Between bites of a veal sandwich at a table in the back, Barry Edison had a quick, four-word answer: ''Buy an iPod Mini.''
This led to another question: What would Mr. Edison, an official with the city's Bureau of Correctional Health, do with the iPod he was carrying in his pocket?
''Probably give it to my wife,'' he said.
Is that what experts mean by trickle-down economics? That question went unanswered at the Family Corner, but the consensus was that $400 would not go very far. Some said it would not be enough to go on vacation.
It is, it turns out, enough for a pair of Manolo Blahnik pony-hair shoes with three-inch-high heels (starting bid: $349.99 on eBay) or a forge for making horseshoes (starting bid: $325, also on eBay). But $400 -- the amount City Hall estimates most homeowners would receive -- would not cover one second on the national debt clock at www.toptips.com.
And George Kavadias, who owns the Family Corner and was taking orders for Greek salads and souvlakis at lunchtime yesterday, doubted that $400 would cover tickets to the Rangers. (''Maybe the Islanders, though,'' he said.)
Still, he was enthusiastic.
''Four hundred dollars is a fantastic gift from Bloomberg,'' Mr. Kavadias said, in part because the city had doubled parking fines at about the same time that it raised property taxes. ''The extra on the tickets hurt the neighborhood,'' he said. ''One hundred and ten dollars is too expensive for the average Joe to pay.''
A waitress, Joanne Tsarsitalidis, zipped by. ''Bloomberg's out of touch with the middle class,'' said Ms. Tsarsitalidis, who, as a renter, would not be eligible for the rebate. ''I wonder if the rebate's for re-election.''
Mr. Kavadias sighed. ''It probably is,'' he said. ''Four hundred dollars isn't much. But it's something.'' Then, sounding like a voter speaking his mind directly to Mr. Bloomberg, he added, ''Four hundred dollars? I can pay off my credit card bills, but you take so much from me in one year.''
How to spend a $400 rebate was being talked about in corners beyond the Family Corner yesterday. Christian Moulin, a hair stylist in Manhattan, wanted to spend his $400 on dinner at Daniel, Daniel Boulud's restaurant on East 65th Street -- ''just by myself, not even with my wife,'' Mr. Moulin said. ''On $400, you can only be extravagant for one.'' Or, he figured, he could go to the Metropolitan Opera 25 times if he bought standing-room tickets in the orchestra ($16, except on Saturdays) or fly -- coach, of course -- to Paris on the lowest fare he could find.
''But then you have to spend the money on a hotel,'' he said, ''and that will cost you three times that rebate.''
And Mr. Edison at the Family Corner? He may have rebate money to burn. The iPod Mini will cost only $250 when it goes on sale next month. That would leave Mr. Edison with $150.
No, it won't, he said. There is always new software to be bought. ''You put me in the Apple store,'' he said, ''and whatever's in my pocket goes.''
