The Patriots had just been humiliated on opening day by the Bills and the Patriots' spurned safety Lawyer Milloy, 31-0. Then came the bigger joke for the rookie Eugene Wilson.
On Monday morning, when the Patriots returned to work, Josh McDaniels, a defensive assistant, told Wilson, a cornerback who was a second-round draft pick out of Illinois, that he was about to become a free safety. One more thing: he was going to start in six days. Wilson thought it was a prank.
''I said, 'Oh yeah? O.K.,' '' Wilson said. ''He was like, 'No, no, really.' ''
Until then, Wilson had played safety only in a video game. He had not taken a single snap at safety during training camp. But he has played it ever since, grabbing four interceptions and playing well enough to help stabilize a unit that was in flux during the first weeks of the season. So went one of the first, and most daring, of a series of lineup shuffles the Patriots (14-2) survived this season on their way to the N.F.L.'s best record. They will be host to Tennessee (13-4) Saturday night in a divisional playoff game.
Because of a string of injuries and personnel decisions like the release of Milloy just days before the regular-season opener, the Patriots used 42 different starters this season, an unusually high number for a successful team. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, only Oakland, Houston, Cleveland and Atlanta used more starters this season. None of them won more than five games.
One day during the week before the Patriots played Washington on Sept. 28, during the worst of the injury siege, Coach Bill Belichick told reporters that if they had to play that day, he would not have been able to dress 45 players. Against the Redskins, all seven of the Patriots' inactive players were opening day starters.
Despite operating with smoke and mirrors and plenty of bandages, the Patriots did not lose another regular-season game after losing to Washington, 20-17.
They raced into the playoffs with a 12-game winning streak, the league's seventh-ranked defense and a turnover differential of plus-17, the second best in the league.
Since joining the Patriots, Belichick has built a roster that stresses flexibility, with players able to perform several jobs, giving the team the ability to withstand the battering of injury and Belichick's constantly changing schemes.
It is a philosophy that offers few certified stars (just two players were voted to the Pro Bowl) but plenty of movable parts. And it was tested this season as it rarely has in the N.F.L. Not since the 1969 Minnesota Vikings has a division champion used so many starters. But the Patriots insist that the roster instability was never overwhelming.
''You put together the best you can with the resources that you have,'' Belichick said. ''We felt like every week that we have walked out there we could be competitive with our opponent. Every team is in some kind of transition in that third, fourth, fifth or sixth week of the regular season, whatever the circumstances are. Then at some point, you become more stable. I am not saying things fall into place, but it seems like there are less moving parts and there is more continuity.''
The Patriots avoided a serious injury to their most important player, quarterback Tom Brady. But they did not achieve continuity until they welcomed back the players who had been injured to a team that was already solidified. By the last weeks of the regular season, the inactive list looked normal again, even though five opening day starters were on injured reserve.
When the Patriots played the Titans on Oct. 5, the left tackle and right guard were the only positions in which the regular starters played. The opening day center, Damien Woody, who missed two games with a chest injury, had moved to left guard because the opening day starter there, Mike Compton, was on injured reserve. So was Adrian Klemm, the right tackle on opening day.
The backup right tackle Tom Ashworth, whose previous playing experience consisted of reserve duty at tight end in one game last season, started in place of Klemm, and the rookie Dan Koppen started at center for Woody.
In a 38-30 victory, the Patriots rushed for 161 yards against the Titans, who would finish the season with the top-ranked run defense in the league. It matched the Patriots' highest point total of the season and was the first of their 12 straight victories. It also came without nose tackle Ted Washington and linebackers Willie McGinest and Mike Vrabel.
''It's unbelievable,'' said Jets Coach Herman Edwards, whose team lost twice to the Patriots. ''The thing I like about them is they win all different ways. They won a lot of close games and won some shootout games. When you start winning that way, you get confident that somebody is going to make a play, always.''
The Patriots may have been better equipped to deal with the tumult than most. After all, even the Pro Bowl defensive end Richard Seymour plays every position on the line. Eight rookies from the 2003 draft played, and six started at least one game. The rookie Dan Klecko started one game at nose tackle, but also played linebacker and fullback.
And the back end of the roster was always subject to tinkering. Larry Centers, who started at fullback in the third and fourth games of the season, was released on Oct. 18, re-signed Dec. 10 and was starting again against the Jets on Dec. 20. Coaches spent considerable time every week debating the inactive list.
''I think we have more transactions than any team in the league, especially that bottom half of the roster,'' said Matt Chatham, a special teams player who started four games at linebacker. ''They'll mess with guys all year long. We're a game-plan team. We like to do something different each week, so you have to have that flexibility with guys. It's geared toward guys that are able to do multiple things.''
When the Patriots won the Super Bowl after the 2001 season, they thrived with a few dominant stars and after a huge personnel change: replacing quarterback Drew Bledsoe with Brady after Bledsoe was hurt. It was the decision that shaped that season. The Patriots have made several of them this season.
''This team has really meshed,'' Ashworth said. ''That's the big part. We may not be the most talented team in the league. But we play well together.''
PRO FOOTBALL
