There must have been some tension within the New York Philharmonic on Thursday night when Kurt Masur returned for the first of three programs he is conducting over the next three weeks. When his tenure as music director ended in the spring of 2002, the orchestra's administrators assured Philharmonic regulars that Mr. Masur would be back regularly as music director emeritus.
Since his departure, though, some Philharmonic musicians have voiced pent-up complaints about what they describe as Mr. Masur's authoritarian, even abusive leadership. Last month an article in The New York Times quoted several musicians who defended Mr. Masur's successor, Lorin Maazel, by characterizing his respectful and thorough working style as a welcome relief. One cellist said Mr. Masur's operating assumption had been that every musician was ''trying not to play well and had to be terrorized into doing their best.'' Since then orchestra officials have been quick to affirm that Mr. Masur is highly regarded and that the musicians look forward to working with him.
If there was some interpersonal awkwardness on Thursday, the only evidence came in the uptight performance of the first movement of the opening work, Haydn's Symphony No. 88 in G. Perhaps the musicians were adjusting to Mr. Masur's concept of the work.
The genial ''Papa'' Haydn of legend was not much in evidence. Nor did Mr. Masur reveal Haydn as a gotcha prankster with a glint in his eye, as Simon Rattle did in a recent performance of two Haydn symphonies with the Berlin Philharmonic at Carnegie Hall. Ingenious structure, symphonic heft and bold harmonic maneuverings were the hallmarks of the symphony in this performance. Once the musicians loosened up there was plenty of vitality in the playing. The third movement may be a minuet, but there was nothing courtly about Mr. Masur's account: you could practically hear the heavy-footed clomping of Austrian peasants in a hearty folk dance. The high spirits of the finale were held in check with a wry reserve that Mr. Masur elicited from the players, which emphasized the music's ingenuity as much as its humor.
There were lots of empty seats in the hall, probably because Mr. Masur's program was no crowd-pleaser. Haydn was followed by two little-known Central European works from the early 20th century: Karol Szymanowski's First Violin Concerto (1916) and Max Reger's Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Mozart (1913). Hopefully more people will turn out for the remaining performances tonight and Tuesday, because Mr. Masur was in his element. Now liberated from the music director's post, he does not have to appease constituencies and can devise a program that really fires him.
After Szymanowski's death in 1937, one of his few champions was his good friend and fellow Pole Arthur Rubinstein. But Szymanowski wrote far more ambitious works than the piano music that Rubinstein frequently played. A 1999 recording of his rarely heard opera, ''King Roger,'' with Thomas Hampson in the title role and Simon Rattle conducting, brought a mystical and adventurous score to light. So did the Philharmonic's performance, with the concertmaster Glenn Dicterow as soloist.
It begins with hazy, shimmering, richly chromatic harmonies in the orchestra over which a ruminative violin melody winds its way. Though structured in one continuous span, the concerto has clear de facto movements. The orchestral forces are large and the instrumental colors sumptuous. In the restless opening episode one imagines the bustling Russian public square of Stravinsky's ''Petrushka'' relocated to some subdued and struggling Polish town. Mr. Dicterow gave a technically assured and luminous performance of the demanding violin part, as Mr. Masur drew glittering playing from the orchestra.
Reger (1873-1916) was a curious figure whose complex, thick-textured and rigorous works won a strong following in his day but also vocal critics. Though his waywardly chromatic harmonic language anticipates Schoenberg's atonality, it's hard to imagine that Reger would have gone that route had he lived longer.
The Mozart theme that Reger used in this 30-minute score comes from the opening of the Piano Sonata in A, K. 331 (the one that ends with the famous ''Turkish'' Rondo). Mozart's movement is also a set of variations, and Reger knew that most listeners to his orchestra work would have Mozart's music in their ears. Consequently, his treatment of the theme seems purposefully out there. The second variation, for example, sounds as if you have suddenly dropped into the middle of a tortured transitional moment of some Brahms symphony. The formidably complex fugue is composed with such audacious confidence that it can't help smirking. Mr. Masur certainly captured that quality in a vibrant performance of a work he clearly loves (and conducted from memory).
It should be interesting to see what happens as Mr. Masur and the Philharmonic reconnect over the next couple of weeks.
PHILHARMONIC REVIEW
