For the first time in New York State, a jury in Brooklyn yesterday said that a tobacco company should pay punitive damages for the lung cancer death of an individual smoker.
The $8 million damage award was imposed on Brown &amp; Williamson for conspiracy and fraudulently concealing the health risks of smoking. The jury also assessed an additional $12 million against two tobacco industry trade organizations that have been dissolved, the Tobacco Institute and the Council for Tobacco Research.
While far smaller than some awards against tobacco companies in Oregon, California and elsewhere in the country, plaintiffs' lawyers and some financial analysts said the verdict could be a turning point, encouraging many more suits against tobacco companies. It is also helping to demonstrate, they said, that there are cracks in what was for decades a legal armor that seemed to make tobacco companies invulnerable to such lawsuits nationwide.
''It will force the industry to stop saying these large punitive damage awards from juries are just some aberration from the West Coast,'' said Mary Aronson, an analyst who studies the suits for institutional investors. ''Now, it's moving east.''
The award was the first in the Northeast against a tobacco company in a case involving an individual smoker's death since an eventually abandoned case in New Jersey in 1988.
In a verdict on Dec. 18, the same Brooklyn jury said the widow of Harry W. Frankson, a Brooklyn man who died in 1999 after smoking Lucky Strikes for more than 40 years, should get $175,000 in compensation.
After a monthlong trial, the jury said then that punitive damages, intended under the law to punish outrageous behavior, were warranted. Yesterday's decision followed a brief second phase of the case to set the amount. Some lawyers said the relatively modest amount might enhance the possibility that an appeals court could sustain it. Since 1996, smokers or their families have won 13 cases nationwide. But many very large awards, including one for $28 billion in Los Angeles, have already been reduced.
Several jurors in the Brooklyn case said that the panel was divided and that the $20 million total punitive award was a compromise, with two of the six members working to limit the damages and others pressing for as much as $1 billion.
''I wanted to hurt them in their pocket because I wanted to send a message,'' said Lenore Toscano, 61, an unemployed office worker who said she had wanted a $100 million award. ''They just wanted to sell cigarettes, they didn't care about the public.''
Another juror, a 51-year-old school safety officer who declined to provide his name, said he had been outraged by evidence in the case that tobacco companies covered up the dangers of smoking. He said ''they're going to keep doing it'' unless they were punished.
Mr. Frankson's widow, Gladys, who said her husband began smoking when he was a 14-year-old in Queens, said she was satisfied by the verdict. But, she told reporters in a bustling hallway of Brooklyn Supreme Court, ''there is no price that replaces my husband. No amount of money.''
Brown &amp; Williamson, the third-largest cigarette company in the country, with estimated annual revenue of $3.6 billion, put out a statement from its headquarters in Louisville, Ky. ''The verdict is outrageous,'' it said, predicting it would be reversed.
A lawyer for the company, Gareth Cooper, said Brown &amp; Williamson was particularly disappointed that the trial judge, Herbert Kramer, did not follow what Mr. Cooper said were the dictates of a United States Supreme Court decision in April. It said punitive damages should be proportional to damages awarded for compensation. In arguments, company lawyers had told the Brooklyn jurors the proper amount of punitive damages was about $50,000.
The lawyers for Mrs. Frankson, Gary J. Douglas and Michael A. London, had suggested punitive damages of as much as $137 million.
But the two lawyers said yesterday that the $20 million verdict would encourage other lawsuits in New York and elsewhere.
Until Mrs. Frankson's case, the industry had been successful in defeating other New York suits by arguing that smokers should be held personally responsible for their decisions to smoke despite information that has been widely known for decades about the health risks.
Steve Kottak, a spokesman for Brown &amp; Williamson, said that after every court defeat for a tobacco company, critics say that the verdict will encourage additional suits.
He said inquiries about whether Brown &amp; Williamson might be responsible for the $12 million in damages that were assessed against the dissolved trade organizations were ''hypothetical.''
Mr. Douglas said it was unclear whether money was still available at the two dissolved trade organizations to pay the award.
But because the jury found that Brown &amp; Williamson conspired with those organizations and others in the industry, he said, he planned to research whether the company could be forced to pay the $12 million in damages assessed against those organizations.
