Don Zimmer is putting off retirement to join his hometown team. Roger Clemens may not be far behind in joining his.
Zimmer, who spent the last eight seasons as the Yankees' bench coach, will be an adviser to the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, who play close to his home in Treasure Island, Fla. Clemens is retired from the Yankees, but the Astros, his local team, seem optimistic that he will pitch for them next season.
Houston made Clemens a contract offer in November, and he is expected to make a decision this month. With his close friend Andy Pettitte already on board, and with the chance to finish his career with a flourish by playing at home, Clemens is interested.
''It's still a scenario where Roger has to decide whether he wants to play or not,'' Astros General Manager Gerry Hunsicker said by telephone yesterday. ''But from the fact that there has been some dialogue with regard to a contract structure, you certainly can draw the conclusion that there appears to be growing interest on their part.''
Clemens, 41, won 17 games for the Yankees last season and has 310 victories. He is a proud Texan and has apparently been moved by the excitement in Houston over his possible return. Pettitte has also been trying to persuade Clemens to come back, and Astros first baseman Jeff Bagwell has made an appeal.
Randy Hendricks, one of Clemens's agents, cautioned that Clemens had not made up his mind.
''The question is whether Roger will play, and I expect him to decide, one way or the other, this month,'' Hendricks said in an e-mail message. ''Obviously, he has been tempted, but that is a far cry from deciding to play.''
Hendricks and his brother, Alan, also Clemens's agent, met with the Astros' owner, Drayton McLane, for two hours yesterday without Clemens. McLane told a Houston TV station that Clemens would make his decision within the next week, but Randy Hendricks maintained in a later e-mail message that Clemens's timetable had not changed.
Hunsicker said he doubted that money would be an obstacle to a deal.
Zimmer, who turns 73 next week, quit after the World Series, citing a series of slights from George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner. This, he said, will be a better way to finish his career.
''I left because I wanted to leave, but still, it's not the way you'd want to say goodbye to somebody -- except him,'' Zimmer said, adding later: ''Steinbrenner ran me out of New York. I left because of him.''
Zimmer will be in uniform for spring training and for pregame practices at all Tampa Bay home games. He said the owner of the Devil Rays, Vince Naimoli, told him he could have his choice of seats during the game: in the stands with scouts, in Naimoli's box or mingling with fans in luxury suites. He said the Devil Rays told him he could make any road trip he wanted.
It will be the 56th season in uniform for Zimmer, who has managed four teams and will be coaching with his seventh. He joked that his new title -- senior baseball adviser -- sounded too serious, and said the Yankees' trainers had already called to needle him.
''This is all new to me,'' Zimmer said. ''I've never been nothing but a broken-down old coach.''
BASEBALL
