Four hundred years after he colonized what is now New Mexico for Spain, Don Juan de Oñate (half of him, anyway) lies here with scattered pieces of his horse as if dismembered on a battlefield of titans.
But by the end of next year, if all goes according to plan, this helmeted giant will rise, four and a half times as large as life, at the airport in El Paso, though without a vital attribute -- his name.
Oñate will be simply ''the Equestrian.''
As foundry workers cast and assemble what is thought will be the world's largest bronze horseman -- an 11-ton, nearly four-story-tall monument to Oñate by the artist John Sherrill Houser -- the project intended to beautify El Paso continues to stir up ugly skirmishes in the culture wars.
Oñate's complex legacy is the issue. Founder of the first European settlement west of the Mississippi and celebrator of the first American Thanksgiving, in 1598 on the Rio Grande, nine years before settlers landed at Jamestown, Oñate is remembered today, if at all, for savageries that some scholars dispute.
''He is infamous for his cruelty to the Acoma Indians, killing hundreds of Indians, punishing 24 with amputation of a foot,'' Representative Norma Chavez, an El Paso Democrat in the Texas House, said in a recent speech and newspaper column.
But Mr. Houser and some historians question whether Oñate ever carried out the sentences, even in response to an Indian massacre of his own men, and contend that he was no more brutal than his era and his enemies. ''In a wild and woolly time, he was a hell of a brave guy,'' said Mr. Houser, 66, who traveled from his Mexico City studio over Christmas to see the progress of the casting at the Shidoni foundry outside Santa Fe.
Torn both ways, in November the El Paso City Council approved $713,000 from revenues of the El Paso International Airport toward Mr. Houser's $2.3 million project, then already more than six years in the making with $1.3 million raised privately. But the Council voted to deny Oñate glory by giving the work a generic name.
The Council also decided that the statue fit better at the airport than downtown. Mr. Houser had wanted it by the Camino Real El Paso, a 1912 hotel named for the southwest trail that Oñate made famous, and near the first of his planned sculpture series of 12 Western travelers, Fray García de San Francisco, founder of a mission that became El Paso.
Still, Mr. Houser, a second-generation monumental sculptor whose father helped carve the presidential likenesses on Mount Rushmore and whose son, Ethan, 30, also a sculptor, is working with him on Oñate, is not quarreling. ''Whatever they call it, it's the way I made it,'' he said. ''Unfortunately for them, it says Oñate all over the place.'' As for the airport location, he said, ''I think it's a fine place.''
If the idea was to call people's attention to history, Mr. Houser said, ''it's done that -- although now they don't want to recognize it.''
It was a City Council panel that selected Oñate as a subject after city officials, searching for ways to revitalize the aging downtown, approved Mr. Houser's concept of statues commemorating 12 famous travelers, as popularized by the Western painter and writer Tom Lea. Leon Metz, an El Paso historian and columnist who served on the panel, said Oñate was the second selection, and a hotly argued one, after the city founder Fray García.
Oñate remains a mystery man to most Americans, in the words of Marc Simmons, a historian and an author of more than 40 books, including a 1991 biography of Oñate, ''The Last Conquistador.''
''As it happens,'' he wrote in the book, ''Oñate was probably among the best of the lot when it came to the treatment of the native peoples.''
Oñate's nefarious reputation rests largely on his response to a murderous rebellion by Acoma Indians at their mesa-top pueblo, Sky City, 60 miles west of Albuquerque, in 1598, according to the Simmons book. Crushed, tried and convicted, they were given harsh sentences by Oñate, who could have decreed death. Men over 25 years of age were condemned to servitude and to have a foot cut off. Men and women over 12 were given 20 years of servitude. Two Moqui tribesmen were to have their right hand cut off. And children under 12 were ordered taken away to be raised by missionaries.
Fifteen years later, in Mexico City, Oñate was tried, found guilty, and condemned to exile for using excessive force against the Acoma and unjustly hanging two Indians.
But in a recent article, Dr. Simmons said research by John L. Kessell, professor emeritus of the University of New Mexico, had thrown doubt on whether Oñate's sentences were actually carried out. ''Unless more Spanish documents come to light, we will probably never know one way or another,'' Dr. Simmons wrote.
He derided the dispute over the statue as a travesty and accused critics of ''selective indignation.''
''You have to look at him not in the context of today's gross sensitivities,'' he said of Oñate. Otherwise, he said, ''you would not have a statue to anyone.'' He asked: ''Could you deny George Washington his place because he was out fighting Indians?'' The Acoma themselves committed atrocities against other tribes, he said, adding that everyone ''has ancestors who knocked somebody on the head.''
Dr. Kessell, in an e-mail message after the City Council renamed the statue the Equestrian, called the move ''a generic joke'' and added: ''There are probably still Confederate sympathizers who would applaud if we renamed the tall man seated in the Lincoln Memorial simply 'The President.' ''
Members of the Acoma tribe have denounced the Oñate statue, but a tribal historian, Petuuche Gilbert, and the tribal governor, Fred Vallo, did not return repeated calls for comment. The tribe's Web site (puebloofacoma.org) says the pueblo, situated on a 367-foot-high sandstone rock, is considered to be the oldest inhabited village in the United States, and it adds: ''Acoma was nearly destroyed when Governor Juan de Oñate and 70 of his men retaliated for the killing of 13 Spanish soldiers by the Acomas when they tried to steal grain from the pueblo storehouses in 1598.''
Alexandro Lozano, a recently elected El Paso City Council member and commercial artist who visited Mr. Houser in his Mexico City studio in November, praised the statue, saying, ''I was astounded by its size and beauty,'' but said he still had deep reservations about putting it up. ''To make a point, cutting feet and arms from women and children is not very nice,'' he said.
Mr. Lozano also questioned its appropriateness for the airport. ''It's a huge thing,'' he said. ''We don't have a space for that thing. You can't even see it -- just the bottom part of it, if you know what I mean.''
Mr. Houser says he is confident that his Oñate, by whatever name, will rise on schedule, and he has plans for other towering creations, some perhaps even larger and equally controversial. His list of travelers to come includes the Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa and the Wild West gunfighter John Wesley Hardin.
