The major political parties of the Iraqi Governing Council agreed at a meeting with Kurdish leaders on Thursday evening and Friday morning that the northern Kurdish region should keep much of the autonomy that it has held for the last 12 years, a senior Kurdish official said.
That includes allowing the region to remain together as one political body in a federalist system rather than dividing it up into several provinces, as some American officials had proposed, said the Kurdish official, Barham Salih, prime minister of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, one of two governing political parties in the Kurdish area.
Support of Governing Council members for broad Kurdish autonomy conflicts with the plans of the Bush administration, which is seeking to force Kurdish leaders to compromise on their demands for autonomous powers under the new government. L. Paul Bremer III, the top American administrator in Iraq, has met twice with Kurdish leaders, including Mr. Salih, in the last eight days to ask them to withdraw some requests, only to be rebuffed.
The issue of Kurdish autonomy has emerged as the most volatile one confronting American officials as they try to create a transitional government in Iraq by July 1. There is enormous reluctance by some senior White House officials to divide a federal Iraq along ethnic lines. Close regional allies of the United States like Turkey and Saudi Arabia have also chafed at this idea, for reasons related to their own concerns over ethnic and religious nationalism.
Mr. Salih, who attended the two-day meeting, said in an interview that the two main Kurdish parties were willing to accept the fact that they would not enjoy all the powers they had held since after the Persian Gulf war of 1991, when the United States and Britain declared northern Iraq a no-flight zone and protected the area from Saddam Hussein's forces.
The Kurds are ready to cede matters of foreign, monetary and national defense policy to the Iraqi national government, Mr. Salih said. Kurdish militiamen might become part of the national military, though they would answer to Kurdish authorities, he added.
''There was absolutely no dissension'' from the need to ''respect and defend many of the elements of the status quo in Kurdistan, including the governing structure of the Kurdish region,'' Mr. Salih said.
He added that leaders at the meeting discussed the future of Kirkuk, a city rich in oil and agricultural land 150 miles north of Baghdad and just south of the Kurdish region. The Kurdish parties have demanded control of the city of 1 million people. Some attendees supported a Kurdish proposal that would leave the decision of who governs Kirkuk up to a popular vote, Mr. Salih said.
Because of Kirkuk's natural resources and ethnic divisions, a vote would almost certainly stir enormous unrest throughout Iraq. The city's population is composed largely of Arabs, Kurds and Turkmens.
The outcome of a popular vote is hard to predict because no accurate census has been done since 1957. The 173rd Airborne Brigade, which controls the area, estimates that the population is 35 percent Arab, 35 percent Kurd, 26 percent Turkmen and 4 percent other, though those numbers are just rough guesses, said Maj. Douglas Vincent, a spokesman here for the occupation forces. The numbers are changing day by day, as Kurds move into the area and many Arabs move out.
The meeting took place in the area of Erbil, the capital of the half of the Kurdish region controlled by the Kurdish Democratic Party.
Several representatives could not be reached Friday for comment. In recent interviews, some prominent Governing Council members have said they favor a federal system in Iraq, with the Kurdish region remaining as one autonomous body.
''There will be a special structure for Kurdistan, and some kind of federal structure for Iraq, but we haven't gone into the details of that structure,'' said Adnan Pachachi, the head of the Governing Council.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: POLITICS
