LG Card, South Korea's largest credit card company, narrowly avoided bankruptcy on Friday after its creditors agreed to a five trillion won ($4.23 billion) rescue package, ending weeks of talks.
Under the agreement, LG Card will come under de facto state management.
''From now on, LG Card will be managed by the Korea Development Bank,'' the credit card company's 16 creditor banks said in a joint agreement issued late in the evening. The Korea Development Bank is state-owned.
Under the rescue plan, the Korea Development Bank would have a 25 percent stake, more than any other creditor, in LG Card, according to Reuters. Until now, LG Card's creditors had been divided over how to manage the company. A plan for eight of the creditors to manage LG Card jointly was weighed and rejected, essentially leaving the government to ensure LG Card's survival.
LG Card was forced to halt cash advance services at most banks in the country on Thursday as its liquidity shortage worsened. As a quick fix, creditors on Friday rolled over 100 billion won ($85 million) of LG's short-term maturing loans by just one day.
In late November, the company temporarily halted all of its cash services as it ran out of money. Its creditors stepped in with $2 billion in emergency loans, but only after they prevailed upon the LG Group, LG Card's parent, to give up control.
Recently, government officials have voiced concern over the fallout a bankruptcy at LG Card would have on South Korea's economy, which is still emerging from a recession in the first half of last year. Consumer spending has not picked up significantly and the economy is being shored up by strong exports.
An official at the finance ministry said that LG Card's creditors were told that a bankruptcy would cost the country's economy 27 trillion won ($23 billion). It was the government's drive to stimulate spending that led to the country's love affair with credit cards in recent years.
As part of the plan, LG Card's creditors will offer 1.65 trillion won ($1.4 billion) in fresh loans. Creditors will then swap a portion of the new loans and 2 trillion won ($1.7 billion) in previous loans into company stock, according to the agreement.
The LG Group will pitch in by selling its brokerage affiliate, LG Investment and Securities, among other measures, contributing the proceeds to LG Card.
The stalemated talks had a breakthrough late Friday afternoon after the LG Group finally agreed to cover 75 percent of a projected 500 billion won in additional losses that LG Card might incur later this year, with the Korea Development Bank covering the rest. Creditors had balked at the prospect of having to assume losses beyond the amount covered by the rescue plan.
Later, an oral accord was reached, calling for the Korea Development Bank to cover losses beyond the 500 billion won already foreseen in the rescue plan, according to Reuters.
