When asked how she came to write mysteries, P. D. James has a ready answer. As a child she wondered about Humpty Dumpty: ''Did he fall or was he pushed?''
In Ms. James's novels about Cmdr. Adam Dalgliesh, death is never -- well, hardly ever -- accidental. In the case of the first character to die in her new book, ''The Murder Room,'' there is no question that someone torched a car with the driver at the wheel. And Dalgliesh, the poet-detective, is alert to every hint of a clue. A master of police procedure, he painstakingly reconstructs the crime and identifies the culprit, but not until a full house of suspects have been subjected to his genteel but inquisitorial gaze.
As for Ms. James -- Baroness James of Holland Park -- at 83, with her gray hair and her natural politesse, she may seem like a comforting grandmother, or in her case a great-grandmother, but she has lost none of her zest for writing intricate detective stories and for contemplating the act of murder.
''I suppose that it is the one act for which we can never make reparation, taking away something we didn't give and can never replace,'' she said during a recent visit to New York. ''And yet an awful lot of murderers -- according to John Mortimer, who defended them -- are just ordinary people who get into a certain situation and murder seems the way out.''
Then she posed a question: ''Do you know the age group which is 13 times more likely to be murdered than any other? Under the age of 1 -- infants. My age group is the least likely to be victims.''
In her new book, her 18th, there is a ''murder room'' in the small Dupayne family museum on Hampstead Heath in London. In it is a gallery of famous British crimes, some of which will be re-enacted in the present, as the Dupaynes battle for control of the museum. Those historical crimes are borrowed from the author's own library, a kind of murder room in her London home. She especially savors those that are Edwardian or Victorian in flavor, for ''the outward formality, the seething emotions underneath.'' Her stories, however, are contemporary, in this instance including a private sex club.
Her novels always begin with a place. ''I've done the church, a publishing house, a forensic science laboratory, but I hadn't done a museum.'' Still on her short list is the House of Lords. ''I'd love to do the House of Lords,'' she said, ''but there are problems.'' For one: ''Nobody dies in the Palace of Westminster. You're shoved into an ambulance and you die on the way to the hospital.''
For each novel she does voluminous research. With ''The Murder Room,'' she visited many museums as well as the Forensics Science Laboratory in London. (When she worked at the British Home Office, she was in the forensic and criminal justice department for a time.) ''I never start until the whole of the story is very clear in my mind, and indeed down in the notebooks,'' she said. ''I know the suspects. I know what their motives are. Despite the careful preparation, I never get exactly the book I thought I was writing.''
Her books are more about character than place. This time her cast includes the three very diverse Dupayne siblings and their employees, starting with Tally Clutton, who is a kind of museum housekeeper. For Ms. James, Tally is a pivotal character, ''a woman of sound common sense and morality, rather a touchstone for other people's more dubious moralities.''
Ms. James is primarily a storyteller, but there is a streak of social consciousness in her mysteries. The new book, she said, ''touches not only on the violence in our schools but also the inadequacies in our mental health services.''
Her keen sense of reality is one of her basic differences from mystery writers of another era, beginning with the writer she refers to as ''Dear Old Agatha in never-never land.'' ''The methods in Agatha Christie and even Dorothy Sayers novels couldn't possibly work in real life,'' Mrs. James said. ''You don't expect the plots to be logical. It's an ingenious puzzle.'' Of course, today's detectives, like Dalgliesh, are helped by modern forensics and DNA.
She admitted that she did not often read other mystery writers (except her friend Ruth Rendell, with whom she often shares public platforms) and preferred to spend her time with Jane Austen. But she likes the novels of Ian Rankin and his hard-drinking detective, Rebus, who has very little in common with Dalgliesh, except that each has a sharp eye for detail and for uncovering the unexpected.
The main reason for writing detective fiction, she said, is ''to bring order out of chaos,'' and secondarily to bring ''justice out of injustice.'' ''It's not real justice,'' she said. ''At least you solve the problem. I think that's the virtue of the modern detective story, if it's well written. With Dear Old Agatha, the peace of that mythical little village is totally restored once the murder is solved. But with my novels, everybody who comes in touch with that very contaminating crime is changed. You don't get things back to what they were.''
One distinction of ''The Murder Room'' is that Dalgliesh, a melancholic widower, becomes romantically involved with Emma Lavenham, a lecturer at Cambridge University. At the end of the book, he sends her a love letter proposing marriage. Up to then, she said, with Dalgliesh there has been ''a holding back of being committed to another human being.''
She cited ''something C. P. Snow said in one of his novels: there is great dignity in being an observer of life but if you do it long enough you lose yourself.''
Will Adam and Emma marry in the next book? Perhaps, but she said at least ''they are going to start living together insofar as people can live together when one is in London and one is in Cambridge.'' She said she also planned to give Kate Miskin, Dalgliesh's earnest assistant, a love life.
As for Dalgliesh, she will continue writing about him ''as long as I have something to say and can find the words to say it,'' unlike Colin Dexter, who killed off his detective, Morse. Dalgliesh, she said, ''can go when I go -- we'll go together.''
