The stage had been set to celebrate the revival of jobs.
With a phalanx of women entrepreneurs at his side and a billboard covered with the word ''Jobs!'' behind him, President Bush proclaimed his confidence about the economy here on Friday. But he made only passing reference to the latest news about employment.
The reason was clear: Friday's report on unemployment in December was much weaker than either the administration or most independent economists had predicted. Job creation was virtually nil, and the unemployment rate declined only because the labor force shrank by 309,000 workers. Many of those were people who had simply become too discouraged to keep looking for work.
The problem confronting Mr. Bush is that there is little he can do between now and the elections except wait and hope that the employment picture improves. And the administration is not likely to get much more help from the Federal Reserve, which has already reduced short-term interest rates to just 1 percent.
''In terms of big levers to pull, they don't have anything,'' said Pierre Ellis, a senior economist at Decision Economics, a forecasting company.
It is entirely possible that the job trend will abruptly improve over the next several months. Businesses are more optimistic and more willing to invest in expansion than they have been in years, and that should translate into more jobs at some point.
President Bush may also have an ace in the hole. Last year's tax cuts are expected to produce another big bulge of tax refunds and lower tax bills between now and June -- about $40 billion in extra cash flow to households, according to economists at Goldman Sachs and Macroeconomic Advisers.
''It's not a good idea to give excessive weight to any particular statistic,'' said N. Gregory Mankiw, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers. ''If you look at the pattern, most of the economic news has been good rather than bad.''
Both the White House and the Fed are confronted by a recovery unlike any other in modern history. Economic growth has been soaring for months, corporate profits have shot up and the stock market has regained much of its old ebullience.
Yet job creation has been slower than in almost any previous recovery, and wage growth has slowed to a crawl. That appears to reflect another big new element that lies entirely outside the president's control: the enormous increases in productivity, which have made it possible for companies to squeeze more output from each worker.
''The evidence is powerful that we can have 4 or 5 percent growth without hiring much,'' said John Makin, a senior economist at the American Enterprise Institute. Mr. Makin has long been among the more pessimistic economic forecasters, but the employment and wage data on Friday came in far worse than even he had expected. ''I was stunned, quite frankly,'' he said.
It is not unusual for presidents to undertake actions to straighten out the economy and then do little but hope and pray they work -- and in time. Jimmy Carter appointed Paul A. Volcker as chairman of the Fed, and he increased interest rates to stem inflation. The first President Bush reluctantly raised taxes to deal with a ballooning budget deficit. In each case, those actions helped the economy recover, but not in time to earn Mr. Carter or Mr. Bush a second term.
Administration officials know that the crucial issue in an election season is jobs. And President Bush's track record, a net loss of more than two million jobs since he took office, remains one of his biggest political weaknesses.
Not surprisingly, Mr. Bush's Democratic opponents jumped on the jobs number as another opportunity to attack his record.
''President Bush has all but declared 'Mission Accomplished' on an economy that is still not generating jobs,'' said Gen. Wesley K. Clark. Howard Dean, who has distanced himself from former President Bill Clinton through much of his campaign, said Mr. Bush had generated only 1,000 jobs in December while the economy added about 1,000 jobs every three hours during Mr. Clinton's administration.
''What further proof do we need that George Bush's economic policies are a failure for working Americans?'' Mr. Dean said in a statement issued after the new employment data was released.
Unable to do much more to stimulate the economy, administration officials have stepped up their arguments that the three tax cuts over the last three years have made the economic slowdown and job losses shorter and smaller than they might otherwise have been.
''Without the passage of the president's plans, by the second quarter in 2003, the unemployment rate would have been nearly one percentage point higher,'' Treasury Secretary John W. Snow said earlier this week. ''As many as 1.5 million fewer Americans would be working, and real G.D.P. would have been as much as 2 percent lower.''
It is impossible to prove or disprove such contentions, but they are unlikely to comfort voters in big industrial states where hundreds of thousands of manufacturing jobs have been lost over the last three years.
Administration officials also appear to have stepped up efforts to show their concern, sometimes by criticizing ''unfair trade practices'' by China and other countries and occasionally by offering help in prominent cases.
On Thursday, for example, the Export-Import Bank announced a new agreement to lend $35 million to Malden Mills, a textile company in Massachusetts whose owners have been trying to pull it out of bankruptcy court.
However well intentioned, such moves amount to little more than window dressing. ''If they want to do something for public relations, they might have some kind of job hiring incentive,'' Mr. Ellis of Decision Economics said. ''But it could not possibly be something of a magnitude that would affect this economy.''
News Analysis
