Republicans joined Democrats on Friday in calling for the establishment of a committee to determine whether Gov. John G. Rowland has committed impeachable offenses.
''Regardless of the name that is used, it is a committee that would determine whether there are facts for impeachment,'' said Robert M. Ward, the Republican House minority leader in Connecticut. Mr. Ward spoke after a four-hour meeting with his caucus to decide how to proceed if Mr. Rowland, also a Republican, continues to fight to hold his job.
Late Thursday, House Speaker Moira K. Lyons said that after a seven-hour meeting with her Democratic caucus, they had also decided to set up a committee.
In addition, three more Republican senators on Friday called for Mr. Rowland to resign, bringing the total to 5 of the 15 Republican senators. Both the House and the Senate in the state are controlled by Democrats.
The continuing deterioration of the governor's position comes about three weeks after Mr. Rowland, who was elected to a third term in 2002, admitted that he lied about accepting free work and gifts on his private cottage in Litchfield.
Many of those who provided the work are at the center of a federal corruption investigation that has been examining Mr. Rowland's administration for the past year, since his former deputy chief of staff, Lawrence E. Alibozek, pleaded guilty to steering state contracts in return for cash and gold bribes. Mr. Alibozek helped pay for a heating system at the cottage.
Senate Democrats met on Friday in a caucus as well.
''It is our sincere desire that Governor Rowland resign as the chief executive of the state,'' said Kevin B. Sullivan, the senate president.
While not detailing how many Democratic senators had called for the governor's resignation, Mr. Sullivan said it was the ''overwhelming'' opinion expressed by lawmakers.
Mr. Rowland came to his office briefly Friday morning to meet with his top staff members and, according to his staff, discuss budget issues. He left, with his dog Colby by his side, to go back to his official residence to meet with a small group of Democratic lawmakers.
For a week, Mr. Rowland has held a series of similar meetings, the point of which is to allow lawmakers a chance to vent and tell the governor everything he has done to upset them. The goal of the meetings, aides said, was to help regain some trust between the governor and the legislators.
But the events of the past two days revealed that the effort has not been as successful as he may have hoped. Before Ms. Lyons and Mr. Ward met with their caucuses, Mr. Rowland said privately that an impeachment inquiry would ''suck the oxygen out of the building.''
Friday night, Dean Pagani, the governor's chief of staff, said that Mr. Rowland would mount a vigorous defense should things get that far.
''Clearly the Legislature is moving forward with the investigation,'' Mr. Pagani said. ''There has been a concern that there might be a rush to judgment in the current atmosphere,'' he said, adding that Mr. Ward's plan sounded like it could be a process that, in the end, vindicated the governor.
''The governor strongly feels he has not committed an impeachable offense,'' Mr. Pagani said.
While Republicans and Democrats offered similar versions of what sort of inquiry should be set up, both were vague on details. Likely, a small bipartisan committee would have subpoena powers and a mandate to decide if Mr. Rowland's actions warrant impeachment hearings. All the lawmakers stressed that the Legislature was still a long way from actually deciding on impeachment.
Connecticut's constitution does not outline specific grounds for impeachment, and one of the goals of the committee would be to try and come to some consensus on that matter, Mr. Ward said.
Next week, Mr. Ward and Ms. Lyons will meet, assisted by lawyers and staff, to try to give a clearer picture of what comes next.
No governor in the history of Connecticut has been impeached. The last governor in the country to be impeached was Evan Mecham of Arizona in 1988.
As an impeachment inquiry becomes increasingly likely, Mr. Rowland is also struggling to stem the tide of lawmakers calling for his resignation. More Republicans seemed to be worrying about the impeachment process grounding state business to a halt.
''I do not want to see this situation dragged out through a long impeachment process where the critical issues of the state are placed secondary to the governor's trial,'' said Senator David J. Cappiello, a Republican from Danbury. ''I believe it is best for everybody that he step aside now.''
Also on Friday, prominent Democrats called for new rules to close loopholes in state ethics laws about taking gifts.
''It is insulting to the public to hear technical, legal arguments that ignore the intent of our ethics laws,'' said Susan Bysiewicz, the secretary of the state.
Under the proposal, no constitutional officer could accept a gift of more than $100 from anyone with a state contract. Existing law prohibits the receipt of such gifts from someone doing business only within their agency. State agencies would be required to post the names of all companies with state contracts worth more than $100,000 on their Web sites, under the proposal.
Mr. Rowland has been fined twice by the Ethics Commission: in 1997, for accepting free tickets to a Hartford concert, and in 2003, for underpaying for vacation stays at the homes of two people whose companies have multimillion contracts with the state.
