There is no more room on the Tennessee Titans' marquee, even for a receiver with 95 catches.
The quarterback, Steve McNair, is the most valuable player. The running back, Eddie George, is a walking bandage. The spotlight has been wheeled toward them all week.
The wide receiver, Derrick Mason, remains almost anonymous.
The 5-foot-10 Mason, standing in front of his locker before a practice this week, looked up with a smile, then shrugged. He seemed to be saying, ''So, what's your point?''
The point is that the Tennessee receivers, background noise this week to McNair and George, could have a decisive role in Saturday night's American Football Conference divisional playoff game against New England's ruthless defense.
George is bruised and injured after dislocating his left shoulder and spraining his left ankle in the Titans' 20-17 wild-card victory over Baltimore last week. McNair looks wobbly with yet another foot injury. Someone has to make plays for the Titans to upset the Patriots.
Mason, a Pro Bowl selection with 95 catches for 1,303 yards and 8 touchdowns, is part of a versatile receiving corps that helped McNair claim a share of the league M.V.P. award. He did not complete 250 passes without some help.
McNair will need help Saturday night when New England brings a dizzying array of blitzes. The Patriots, who led the N.F.L. with 29 interceptions, press on the corners and do not play receivers as much as the quarterback.
They will see if McNair is taking a three-step drop or a five-step drop. If it is a three-step, they will try to jump the route.
Patriots Coach Bill Belichick and his defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel, ''are going to bring a blitz you can't pick up,'' the Titans' offensive coordinator, Mike Heimerdinger, said. ''Our guys have to be good technique-wise. If you have a three-step slant, you have to make sure you're coming flat and not let them beat you there.''
Mason, a seven-year receiver out of Michigan State, will be McNair's most likely target Saturday night. He is considered an underneath receiver who gets first downs, but Heimerdinger said long passes are built into his routes to take advantage of the right coverage.
''Derrick doesn't have a lot of touchdowns, you get on TV for touchdowns, but he makes a lot of tough catches and moves the chains,'' Heimerdinger said.
''For three years. he's had more and more catches and he's made all the games'' -- missing two last season and one in 2001. ''I didn't think with his size he would hold up that long. Usually, the little guys in this league get beat up.''
But the Titans also have size on the wings. Justin McCareins, who had a career-high 47 catches for 813 yards, is 6-2 and 220 pounds. Drew Bennett, who had 32 catches for 504 yards while missing four games with an injury, is 6-5, 203. The rookie Tyrone Calico, who had 18 catches for 297 yards in the regular season, is 6-4, 222 pounds.
The receivers are not just big, they are productive. Bennett averaged 15.8 yards a catch in the regular season, Calico 16.5 yards and McCareins 17.3.
''We throw a lot of vertical routes, but the thing with this offense is we can also get the ball quick and make extra yards,'' Mason said. ''That's the big thing this year. You've got to have the big play this year. You can't dink and dunk all the way down the field. We've had one or two big plays every game.''
George rushed for 88 yards against Baltimore partly because the Ravens showed some respect for the N.F.L.'s fifth-best passing attack by spreading out to cover three wide receivers.
The Patriots are going to show a lot of different defenses, Mason said, but the key is to keep New England balanced so it does not overwhelm the offense with more defenders than the Titans can block.
''We want to balance them so they can't lean on the run,'' Bennett said. ''We want to keep them out of cover 2'' -- two deep -- ''so they can't cover the routes.''
McNair completed passes to eight receivers in the wild-card victory over Baltimore, so he does not lack for targets.
Mason said: ''We're going to have to take some shots to loosen that defense up, or they are going to dominate us. It's not going to stop them from blitzing, but they won't blitz as much if we can make some plays.''
PRO FOOTBALL
