Patricia Cruz knows she has a weighty responsibility. ''I have five lives on my hands,'' she says.
There is Josue, 13; Charlie, 11; Kelvin, 9; Christopher, 3; and Steven, 1. Before leaving for work, she makes sure her sons are all dressed for the cold. A petite woman, she laughs about how they are gaining on her in height.
She wants to teach her boys what they need to know to overcome life's obstacles.
''Everything, I believe, is in the mind,'' she said.
Ms. Cruz was 17 when she came to Queens in 1992 from Puebla, Mexico, with her husband and Josue, then an infant. The couple married when she was 15.
Once in New York, she said, her husband was often ill-tempered and their relationship deteriorated.
''In that time we moved to here, everything's changed,'' she said in English, which she learned on her own.
Her husband had relatives and other connections in America. ''I didn't know anything,'' she said.
She left her husband, figuring that she and her sons would be better off alone.
''I was scared inside, but I tried to show him, I'm stronger than him,'' she said. ''I'm mother and father for them. I'm working like crazy, but I don't care -- I feel free.''
Ms. Cruz, like many immigrants, began ''selling on the street'' -- lighters, gloves and caps. Without a vendor's license, it was a game of cat and mouse with the police, she said. On several occasions, she was arrested and all her wares were confiscated. But, she said, it was her only means of earning money.
''At that time I didn't have food stamps, nothing at all,'' she said.
But her boys provided her with plenty of motivation. She remembers one day after she had left her husband when she was not sure if she could go on.
''The three little ones come close to me, and they told me, 'Mom, you feel hungry?''' she recalled.
She told them that she did not want to eat, but the children were undeterred.
''You sure?'' Charlie asked. ''Listen, the food is very good.''
She could not refuse such a pitch.
''They serve me food, they bring me the chair, the little table and the three guys, they start giving food in my mouth,'' she said. ''They give me energy.''
But more hardship was to come.
When Josue was 4, doctors thought that he might have autism. He had difficulty relating to other people.
''He's like a dream boy inside,'' she said. ''He creates his own world, but one day he is going to be out.''
Autism was ruled out, but he attends a school for special needs children.
She started a new relationship, and had Christopher and Steven. In 2000, however, her partner lost his job, and they lost their home and moved into his sister's two-bedroom apartment in a housing project in Brooklyn.
When Charlie was 9, he began having anxiety attacks, telling his mother that he was seeing ghosts and monsters. ''He always was worried that something was going to happen to me,'' she said. ''When he saw the storms on TV, he started crying.''
She broke up with her partner, and last fall received help from the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of seven agencies supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The bureau helped the family move into a four-bedroom apartment in a house with a backyard in Middle Village, Queens, providing $1,590 for a security deposit and $320 for moving costs.
The family has been receiving counseling services from the bureau's Bedford-Stuyvesant Family Center. The bureau has also provided $150 for a Christmas dinner and $100 for books for her and her children. Ms. Cruz likes to read self-help and spiritual books, while her children enjoy funny stories.
She has also made progress on her own. In 1999, she began working part time at a Belgian chocolate shop near Wall Street and is now working full time there. But her salary is barely adequate to raise five children.
''They have the big dreams, and I explain to them that you have to be good in school,'' she said. ''You have to be good.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,688,556.64  Recorded Thursday: 13,321.00  Total: $6,701,877.64  Last year to date: $7,157,040.35
