Howard Dean won a prized endorsement on Friday for the fast-approaching Iowa caucuses as Senator Tom Harkin, the state's most influential Democratic lawmaker, called Dr. Dean ''our best shot'' to oust President Bush.
The backing could not have come at a better moment for Dr. Dean, who spent much of the day scrambling to recover from a four-year-old videotape that was played Thursday night on NBC News showing him disparaging the caucus process as dominated by special interests.
Mr. Harkin, whose support had been avidly sought by a number of the Democratic candidates told hundreds of cheering Dean supporters at a midafternoon rally ''As we Iowans say, Howard Dean has his head screwed on right.''
With polls showing Dr. Dean at the head of the pack in Iowa before the Jan. 19 vote, his rivals seized on the comments belittling the caucuses in an effort to cut into his support in a state where the voters and political establishment are famously protective of their first-in-the-nation event.
Throughout Friday, Dr. Dean said he had undergone a conversion based on his personal experiences campaigning in Iowa.
''I really didn't have much of a vision of what the Iowa caucuses were all about,'' Dr. Dean said, while campaigning in New Hampshire. ''After two years in Iowa, 99 counties, I do have a vision, and I wouldn't say the same thing today.''
He also sought to return to issues. Asked about taxes at a college students' convention in Manchester on Friday night, Dr. Dean said he planned to propose a cut in payroll taxes, which he called ''the most regressive'' form of taxation. ''I have never taken the position I wanted to raise taxes on the middle class,'' he said.
At one point in the day he asked that the campaign look forward.
''I don't think this campaign can continue to be about who said what four years ago,'' he said.
But the delving into Dr. Dean's past record by news organizations and rivals continued.
The Associated Press reported that while he was governor, Dr. Dean accepted more than $13,000 in speaking fees from special interests and received more than $60,000 in checks and pledges for his charity fund from insurers who benefited from a state tax break.
Dr. Dean's campaign dismissed any suggestion that the payments affected official action.
As the Democratic contest intensified, Dr. Dean was not the only candidate dealing with his past. Gen. Wesley K. Clark defended his past votes for Republicans Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan.
Asked by a questioner at a town-hall style meeting New Hampshire whether he regretted those votes replied, ''We won the cold war.'' He added, ''The Soviet Union no longer exists. Insofar as my vote had anything to do with it, I'm proud of the way it all worked out. Let's move on to the future.''
Dr. Dean's endorsement by Mr. Harkin was a blow to the other Democratic campaigns, which had tried hard in recent days to persuade Mr. Harkin to either back their candidate or stay neutral.
For instance, Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who planned to be in Iowa this weekend to campaign for Senator John Kerry, had been on the phone with Mr. Harkin, lobbying him not to endorse Dr. Dean.
But the endorsement may have fallen hardest on Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who has served with Mr. Harkin for more than two decades in Congress. He learned of the news from a reporter on Friday afternoon as he was flying aboard a chartered plane.
''I would never tell you it's not a disappointment,'' he told reporters. ''It is. I like Tom Harkin. I have enormous respect for him.'' Mr. Gephardt also said that the endorsement should not serve as a ''shield'' to protect Dr. Dean from having to explain his earlier commentary on the caucuses.
Senator Kerry of Massachusetts said the Harkin decision was not unexpected and that he would ''just keep going.''
In Davenport, Mr. Kerry picked up an endorsement of his own: Tom Miller, the Iowa attorney general for 21 years, said the senator would make ''a first-rate president'' and would be the best candidate to take on President Bush over foreign policy and security.
Mr. Harkin had been agonizing over what to do about an endorsement.
He said he talked to Dr. Dean by telephone on Thursday night and was reassured by the candidates' declaration that his days spent in Iowa had been ''the best political experience of his life.''
In his endorsement speech, Mr. Harkin praised the candidate for a ''powerful authenticity.''
''I believe most Iowans and most Americans would rather have an occasional mistake by someone who speaks openly and forthrightly, than the practiced, nuanced, measured emptiness of today's political chatter,'' said Mr. Harkin.
It was unclear whether Dr. Dean's four-year-old remarks would do him much damage in Iowa. Several voters interviewed in Des Moines said it would not change their own perception of Dr. Dean. On the heels of Mr. Harkin's endorsement, another big-name Dean supporter rolled into Des Moines Friday to campaign for the former Vermont governor.
Former Vice President Al Gore greeted a cheering crowd at a downtown headquarters, declaring ''Hey, isn't that great news about Tom Harkin.''
Though the Harkin move appeared to help quiet one controversy sparked by the tapes, Dr. Dean faced others, like a comment from 1998 that if the militant group Hamas took over the Palestinian territories it would ''probably be good and bad,'' because ''if they have to run a quasi-state they may actually have to be more responsible and start negotiations.''
Dr. Dean on Friday said, ''I've been very clear about Hamas.'' He added, ''Hamas is a terrorist group. I said so six years ago, I say so today.''
He said, ''I think people who are discerning and pay attention will know that I am a strong supporter of Israel. I have repeatedly said that Israel and America have a special relationship.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
