A senior State Department official said the administration was negotiating the release of many of the prisoners at the Guant치namo Bay naval base to the custody of their home governments over the next several months, according to a transcript released Friday.
Pierre-Richard Prosper, the ambassador for war crimes, in a briefing on Thursday with British reporters, said that the United States was in discussions with several governments over releasing a large number of the 660 prisoners. In the transcript, Mr. Prosper said the prisoners had been put in three categories, corresponding to the danger they were thought to represent. The discussions involve those in the middle category, which he defined as posing ''a medium threat.''
That group, he said, includes those individuals ''where we are prepared to work on some sort of arrangement to transfer them back home for either detention and prosecution or other actions, monitoring, whatever it may be.'' In the briefing, Mr. Prosper emphasized that each of the cases would be evaluated separately.
Those in the top category, he said, were the most dangerous and would go before military tribunals. Individuals in the lowest category were deemed largely harmless and could be released, he said, as have been some 84 Guant치namo prisoners to date.
In determining whether individuals in that second category could be sent back to their home countries, Mr. Prosper said the United States would consider factors like whether they would be properly prosecuted, or at least monitored. He said the United States did not want to be in a position ''where a dangerous person is released and is on the next airplane into the next tall building around the world.''
Mr. Prosper said that in the negotiations with other countries, the United States understood it could not demand convictions.
''But what we're asking for, what we're saying is, these are dangerous people, they're engaged in dangerous activity,'' he said. But, he added, the administration was asking if the countries that will receive the detainees have the ''capabilities to put them through a process that allows for the managing of the threat and the detention, the investigation, prosecution.''
The detentions at Guant치namo Bay have been a major irritant in relations between the United States and several of its allies, notably Britain. There are nine British citizens at Guant치namo, two of whom have been designated as eligible for prosecution by military tribunal.
Mr. Prosper declined to discuss the Britons specifically, but the English journalists' questions were mostly about those nine prisoners. In the resulting articles, Mr. Prosper was quoted as having said that seven of the nine might soon be released for trial in Britain. State Department officials said that was inaccurate, however, saying that Mr. Prosper had not yet given any specific plans for the British prisoners.
