Sheldon S. Leffler, the former councilman from Queens who was convicted of campaign fraud by a Manhattan jury in November, avoided being sent to prison yesterday. Instead, he was sentenced to five years' probation and 540 hours of community service.
In sentencing Mr. Leffler, Justice Lewis Bart Stone of State Supreme Court in Manhattan referred to the case as a ''classical tragedy''; he described Mr. Leffler as a good person who, out of hubris and ambition, made mistakes that were criminal in the pursuit of higher elected office.
Prosecutors argued that during his unsuccessful run for Queens borough president three years ago, Mr. Leffler had sought to quadruple $10,000 in campaign contributions by claiming that the money was eligible to be matched with public funds.
Mr. Leffler, 61, was facing up to four years in state prison. Instead, he was given five years' probation for attempted grand larceny and three counts of offering false documents -- all felony convictions. For the misdemeanor convictions of conspiracy and attempting to defraud the government, he was sentenced to 540 hours of community service. He was also fined $5,000; in addition, the Campaign Finance Board may seek restitution in the civil courts.
As a convicted felon, Mr. Leffler, a Harvard-educated lawyer, is automatically disbarred. Justice Stone told Mr. Leffler that he believed that the inability to earn a living as a lawyer would be punishment enough ''to make an example of you.''
While Mr. Leffler's scheme to defraud the government was a criminal offense, Justice Stone said it stopped short of being ''pure evil.'' He also noted that Mr. Leffler had not received the money he had been seeking.
The judge said the public should understand that this was a situation in which there was a difference between ''one who commits a crime and one who attempts to commit a crime.'' To Mr. Leffler he added: ''You didn't get the money. In fact, you gave money back, albeit under pressure.''
Outside the courtroom, Mr. Leffler and his wife, Joy, seemed relieved. ''I accept the sentence today and I'm not going to make any other remarks,'' Mr. Leffler said.
Frederick P. Hafetz, a lawyer representing Mr. Leffler, said: ''He's gratified by not having to go to jail.'' Mr. Hafetz said he planned to appeal the conviction.
The prosecutor, Daniel Cort, an assistant district attorney, had asked for jail time, noting what he called Mr. Leffler's ''complete and utter failure to take responsibility for the crimes he so clearly committed.''
Mr. Cort also told the court that Mr. Leffler had turned down an opportunity to accept a plea bargain before the trial. He would have pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor and served no jail time.
Mr. Cort said that Mr. Leffler was ''too proud to plead guilty'' and that he had shown no remorse.
Mr. Hafetz criticized Mr. Cort, saying he ''asks the court to close its eyes to the quality and nature of the human being who stands before it.'' He said that the trial had been punishment enough and that Mr. Leffler did not need to go to jail for his actions. ''It screams out that this was aberrational behavior,'' he said.
Mr. Hafetz also told the judge, ''I think it is fair to say that at the age of 61, Sheldon Leffler's life has been destroyed.''
