With Brazil and the United States holding fast to their insistence on photographing and fingerprinting visitors from the other country, what began as a minor dispute last week is now threatening to sour relations between the two countries, the most populous in the Western Hemisphere.
The dispute grew out of a security program the United States began this week, which applies to all foreigners entering the country who are required to have visas. Comparing the American action to ''the worst horrors committed by the Nazis,'' a judge in a remote interior state ordered that all Americans arriving in Brazil be subjected to the same treatment.
Judging by radio call-in programs and newspaper columns and letters to the editor, the measure has proved popular here, with Brazilians praising their government for standing up to Washington. But that sentiment makes it politically costly for President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a left-leaning former labor leader who took office last year, to cede to Washington's insistence the program be curtailed.
''The barriers to American visitors erected at ports and airports have served thus far to inflate the national ego,'' O Globo, the principal daily here, cautioned in an editorial today. ''But with the complaints of Secretary Colin Powell and the tension in contacts between the Foreign Ministry and Washington, this could take on the dimensions of an undesired diplomatic crisis.''
Initially, the United States appeared indifferent to the Brazilian action. But on Wednesday, Washington's tone hardened, with the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher, noting that the American procedure took ''just seconds,'' compared with delays of up to nine hours for some Americans arriving here, and suggesting that the Brazilian policy was purposely discriminatory. ''It's not being applied to all people the way our system is,'' Mr. Boucher said. ''We regret the way in which the new procedures have suddenly been put into place that single out U.S. citizens for exceptional treatment.''
Brazilian diplomats and government officials are exempted from the American inspection program. In contrast, embassy staff members said, United States diplomats here have been photographed and fingerprinted even after presenting their diplomatic passports, and even a visiting senator, Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican, was forced to comply with the procedure.
Mr. Boucher's complaints were followed by a telephone call by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell to his Brazilian counterpart, Celso Amorim. Officials of both governments said the focus of the conversation was the meeting of Western Hemisphere heads of state in Mexico next week. But they added that the fingerprinting dispute was also discussed and was likely to be addressed again when President Bush and Mr. da Silva meet next week.
In a statement Wednesday, the Brazilian Foreign Ministry said it was seeking to ''assure proper treatment'' for its citizens arriving in the United States and invoked the principle of reciprocity, which it said was a ''basic element of international relations.'' On Thursday, Mr. Amorim told reporters that Brazil had grounds to complain of discrimination because ''27 countries are exempt from this measure'' and Brazil deserved to be among them.
The United States has identified the border region where Brazil, Argentina and Paraguay come together as a haven for Islamic terrorists. There is also a flourishing traffic in counterfeit and contraband passports; on Wednesday, for instance, a Brazilian police officer about to board a plane in São Paulo was arrested with 36 blank Italian, Portuguese, Spanish and Mexican passports.
Brazilian officials, however, have contested American warnings about that situation and maintain that their country does not confront any threat of terrorism. Brazil's critics here said that would seem to eliminate any need to build files on American tourists. But federal police officials say fingerprinting is necessary because American visitors could be involved in the prostitution of children or wildlife smuggling.
The new Brazilian policy has already begun to affect tourism from the United States. According to the tourist association here in the city that is the primary destination of the more than 600,000 American tourists who visit Brazil each year, an American corporation canceled an excursion for 240 of its employees, and cruise ship and air charter lines are thinking of doing the same.
The mayor of Rio, César Maia, this week appealed the original court ruling, calling the new policy ''infantile.'' But a judge here turned down his request, saying she lacked the legal authority to revoke the decision of a judge in another state.
The federal government, which does have the power to challenge the policy for a limited time, has not yet filed suit asking that the judge's ruling be overturned. In remarks to Brazilian reporters on Thursday, Mr. Amorim said that such a step should properly occur ''within an assemblage of concepts that will permit better treatment for Brazilians in the United States.''
