The last time a playoff game was held here, in January 2002, a little snow drift formed on the visor of Jon Gruden, then Oakland's coach.
That meeting, between the Patriots and the Raiders, came during the first season that the N.F.L. scheduled a playoff game at night for prime-time viewing. And when heavy snow fell before and throughout the Patriots' overtime victory, the game became an instant classic, the Snow Game. Pictures of it are on sale at the Patriots' Pro Shop.
There will be no winter wonderland when New England is host to Tennessee on Saturday, only bitter cold, with the temperature for the 8:15 p.m. kickoff predicted to be in single digits and the wind chill at about minus 15. Forget the charming tableau: this game could rank among the coldest in N.F.L. history, where the Ice Bowl has legendary status. In that game, on Dec. 31, 1967, the Packers, perhaps used to this sort of thing, beat the Cowboys with the temperature at minus 13 degrees and a wind chill of minus 48.
Tennessee, however, has played only three games when the temperature was in single digits.
''We're going to leave the Florida guys home,'' Tennessee Coach Jeff Fisher joked. ''We'll bring them up on Saturday, put them in the press box, give them some pizza and let the rest of the guys play.''
The Patriots, bowing to the plight of fans, will allow blankets and sleeping bags into Gillette Stadium. But don't worry too much about the players' comfort. Both teams have storerooms full of cold weather equipment: heated benches, heat blowers, thermal underwear, coats, hats, gloves. Some players also wear plastic gloves under their regular gloves; others smear Vaseline on their bodies to give themselves another barrier against the cold.
Tennessee's offensive linemen have made it clear, though, that they will keep a tradition and not wear anything now that they didn't wear in the dog days of August. That means no long sleeves and no thermals.
Teams like to say that the cold does not matter once the game starts, but the field will most likely be frozen by the second half, making footing treacherous, particularly because new grass was laid this week. The football becomes hard and slick, making it difficult to grasp. It does not fly as far on kicks. And tackles sting even more on a cold body.
''The ball is like a rock,'' Titans tight end Frank Wycheck said. ''It's hard to tuck it away, and defenses usually thrive on raking the ball, so we have to place a lot of emphasis on tucking the ball away and getting on the ground when you know the journey has ended.''
Despite the deep freeze, the N.F.L. does not appear to be second-guessing itself about scheduling playoff games at night, in January, in the Northeast. ''The temperature difference between afternoon and evening is not terribly dramatic,'' Greg Aiello, a league spokesman, said.
He said that the three coldest games in league history -- the Dallas-Green Bay game, the A.F.C. championship game in Cincinnati in 1982 (minus 9 degrees) and a 1994 playoff game in Buffalo (0 degrees) -- were played in the daytime.
''The challenge of the elements is part of the history of the game,'' he said.
PRO FOOTBALL
