The Bush administration lowered the terrorist threat status on Friday to ''elevated'' after nearly three weeks at high alert. Officials said they would continue heightened security for industries like aviation, banking and energy that are regarded at risk of attack.
Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge told reporters that intelligence officials had seen a reduction of terrorist threats in recent days and that the administration believed it was safe to lower the level to ''elevated,'' or yellow, level, the midrange in the five-step color program.
The administration put the nation on high-risk alert on Dec. 21, after intelligence officials detected an alarming increase in credible threat reports based on electronic eavesdropping of suspected extremists, e-mail monitoring, intelligence from informants and other factors.
The administration was particularly concerned about the prospect that terrorists might hijack a flight from London, Mexico City or Paris. Numerous flights were canceled or disrupted. One flight to Los Angeles from Mexico City two weeks ago turned around in midair after American officials said they were not satisfied that passengers had been properly screened.
Many threats were pegged to Christmas and New Year's. Mr. Ridge said that with the holidays having passed without incident, the administration believed that it was safe to return the status to yellow. A law enforcement bulletin also cited ''a decrease in specificity and intensity'' of the threats.
Mr. Ridge added: ''We have not let our guard down. Yellow still means that we are at an elevated risk of attack. And we will maintain particular vigilance around some critical resources and locales.''
That added vigilance will mean ''literally thousands of security professionals'' to provide added protection at specific locations, Mr. Ridge said. He would not disclose the particular sites, saying, ''We don't want to broadcast to everybody where we're going to be doing this.''
Law enforcement officials said the sectors that would be subjected to added security included transportation and banking, along with energy providers like nuclear reactors and hydroelectric plants. Local law enforcement officials around the country were asked on Friday to review security at particularly sensitive sites, even as they lowered the threat status.
Officials in New York said the city would remain at high, or orange, alert, the only locale in the nation to do so. Amid fluctuations in the national level, the city has stayed at orange since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, because it has been a frequent target for terrorists. The Police Department has stepped up security at bridges, tunnels and other possible targets in recent weeks. Officials also sought to tighten security in the financial sector, including banking. Federal officials have long been concerned that terrorists might use computer sabotage or other means to try to disrupt financial markets. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said the city was remaining at orange because ''we are the logical target.''
''That's both the good news and the bad news,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''We represent to the whole world, I think, the things that the terrorists find so frightening: a society that is open to everybody, and everybody's ideas, and actually works. That's what they're scared of.''
A senior police official said New York planned to keep patrols and readiness roughly the same as they have been. ''We are going right through to the beginning of February'' with plans for heightened security, the official said, noting that the Hajj, the Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca, ends at the start of next month.
In New York, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the police would largely retain a heightened posture through the Hajj period. Officials have identified it as a time for increased concern about attacks.
''There will be some adjustment and a reduction in some of the overtime-covered posts,'' Mr. Kelly said. ''But essentially we will doing the same thing, because there has been no significant change in the information.''
Federal officials, in calls to governors and mayors around the country, asked for heightened security at several dozen ''critical infrastructure'' sites, administration officials said. Of particular concern, an official said, were sites in Las Vegas, Los Angeles, New York and Washington, because of intelligence on threats.
