A fire lieutenant who was transferred after a fight on New Year's Eve at a Staten Island firehouse was suspended for drinking and fighting on the job in 1986.
The lieutenant, Gregory McFarland, who was working at Engine Company 151 and Ladder Company 76 in Tottenville when the fight occurred on New Year's Eve, was reassigned by the Fire Department on Monday as part of an investigation into a suspected cover-up of the fight, in which Firefighter Michael R. Silvestri, 41, was accused of hitting Firefighter Robert Walsh, 40, in the face with a metal chair, critically injuring him.
A captain, two other lieutenants and two firefighters were also reassigned.
Francis X. Gribbon, a Fire Department spokesman, said Lieutenant McFarland was working at the Tottenville firehouse on New Year's Eve to cover an absence and was not a regular member of either company. But it remains unclear what role, if any, Lieutenant McFarland had in the suspected cover-up.
Yesterday, Mr. Gribbon made a point of defending Lieutenant McFarland, and said that there was no link between the Staten Island incident and the 1986 fight. ''These are completely unrelated things,'' he said.
In June 1986, a few years after a group of women who had sued the Fire Department were allowed to join, Lieutenant McFarland, then a firefighter at Engine Company 207 and Ladder Company 110 in downtown Brooklyn, wrestled with a female colleague, leaving her with a slashed finger.
According to an article in The New York Times on Dec. 8, 1986, his colleague, Ella McNair, found an offensive news clipping taped to a wall in the firehouse and was scraping it off with a kitchen knife when Firefighter McFarland began wrestling with her for the knife, leaving Firefighter McNair with a slashed finger.
An administrative judge found that Firefighter McFarland had been drunk while on duty and recommended that he be dismissed. Instead, the department decided to suspend him for six months without pay and fine him $15,000.
Nick Mancuso, who was then president of the Uniformed Firefighters Association, was quoted in the article as saying that firefighters were raising the money to pay the fine and had already raised $12,000.
The department said that Lieutenant McFarland was not involved in any disciplinary incidents in the intervening years and that he had effectively turned his life and career around. The department said that by law it was not allowed to release Lieutenant McFarland's disciplinary record, which is confidential. Officials have said that a lieutenant made a false entry on New Year's Eve in a log kept in the Staten Island firehouse and that the captain, Terrence Sweeney, lied to a battalion chief about how Firefighter Walsh sustained his injuries.
A woman who answered the phone at Lieutenant McFarland's Staten Island home said he had no comment.
While fire officials described both the 1986 episode and the New Year's Eve attack as isolated acts, critics of the department have seized upon them as examples of why the insular culture of the firehouse, one in which the razzing of colleagues is considered an effective way to build character and esprit de corps, needs to be changed.
The New York chapter of Fireflag/EMS, a national group of gay, bisexual and transgender firefighters and emergency workers, sent Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta a letter late Wednesday night asking to meet with him and requesting that he review whether homophobia was a factor in the Staten Island episode. While the group acknowledged that it did not know the sexual orientation of either firefighter, it said that if homosexual slurs were uttered during the fight, it should be investigated as a bias crime.
Mr. Gribbon said Commissioner Scoppetta had not had a chance to review the letter and would respond once he had.
A spokesman for the Uniformed Firefighters Association said the union declined all comment pending the outcome of the investigation.
