Royal Dutch/Shell said yesterday that it was reducing its proven oil and gas reserves by 20 percent, a surprising announcement that raised questions about the company and about the tabulation of oil and gas reserves throughout the industry.
The morning disclosure sent the stocks of the two companies that control Shell, Europe's second-largest oil company, down more than 7 percent and left some analysts with doubts about the outlook for the company.
Shell officials, in a statement and a telephone conference call, said that a review begun in the fourth quarter of last year led to movement within the categories of the company's oil and gas reserves, cutting the amount classified as proven reserves by 3.9 billion barrels, to the equivalent of 15.4 billion barrels of crude oil, gas liquids and natural gas. Almost 50 percent of the reduction came from projects in Nigeria and Australia.
The statement said that the change followed a review of previously booked reserves against an updated companywide standard. Acknowledging that proven reserves must be reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission, Shell executives said they had supplied the new information to the public as quickly as possible. They also said that securities rules allow room for judgment in determining proven reserves. The company said that proven reserves are oil and gas resources that are reasonably certain to be produced.
Officials said that the reduction would have ''no material effect'' on the company's financial statements for any year, including 2003. And they said that they expected that the reserves in question would eventually be moved back into the category of proven reserves.
The statements did not seem to reassure investors or analysts.
Merrill Lynch immediately cut its stock rating on Shell, and analysts at Goldman Sachs said in a report that ''this raises significant concerns with respect to the credibility of the company's underlying operational performance.''
Several analysts also noted their disappointment in the related announcement by Shell that its reserve replacement for 2003 would be just 70 percent to 90 percent. Merrill Lynch was expecting a replacement level of 100 percent or more.
J.J. Traynor, an oil analyst for Deutsche Bank, said that there was no industrywide standard for reserve audits and suggested that the step by Shell could lead to similar reviews by other oil companies and even changes in the rules for reporting reserves to the S.E.C. A spokesman for the S.E.C. had no comment.
Several analysts said that investors would now focus on Shell's quarterly and annual results, to be released on Feb. 5, and wait for further information from Philip B. Watts, the chairman, who did not take part in yesterday's announcement.
Mr. Traynor said everyone would be watching to see whether Mr. Watts could turn a $1 billion writedown in the fourth quarter and this 20 percent drop in proven reserves ''into a presentation that demonstrates tough top-down management of an underachieving portfolio.''
Shell has been involved in a centralization and revamping since last year, including layoffs and the sale of old fields. But, at the same time, the company has disappointed investors by falling short of targets for increased oil and gas production.
Several analysts suggested that the reduction in proven reserves was a result of the effort at Shell to centralize.
The standard for proven reserves used in many of the company's regions may not have measured up to the criteria now being used at headquarters, they speculated.
''The positive angle,'' Mr. Traynor said, is that Shell is ''gathering these regions and putting some top-down management on them.''
After the announcement, Exxon Mobil said it did not need to revise its proven reserve estimates for oil and gas, according to Bloomberg News. Bloomberg also reported that a BP spokesman said that the company had no plan to review its reserve numbers.
Still, several companies are involved in projects with Shell, like the Gorgon natural gas development off the coast of Australia, which accounted for a major portion of the reduction in proven reserves. The Exxon Mobil spokesman said that his company had not yet included the Gorgon project in its proven reserves total.
According to Shell, more than 90 percent of the reduction came from projects that are classified as undeveloped, which means that equipment to extract crude oil, natural gas liquids and natural gas are not yet in place.
Because these projects are not in production, the company said that the reduction in proven reserves ''is not expected to have a material impact on hydrocarbon production in the near term.''
The rest of the reduction was from developed projects, where the equipment to extract the oil and gas are in place. A spokesman, Simon Buerk, said that in this case a project may ''not be going as well as expected.''
Of the 3.9 billion barrel reduction, 2.7 billion barrels are related to crude oil and natural gas liquids. The remaining 1.2 billion barrels are related to natural gas.
Share prices of the partners in the conglomerate fell. Shares of Royal Dutch Petroleum, which controls 60 percent of the group, fell 7.7 percent, to close at 38.26 euros. Shares of Shell Transport and Trading, which represents 40 percent of the company, fell 7.5 percent, to 371.25 pence.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
