State education officials have revised the Regents physics exam scores for the last two years, they announced yesterday, meaning that thousands of students who thought they had failed the test have now passed.
The effects of adjusting the test scores were particularly pronounced for those who took the exam in June 2003. Nearly 81 percent of students passed the test according to the revised scoring system, up from 53 percent under the original system.
Principals and superintendents across the state, many of whom had called for the rescaling after test scores plummeted in 2002, generally said they were pleased. But some educators said that the damage had already been done and that the State Department of Education's refusal to re-examine its scoring methods until recently had undermined their faith in the department's tests.
''We certainly appreciate the fact that it's been done, but it could have happened two years ago,'' said William Johnson, the school superintendent in Rockville Centre, who led a lawsuit against the exam two years ago. ''Had somebody in the State Education Department or in the Regents made the decision two years ago, we would not have had to bring a lawsuit. All the acrimony that existed statewide and the distrust that school districts developed over all of this could have been avoided.''
The problem started in June 2002, when 39 percent of students failed the physics exam. In Rockville Centre, for example, where the passing rates used to hover around 94 percent, only 76 percent of students passed. There was not a corresponding drop in Advanced Placement test scores.
State education officials defended the test and continued to do so after the June 2003 test results showed that even more students, 47.1 percent statewide, had failed. In October, a State Board of Regents panel found that the test had been too hard.
James A. Kadamus, a deputy commissioner of the State Education Department, said yesterday that the revision was not so much an attempt to correct a mistake, but an effort to reverse a policy decision. He said more students failed the 2002 and 2003 exams because the tests were more difficult than previous years' tests, as he said the Board of Regents had suggested they be.
''The scoring that we had before was very consistent with the philosophy and the difficulty level we were walking in with,'' Mr. Kadamus said. ''The philosophy has changed, so this will now be the basis upon which we will both select questions and scale the test in the future.''
But members of the Board of Regents said they had never intended to make the test so much harder.
''The board intended this to be an entrance-level course,'' said Merryl H. Tisch, a Regent from New York City who was a member of the group that examined the physics test this fall. Ms. Tisch said the Regents had acted responsibly in waiting until the 2003 test scores came back before recommending that the scores be revised, rather than giving a ''hysterical response'' to the outcry in June 2002.
''We waited, we listened carefully, we collected data points, and we connected all those dots,'' she said.
Harry Phillips, a Regent from Hartsdale, said he wished the rescaling had taken place sooner. ''It was apparent to me in 2002 from the outcomes that something was wrong,'' he said.
Anthony S. Bottar, a Regent from Syracuse who headed the group that examined the physics exams, said state education officials should be applauded for revisiting the issue.
''I understand that some people say, 'Gee, you should have done it sooner or faster or better,' but compared to what?'' Mr. Bottar said. ''Very few levels of government respond in this fashion.''
Like Ms. Tisch and Mr. Phillips, he said the Regents had never intended to create a more difficult physics exam that fewer students would be able to pass.
Education officials said the problem had been solved, but some educators remained wary.
John Chambers, superintendent of schools in the Byram Hills school district, in Westchester County, said he was shopping around for alternative physics exams to use this June. ''When something like this happens, it certainly undermines confidence,'' he said.
Mr. Chambers said he empathized with the State Department of Education, which he said was overburdened, particularly given new testing and assessment mandates set forth in the federal education law known as No Child Left Behind. ''Things like this are inevitably going to occur because there are so many tests, and now there are more and more coming down the line,'' he said.
Dr. Johnson said students in Rockville Centre would have the option of taking an alternative physics examination, one that the Nassau County Council of School Superintendents is developing.
At Midwood High School, in Brooklyn, where 64 percent of students passed the June 2002 exam and 58 percent passed in June 2003, down from 95 percent in 2001, the principal, Steve Zwisohn, was more optimistic.
He said he had not lost faith in the State Education Department's ability to score tests fairly. ''Maybe they have learned,'' he said.
