In many ways, Stan Kowalski is precisely the kind of undecided voter that the campaign of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman is trying to reach.
Learning from a flier on his car that Mr. Lieberman would appear at the In a Pinch Cafe, Mr. Kowalski showed up, chatted with him and left strongly inclined to vote for him.
''I like Joe,'' Mr. Kowalski, a biochemist turned law student, said. ''I feel like he's in touch with the middle class. He's a good man.''
There was just one hitch. Mr. Kowalski, a registered Republican, cannot vote for Mr. Lieberman in the Jan. 27 Democratic primary here.
With less than three weeks to go before the primary, Mr. Lieberman is making an all-out push here, leaving his Manchester apartment shortly after dawn and returning some 16 hours later while his wife, Hadassah, stumps the state, often on her own.
But the interest of Republicans like Mr. Kowalski, coupled with Mr. Lieberman's seeming inability to attract the kind of Democratic hordes who flock to see Howard Dean and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, has renewed the perception that although he could mount a challenge to President Bush, he may not get the chance.
Mr. Lieberman and his aides insist they have momentum. ''The crowds at my town hall meetings, at my house parties are getting bigger,'' he said in a radio interview here, describing his position in opinion polls as ''fourth and rising.'' Minutes later, he told a group of lawyers: ''This primary is wide open now.''
The Lieberman campaign has cited its success in its efforts to enlist independent voters who supported Senator John McCain's 2000 bid for the Republican presidential nomination. Independents, who can vote in either party's primary here, are considered crucial, and Mr. Lieberman has courted them aggressively.
But even though there are signs that voters are, as Mr. Lieberman likes to say, ''taking a second look'' at the Democratic candidates, they seem to be looking harder at some of his rivals. While Mr. Lieberman's biggest events rarely draw many more than 100 people, Mr. Clark has been forced to relocate two events this week to larger venues.
On Thursday night, when Mr. Lieberman appeared to struggle to stay awake at a relentlessly congenial forum with Senator John Edwards and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, Mr. Clark was speaking to a rapt audience of 700 or so adults at Concord High School.
At a town-hall-style meeting in Derry this week, one man said, ''Senator I admire your honesty and integrity,'' adding, ''I'm concerned that those are not qualities that will get you elected.''
The audience of about 60 included so many Republicans that Mr. Lieberman at one point called out: ''Welcome brothers and sisters. We welcome converts here tonight.''
And at the same time, his rivals have been nibbling away at some territory that has long been Mr. Lieberman's. Dr. Dean is talking more about faith and values, one of Mr. Lieberman's signature areas, and about middle-class tax relief, a central plank of Mr. Lieberman's platform. Mr. Clark recently released a broad plan to eliminate federal taxes for families of four earning up to $50,000 and cut taxes for families with incomes up to $100,000.
Mr. Lieberman and his aides say that they are not worried, and that the schedule filled with diner stops, policy speeches in offices and house parties reflects a grass-roots campaign that reaches people directly and indirectly through news coverage and advertising.
''This is part of why I moved up here and why I'm spending all this time here,'' Mr. Lieberman said in an interview during a drive between a diner and a residence for the elderly. ''I'm happy with what we're doing and, look, what I'm happiest about is that I'm saying what I believe is right and I'm offering a program for America's future.''
Indeed, Mr. Lieberman had unveiled a proposal on Friday morning to protect the privacy of ordinary citizens while also increasing transparency in government. The plan would double the penalties for identity theft and create an electronic privacy task force, as well as abolish all secret government task forces, create a database of government contracts and issue open-government report cards of all federal agencies.
But even as he has sought to turn the spotlight to what he plans to do if elected, he was still fending off questions about the perceived surge by Mr. Clark, the viability of his campaign and even whether he would accept another vice-presidential slot (the answer was no).
Despite his placid confidence, Mr. Lieberman is aware of the challenge he faces. Exhorting the troops at his Manchester headquarters, he said: ''When you think you've made the last call, make one more. When you think you've knocked on the last door, knock on one more door. Just keep pushing one by one to bring us the support to help us do what we're all in this to do.''
Dick Swett, a senior Lieberman adviser and former congressman from New Hampshire, called out, ''They want to vote for us -- they just don't know it yet.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONNECTICUT SENATOR
