Vijay Singh ended 2003 by winning the PGA Tour money title. He might begin 2004 by winning the year's first event.
Ending his day with seven consecutive birdies, and making eight birdies on the back nine, he held a one-stroke edge over the first-round leader, Stuart Appleby, heading into Saturday's third round of the Mercedes Championships. Singh was 14 under par for the tournament, one ahead of Appleby and four strokes ahead of Darren Clarke, who was in third. Tiger Woods, who lost his ball on his opening tee shot, leading to a double bogey on the first hole, was five under, leaving him nine strokes behind Singh heading into the weekend.
Singh shot a 29 on the back nine, playing like a machine, blasting monstrous drives, making putts and marking birdie after birdie on his scorecard.
''I wasn't expecting all that,'' Singh said of his birdie barrage.
Although Woods won the player of the year award, voted on by his peers, for the fifth consecutive year in 2003, Singh won the money title for the first time and had his most consistent year, with four victories. Now Singh has his sights on an even more challenging goal: overtaking Woods as the No. 1-ranked player in the world.
That will not be easy because Woods holds a sizable lead in the points formula that determines the ranking. Singh believes he can close the gap, and a victory this week at the Plantation Course would be another step in that direction.
''I need to improve, take a step a little further, and catch Tiger,'' Singh said. ''I mean, he's not going to slow down, either. I don't think I can catch him this year, but you know, maybe in a year or so.''
Singh was in such a groove on the back nine that he was probably sorry to see his round end. Few if any players strike the ball with more precision than Singh when he is at his best, and this was Singh at his best. Even his putting, often the weakest part of his game, became a strength.
''I'm not a bad putter, I'm just not a great putter,'' he said. ''Great putters win a lot more tournaments. If I'm putting well, I'm right up there winning tournaments.''
Asked about his putting Friday, Singh said, ''I was a great putter on the back nine.''
The only hole Singh did not birdie on the back nine was No. 11. At No. 10, Singh hit a radar-like approach shot to six feet. He sank a 21-foot putt at No. 12. At No. 13, he hit another dart of an approach shot to four feet. At the 305-yard par-4 No. 14, Singh hit his tee shot left of the green, just 70 feet from the cup, then flipped a pitch to 11 feet and made the putt. At the par-5 No. 15, he reached the green in two shots, then two-putted. At No. 16, he hit a sand wedge approach to five feet. Singh sank a 23-foot putt at No. 17, followed by a 9-footer at No. 18.
It has reached the point where Singh comes to tournaments expecting to contend. In his last eight starts in 2003, Singh finished no worse than a tie for sixth, including victories at the John Deere Classic and the Funai Classic at Walt Disney World.
One of golf's hardest workers, Singh is never satisfied with his latest success. There was still daylight in Hawaii after his round Friday, so he went to the driving range, perhaps trying to figure out why he did not make a birdie at No. 11.
Although he turns 41 next month, Singh sees no reason why he cannot continue to be one of the game's top players for the next four or five years.
''I'm physically much stronger now than when I was probably 25,'' Singh said. ''I feel I'm a stronger person physically and mentally.''
His peers marvel at his work ethic. ''He beats a lot of balls, more so than most people are capable of doing,'' said Jim Furyk, who was tied with Woods for eighth at five under. ''To have done that for 20 years, and hit that many balls, it's pretty phenomenal. I know a lot of people, they would have broken down by now.''
But Singh keeps going and going, much as he kept making birdies on the back nine. After leading the Tour in money making last year, he has quickly served notice that this year could even be better.
CHIP SHOTS
If TIGER WOODS can figure out how to play the first hole at the Plantation Course this weekend, his chances of winning will increase. No. 1 features one of the widest fairways on Tour, but Woods has not hit it. On Thursday, he was wild right off the tee. On Friday, he was wild left, blasting his tee shot into knee-high grass, prompting a five-minute search for his ball. It was reminiscent of last year's British Open, when Woods lost his ball on his opening tee shot, a miscue that helped cost him the tournament. ''That was pretty, wasn't it?'' Woods said, smiling sarcastically. ''I'm frustrated, because I haven't put it together. I've wasted too many golf shots, and normally that's not the way I play. I play a lot cleaner rounds. Now I got to try and play a great round of golf to try and get myself in contention.''
GOLF
