A baffling slow air leak on the International Space Station continued to defy detection on Friday, leading the two astronauts aboard the station to take extra measures to find the source, NASA said.
Even though the crew is not in danger, officials said, engineers in Houston and Moscow agreed to start closing hatches, in effect separating the Russian and American sections of the complex.
The astronauts' scientific work, curtailed after the shuttle disaster last year led to a reduction in the crew, to two members from three, will come to a nearly complete halt. Starting on Wednesday, the crew will stay in the Russian quarters, which are not nearly as comfortable as the usual living and working area.
The two astronauts, Dr. C. Michael Foale, the American station commander, and Aleksandr Y. Kaleri, the Russian flight engineer, will have access to the Soyuz capsule that carried them into orbit in October, still available as a lifeboat.
On Monday, if no leak has been found over the weekend, the station will be repressurized with onboard equipment. The current pressure is 14 pounds a square inch, down from the normal 14.7 pounds, since Dec. 22. The danger level for humans is 10.2 pounds, though equipment can start failing when the pressure drops much below 14 pounds.
The manager of the station, Mike Suffredini, said, ''Keep in mind this is very, very small and there is a half-year's supply of air at the current decay rate.''
On Tuesday, NASA officials said a preliminary analysis indicated that the problem might be the Russian-made air scrubber, which absorbs carbon dioxide from the crew cabins and periodically vents it through valves. The crew reported, however, that the scrubber had no leak.
A spokesman for NASA in Houston, James Hartsfield, called the new measures ''an impact to supplies onboard the station, but actually a pretty minimal impact because it is such a small rate.''
The investigation will be conducted over the weekend, and the hatches should be reopened on Monday, NASA said.
The $100 billion station is a joint venture of Canada, the European Union, Japan, Russia and the United States.
AMERICA IN SPACE: SPACE STATION
