Adele Freedman sat in a wheelchair at a hospital in Queens yesterday and recalled the horror of last month's earthquake in Bam, Iran. Shortly after the quake, she and her fiancé, Tobb Dell'Oro, lay trapped by the wreckage of their guest house, choking on dust and bleeding.
''We're going to die,'' she recalled saying.
But Mr. Dell'Orro replied: ''No, we're not. They're going to get us out. We're going to be fine.''
Ms. Freedman, 39, a Long Island native, survived the catastrophic Dec. 26 earthquake in that killed at least 30,000 people.
At a news conference yesterday before her release from New York Hospital Medical Center in Flushing, she said she had mixed emotions about surviving: Mr. Dell'Oro, a California marketing firm executive, died. He was the only American known to have been killed in the earthquake.
''I just lost my partner and the man I love and the person I want to spend the rest of my life with,'' Ms. Freedman said, choking back tears. ''So I don't feel lucky, even though I know I am very lucky.''
She was wheeled into the news conference accompanied by her doctors and her parents: Dr. Philip Freedman, an anesthesiologist at the hospital, and her mother, AnnaMae.
''This is really overwhelming,'' she said, laughing uncomfortably amid the crush of hospital workers, reporters and television cameras.
Ms. Freedman grew up in Great Neck, N.Y., and moved to California, where she worked as a lawyer. She met Mr. Dell'Oro, 41, who owned a market research firm, in 1998.
She said that before the quake, they were having a wonderful time in Iran, enchanted by the friendliness and hospitality of the people. Mr. Dell'Oro was having fun trying to learn the language, and the locals were amused by his phrase book.
On Christmas Day, they arrived in Bam and explored its ancient citadel. Over dinner, he proposed to her, fulfilling a long-held wish she had harbored. Both Cornell graduates, they had met at a party in 1998. Mr. Dell'Oro told her then that he had grown up in Saudi Arabia and enjoyed traveling and exploring other cultures. She shared his sense of adventure, and they visited Laos and Cambodia and Morocco together.
''He had a real affinity for the Arab world,'' Ms. Freedman said yesterday.
She had already picked out a wedding dress. Recently, they had moved in together and begun to discuss having children. They visited doctors seeking advice on having a baby, despite her bout with cancer.
That night in Bam, they slept in a one-story guest house in the center of town. Around dawn, the building rumbled and Mr. Dell'Orro jumped out of his twin bed and headed toward her, but both were pinned by rubble, she to her pillow.
''I was trying to breathe slowly and relax and stay calm'' to conserve oxygen, she said. They lay in the dark, in silence, beneath the rubble. They could not move or see each other. It was there, in the dark, that he began asking her what kind of engagement ring she wanted. She said she simply wanted them to survive.
After several hours, they heard digging. It was their tour guide, Farzaneh Khademi, who had rushed to the guest house with a rescue party. By about 10 a.m. the rescuers had pulled them out. Mr. Dell'Oro was bleeding badly from the chest and Ms. Freedman told Ms. Khademi to apply pressure and make a tourniquet. The guide began using her scarf to make one. But soon, Mr. Dell'Oro could no longer speak.
''I kept telling him how much I love him and that he had to stay alive and not to leave me,'' she said.
''He wasn't answering,'' she said. ''He was just blinking.''
Mr. Dell'Oro died in an ambulance during the roughly 150-mile ride to a hospital. Ms. Freedman was driven to a hospital in Teheran, where surgeons worked on her feet and ankles. She learned of his death days later.
''Ms. Freedman described how he had helped her survive cancer several years ago, helping her out of bed when she was too weak to manage on her own. They were now looking forward to spending the rest of their lives together.
''This is probably the hardest thing I've ever been through in my life,'' she said, ''and I thought I'd already been through that.''
Yesterday, she credited her survival to the ''kindness of the Iranian people,'' and said that, as hard as it would be to ever return to Iran, she would like to help build a school or a hospital in Bam.
''I'd like to go back because I know Tobb would want me to go back,'' she said, ''but it would be very difficult.
''We had five, or four, really amazing years,'' she said.
Before she was wheeled out, she said: ''He would want me to get on with my life.''
