With a financial crisis looming at Westchester Medical Center, hospital administrators and state and county officials were all struggling to come up with possible solutions for the center's fiscal troubles.
On Thursday, after the medical center's debt rating was downgraded, both a county legislator and a financial analyst suggested that an infusion of cash from the state was needed to help fill a projected $100 million deficit for this year. But a simple bailout seemed unlikely, and the state and the county were each assessing what steps the other could take.
The medical center, which is in Valhalla, offers the most advanced level of care between New York City and Albany, with a burn unit, trauma center and organ transplant program. But since spinning off from the county government in 1998, the 1,000-bed hospital has suffered financial setbacks, resorting to hundreds of layoffs last year.
On Thursday, Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's, two credit-rating agencies, both lowered the rating on a large portion of the center's $278 million in long-term debt to one step above junk.
Westchester has backed about $260 million of the medical center's debt, including an $85 million credit line that the medical center has exhausted. And Westchester officials are now worried that the county's own AAA bond rating, the highest of any county in the state, could be threatened if the medical center defaults on its payments.
A county legislative subcommittee had no fewer than three meetings yesterday to explore ways to keep the hospital afloat. The Legislature and county executive's office authorized the hiring of a financial consultant to help them better understand the scope of the center's problems.
The strategy that appeared to be gaining the most traction, according to hospital administrators and state and county officials, was the potential reclassification of the hospital by the state, from an academic medical center to a public hospital. The hospital continues to serve a large number of poor and uninsured patients.
''We think we've been misclassified, and we're going to talk to the state about it,'' said Gene A. Capello, chairman of the Westchester County Health Care Corporation, which operates the medical center.
Such a reclassification could increase the medical center's reimbursement rates considerably, resulting in additional revenue of some $15 million a year, county officials said. Larry Schwartz, the Westchester County deputy county executive, estimated that the medical center could reap as much as $80 million if a change in classification were retroactive to the year the medical center became independent.
An official in Gov. George E. Pataki's office hinted at the possibility of some sort of financial help, above and beyond any reclassification. But the official, Robert R. Hinckley, the senior deputy secretary to the governor for health and human services, said ''any kind of assistance that the state would provide'' would be predicated on a plan by the hospital to ''restructure its operations and improve its management.''
The state would expect Westchester County to do its part in rescuing the medical center, Mr. Hinckley said. ''We would expect the county to have a role in any solution that is put together,'' he said. ''The medical center provides services for the county, and it's an asset.''
But county officials said that Westchester was burdened with its own set of financial problems brought on by state-mandated expenses. Moreover, the county itself is owed millions of dollars by the medical center for police and public works services that the county has provided under contract, Mr. Schwartz said.
Indeed, Westchester was looking to spread the responsibility, arguing that the counties in the Hudson Valley also shared responsibility. About 40 percent of the center's patients come from outside Westchester.
Richard L. Brodsky, a state assemblyman from Westchester, said the county should help the medical center extend its line of credit, as well as put more funds into a pool of money for malpractice judgments that predated the medical center's becoming an independent entity.
Mr. Brodsky said that the county, state and federal governments had all short-changed the medical center to a certain extent through inadequate funding. ''The first task isn't how do you fill a short-term hole,'' he said. ''It's how you restructure revenue streams so that the hospital is getting actual reimbursement for the care it is giving.''
