When Judith Fugate, a former principal dancer of the New York City Ballet, and Medhi Bahiri founded their company in 1997, they called it DanceGalaxy. On Thursday night it came to Symphony Space with a different name: Fugate/Bahiri Ballet NY. Under any name, this would be an attractive group.
Ms. Fugate and Mr. Bahiri draw upon City Ballet's choreographic heritage. But they also stage works from other sources and encourage new choreographers, like Thaddeus Davis, whose ''Vivaldian Chat'' received its world premiere.
Mr. Davis set his work to recorded music by Vivaldi and Bach and bits of Thomas Newman's score for the film ''In the Bedroom.'' Because the ballet shows a meeting of two people, portrayed by Tanya Wideman Davis, the choreographer's wife, and Prince Credell, the ''Chat'' in the title presumably means a conversation rather than ''cat'' in French.
But maybe not. This exchange soon became a squabble with movement as sharp as claws.
The dancers embraced. But their embracing looked suspiciously like wrestling, and they kept pulling each other about in emotional tugs of war.
If these people were rarely happy together, neither were they happy alone; when separated they stood looking forlorn. At last they established a cautious peace, concluding a dramatic duet filled with fascinating passages of turbulent movement.
Two other pieces also concerned turmoil. Ann Marie DeAngelo based ''A Glimpse'' on ''Mademoiselle de Maupin,'' a novel by Théophile Gautier, the 19th-century French novelist and poet who also helped devise the scenario for the ballet ''Giselle.''
The novel and the ballet tell how a poet and his mistress are both attracted to a handsome youth, who is really a woman, Mademoiselle de Maupin, in disguise.
The ballet, which received its company premiere, is a condensed version of a longer work created in 1992. The taped accompaniment combines Liszt with music by a group called Enigma, in which solemn chanting rises above pounding rock rhythms.
The choreography throbs with passion. Davis Robertson was a wild, restless Poet, and Tiffany Stadler was equally temperamental as Rozette, his mistress. Jenna Rae Lavin, as Mademoiselle de Maupin, looked charmingly jaunty and boyish in trousers.
Mr. Bahiri, as Gautier, wandered calmly through the fiery encounters reciting lines from Gautier in French and English and carefully pushing the characters together; he was indeed a plotting novelist.
Peter Martins, ballet master in chief of the New York City Ballet, contributed ''Reflections,'' a pas de deux, to an appealingly emotional score for synthesizer by his son Nilas Martins, a principal dancer with City Ballet. Mr. Robertson once again became a stormy lover, and he partnered Christina Fagundes in romantic tempests. The storms were sometimes long winded but the dancers always held the attention.
Joy reigned in other ballets. George Balanchine's ''Valse-Fantaisie,'' to Glinka, bubbled along, with Ms. Lavin and Todd Fox heading a sprightly ensemble. Ms. Lavin darted through the allegros and Mr. Fox was notable for his effortless jumps.
Calm prevailed in Antony Tudor's ''Continuo,'' to Pachelbel, as six dancers kept entering and leaving in a steady flow of beautifully serene movement.
DANCE REVIEW
