Health ministers from the six countries where polio is now spreading said yesterday that they would intensify efforts to immunize 250 million children against the crippling disease by the end of this year.
If they succeed, they would move up the World Health Organization's goal by one year.
The countries include Nigeria, where immunizations were halted in recent weeks because some religious and political leaders in Kano State said the vaccine would make girls infertile.
Nigeria has exported polio cases to at least six countries in West Africa in recent months, the health agency has said, jeopardizing efforts to have polio join smallpox as the only diseases to be eliminated from the human population.
The other countries with endemic polio are Afghanistan, Egypt, India, Niger and Pakistan.
Speaking with reporters in a teleconference from a meeting of the ministers at W.H.O. headquarters in Geneva, the Nigerian health minister, Eyitayo Lambo, expressed confidence that his government and officials in Kano would quickly resolve their differences.
''Nigeria is unequivocably committed politically to the eradication of polio,'' Professor Eyitayo said. ''We want to bury totally polio in Nigeria by December 2004.''
The organization invited representatives of Kano to Geneva but bad weather grounded their flight and prevented them from attending, Professor Eyitayo said.
To support their charges, Kano officials conducted tests of the polio vaccine, saying it was adulterated with hormones and contaminants.
But a panel of experts appointed by the Nigerian government sent the vaccine for testing to two independent laboratories, which found no adulteration. The vaccine used in Nigeria is the same one Unicef buys for all countries.
''The oral polio vaccine is very safe,'' Professor Eyitayo said.
He said he and members of his staff met three times in recent days with officials from Kano ''to show them some of the defects'' in their tests and to resolve other differences.
''We are hopeful that by the end of next week, all these concerns that they have raised will be addressed,'' he said. After the issues are resolved, he said, ''we want to enlist them in the army that is going to fight this war'' to eradicate polio.
Nigeria is Africa's most populous nation and home to 300 of the 667 cases of paralytic polio in 2003, according to W.H.O. figures.
Dr. David L. Heymann, the epidemiologist in charge of the agency's program to eradicate polio, said that the ministers were given the option of the end of 2004 or 2005 as their goal for stopping transmission of the polio virus, and that they chose 2004.
That goal requires going house-to-house repeatedly to immunize newborns and infants as rapidly as possible and to avoid missing any children.
The ministers pledged to immunize 250 million children over the next six months, a period when the spread of the polio virus is usually at its yearly low.
Now ''may be the last chance to finish the job'' of polio eradication, said Dr. Bruce Aylward, a polio expert, because many donors and countries are tired of investing in the effort.
Health officials described the program, at $4.6 billion, as the largest such program ever.
The total includes $3 billion from donors, among them Unicef, the W.H.O., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States and Rotary International. The officials said they feared that if the program did not meet its goals by 2005, it would risk losing the entire investment.
Dr. Aylward said that early last year, polio immunizations ''ground to a halt while we scrambled to restructure the program and find the funding to get the job finished.'' Now, he said, an extra $150 million is needed for the push to end polio.
James Lacy, chairman of Rotary International, said, ''With so much at stake, we must not come this close and not finish successfully.''
