Regina Jacobs, the nation's top female middle-distance runner, who has tested positive for the designer steroid THG, is challenging the appeals process established for Olympic sports in the United States, saying it is biased against accused athletes.
This was to have been the farewell season for Jacobs, who lives in Oakland, Calif. She had maintained her excellence into her 40th year and figured to be a contender for a medal in the 1,500 meters at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.
But she has been accused of using THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone, by the United States Anti-Doping Agency, a quasi-independent organization that has managed the drug-testing program for Olympic sports since Oct. 2, 2000.
Jacobs, one of four American track athletes to have tested positive for THG, has said through her lawyer that she never knowingly took banned substances and that the arbitration process established by the anti-doping agency lacks neutrality.
As she attempts to avoid a ban of at least two years from competition, which would end her career, Jacobs will receive an arbitration hearing before a three-member panel. She chooses one member of the panel, the anti-doping agency chooses one member and the American Arbitration Association provides a third member.
According to Jacobs's lawyer, Edward G. Williams of New York, the pool of about three dozen potential arbiters is approved and paid by the anti-doping agency. Arbitrators frequently engage in informal communications with the agency, leaving them ''impermissibly tainted,'' Williams said.
In January 2001, the agency provided the pool of arbiters an expense-paid trip to Los Angeles and a presentation at the Olympic drug-testing lab at U.C.L.A., Williams said.
The U.C.L.A. lab is directed by Dr. Donald H. Catlin, who serves as the chief witness for the anti-doping agency in cases related to performance-enhancing drugs. It was Catlin who last summer first detected THG while retesting samples from the United States track and field championships.
The list of three dozen potential arbiters includes some officials who have self-interest in doping cases, Williams said. He provided a list that included Rich Young, counsel for the anti-doping agency; Jeff Benz, counsel for the United States Olympic Committee; Dick Pound, chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency; and Anita DeFrantz, a member of the International Olympic Committee from Los Angeles.
None of those officials have served on an arbitration panel involving American athletes, Williams said. Still, he said, almost all of the potential arbiters have been compromised by their close ties to the anti-doping agency.
''The arbitrators -- who hope to be chosen by U.S.A.D.A. or the A.A.A. to serve in the future -- are very much aware of who pays them, with the not so subtle possible consequences which flow therefrom,'' Williams said in a letter sent Monday to the American Arbitration Association.
Jacobs is seeking to have the American Arbitration Association require that her arbitration panel be selected from a much wider pool than is usually provided by the anti-doping agency.
Yesterday, Darryl Seibel, a spokesman for the U.S.O.C., which provides nearly 40 percent of the anti-doping agency's $10 million annual budget, said that Williams appeared to be arguing Jacobs's case on procedural issues rather than on the issue of strict liability. Strict liability means athletes are to be held responsible for banned substances in their bodies, no matter how the substances got there.
Benz, the U.S.O.C. counsel, and Travis Tygart, director of legal affairs for the anti-doping agency, said the arbitrators were chosen not by their organizations but by the Court of Arbitration for Sport, which is the final avenue of appeals for sports-related doping cases.
Benz and Young, the anti-doping agency counsel, have recused themselves from consideration on arbitration panels for cases involving American athletes, according to their respective organizations.
The anti-doping agency pays the arbitrators -- with assistance from the Olympic committee -- so athletes will not have to pay for their own appeals, except for lawyers' expenses, Benz and Tygart said. The trip by arbitrators to the U.C.L.A. lab in 2001 was a necessary training session and an athletes' ombudsman and legal counsel were also present, Tygart said.
''This process has been operating without these issues occurring since 2000,'' Benz said. ''Mr. Williams himself has litigated under these rules without raising these objections. There is simply no validity, that we can tell, to the arguments he's making about the process being unfair.''
TRACK AND FIELD
