If you ever move to New York City to seek your fortune, you'll soon learn that the whole city was different before you arrived. We all went to Nell's, Silicon Alley thrived, the West Village was affordable, the East Village was free, George Plimpton ran the social life, muggers ruled, and everyone was a tatterdemalion and artistic.
The jumble of the past may come to seem like a members-only fun house, a delirious place that your own New York will never, ever approximate. You'll never be able to verify this, so you'll have to accept it as true.
TNT, therefore, has provided a valuable service to all New Yorkers who fear they missed the party -- and maybe to everyone who didn't get a chance to swing, enjoy Demerol and collect alimony. The channel has dared to update an era-defining movie that seemed as if it could not be updated. ''Neil Simon's 'The Goodbye Girl' '' will have its premiere tonight. Boldly it suggests that you didn't have to be there: even latecomers can stumble into a witty, inexpensive Manhattan romance.
The original ''Goodbye Girl'' appeared in 1977. Like the new one, it told the story of Paula, a loveless divorced dancer with a smart-aleck daughter named Lucy and a disturbingly great apartment who falls for Elliot, an actor from Chicago who comes to share her place.
The first ''Goodbye Girl,'' which was written by Mr. Simon, also offered glimpses of a picturesque modus vivendi, one that included fire escapes, loan sharks, full beards, sleeping pills, spaghetti dinners, Chianti, phone booths and repartee. In those days, in Simontown at least, bohemians pushing 40 groused cleverly about being unhappy but ended up happy nonetheless. (As Paula says, ''I hate this sickening, it's-wonderful-to-be-alive feeling.'')
But all that was supposed to be obsolete. Hadn't rent hikes wrecked it? When bankers stormed the Village, goodbye girls lit out for Fort Greene. Out-of-work actors didn't stand a chance in Manhattan. Divorced women without prospects started to act more stoic than madcap.
All true, but isn't it pretty to think otherwise? In a sweepingly kind gesture, TNT is giving viewers an opportunity to swoon, 70's-style.
With Mr. Simon's help on the screenplay, the movie has been brought up to date with slightly labored references to ESPN and hybrid cars, but winning anachronisms, like the roominess of the shared apartment, have been left untouched. (Quaintly, too, the characters' last names remain the white-bread McFadden and Garfield.) The movie even opens with a discussion about theatrical revivals; for all the retooling, the new movie might be considered a revival, rather than a remake, of the original.
Patricia Heaton, the unflappable comic from ''Everybody Loves Raymond,'' plays Paula McFadden as if she were born to the role. After seeing her play this downtown single mother with such conviction and brio, it may be hard to accept that, elsewhere, she's still holed up in the suburbs with Ray Romano.
Jeff Daniels, on the other hand, has simply never been cute or funny enough for the warm and broad roles he gets. Instead, he's deferential. Here, he appears to concede without a fight the Elliot Garfield role to Richard Dreyfuss for all time; he contents himself with showcasing the talents of Ms. Heaton. He flaps around obligingly as the gay Richard III -- for some, this spastic scene defines the original ''Goodbye Girl'' -- but he's not forceful enough to charm. You never want to kiss him.
But Paula kisses Elliot anyway, and the girl to whom goodbye has been said too many times finds someone to trust. Lucy (Hallie Kate Eisenberg, from the Pepsi commercials) also finds a dad; she takes to him without reservation. Elliot even gets a movie gig so he can support the womenfolk.
Both girls, in short, are saved, and audiences of 2004 can feel the old magic again: you can still bop around, get some knocks and luck into a guy with a good heart and a decent paycheck. Too bad he's not cuter. Maybe that's what's changed.
NEIL SIMON'S 'THE GOODBYE GIRL'  TNT, tonight, tomorrow night and Sunday night at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
Directed by Richard Benjamin; Neil Simon, Ron Ziskin and Dave Collins, executive producers; Don Safran, co-executive producer; New version of David Gates's song ''Goodbye Girl'' by Hootie and the Blowfish. Produced by Warner Brothers Television and TNT.
WITH: Patricia Heaton (Paula McFadden) Hallie Kate Eisenberg (Lucy) and Jeff Daniels (Elliot Garfield).
TELEVISION REVIEW
