Margie Gillis commanded the stage on Tuesday night with her stately presence and beautiful long red hair in a program of solos that was part of the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater. But her choreography to taped accompaniments was uneven. Four New York premieres exemplified the presentation's strengths and weaknesses.
''Elimination,'' to chiming sounds by Doreen Bray and Josée Dandurand, was filled with abrupt, angular and apprehensive gestures. And the pauses that separated them effectively generated suspense as to what might happen next.
Gaétan Leboeuf's electronic score for ''Breathing in Bird Bone'' sent Ms. Gillis staggering and flailing, clutching at her dress as if she were battling a storm in the world around her and a tempest in her soul.
''A Complex Simplicity of Love'' was set to a gorgeous aria from Handel's opera ''Rinaldo.'' As its sounds poured forth, Ms. Gillis kept restlessly shifting positions, waving her arms and and letting her loosened hair toss about her. But nothing she did equaled Handel's eloquence.
Irene Dowd's ''Viridian'' was the one work not choreographed by Ms. Gillis. Unfortunately, this solo to Bach did not provide the program with a dance that could serve as an effective contrast to Ms. Gillis's own creations. Ms. Dowd emphasized soulful glances and big, wide gestures that were visually impressive without being emotionally evocative.
But Ms. Gillis tended to favor similar glances and gestures in her own choreography. Although there were many costume changes, she seldom created distinctively individualized characters. She twitched unhappily in a chair to a Leonard Cohen song in ''Blue.'' She also twitched in anguish in ''Waltzing Matilda,'' to Tom Waits's version of the song.
Ms. Gillis looked attractively pensive in ''What the Wind Whispers,'' to a Brahms song. But even this piece seemed emotionally overgeneralized.
She repeats her program tomorrow and Sunday nights at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
DANCE REVIEW
