A Head Start On Judd Prints
The Whitney Museum of American Art has been quietly collecting works on paper by Donald Judd, and recently it acquired two crucial drawings and a suite of color woodcuts by him. Together with works it has been buying since the 1980's, when few other major museums took an interest in Judd's prints, the Whitney now has the most important holdings of his works on paper in the United States after his estate.
''It's part of our mission to gather important bodies of material by the artists who have defined American art,'' said David Kiehl, the Whitney's curator of prints. Mr. Kiehl is organizing an exhibition of Judd's works, which has yet to be scheduled.
In April, for Mr. Kiehl's 10th anniversary in his job at the Whitney, an anonymous donor gave the museum ''Woodcuts, Eindhoven, 1987,'' two drawings Judd made in Eindhoven, the Netherlands. ''Judd's drawings tend to be very tight, but these aren't at all,'' Mr. Kiehl said. Composed of blocks of black-and-white shadings, they are not simply the precursor to the artist's later prints but also a reflection of Judd's signature stack sculptures. ''They're light bulb drawings,'' Mr. Kiehl said. ''They record the moment when Judd realized he could make two-dimensional equivalents of his stack sculptures.''
Meanwhile, Brooke Garber Neidich, a trustee and chairman of the Whitney's print committee, rallied support for the purchase of an untitled set of seven color woodcuts by Judd published by the Manhattan dealer Brooke Alexander in 1990. These works of geometric blocks in an intense palette of yellows, oranges, reds and blues are like his sculptures from that period. They can be stacked about 16 feet tall or laid out in a long horizontal strip.
These latest acquisitions aren't on view at the Whitney yet, but Judd devotees can see his first major print in the museum's permanent galleries from Jan. 29 to April 25 in a show featuring 10 years of print acquisitions. ''The Judd collection is still growing,'' Mr. Kiehl said, adding that he had his eye on further important acquisitions.
The Walker Reopening
As the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis gears up for the opening of its $90 million expansion and renovation in February 2005, its director and curators are busy planning how to display its collection. Opening with its permanent collection rather than a special exhibition ''will give us an opportunity to show artists in depth,'' said Kathy Halbreich, the Walker's director.
The building, designed by Herzog &amp; de Meuron, the Swiss architectural firm that designed Tate Modern in London, will nearly double the size of the Walker, which is part of a 17-acre urban campus devoted to the arts.
The museum will have 11 exhibition spaces. Rather than have the presentation dictated by curators, the Walker has asked four artists -- Matthew Barney, Robert Gober, Sherrie Levine and Kara Walker -- to design installations of their work. The artists, representing a mix of media, philosophies, race, sex and style, will select works from the Walker's collection and collaborate with the curators on the presentation.
The installations are to go on view when the museum opens and remain in place for nine months.
The Walker is the only American museum that has all five of Mr. Barney's ''Cremaster'' films. Ms. Halbreich said he was planning one section of his installation for his sculptural pieces and a tree of video monitors continuously screening the five films.
Mr. Gober is planning to show three of his sculptures along with ''Slides of a Changing Painting,'' a rarely seen projection installation in which the artist has painted a series of pictures on a small board over the course of a year, photographing each image as it changes.
Ms. Walker has decided to show one of her large mural works as well as one of her artist's journals. Ms. Levine's installation, still in the initial stages of development, will be a minisurvey of her career taken from her 12 works in the Walker's collection.
Museum holdings from a previous generation of artists will also be on view, in particular the works of Jasper Johns, Ellsworth Kelly, Robert Motherwell and Joan Mitchell. ''We're taking this year to remember the primary relationships we have with these artists,'' Ms. Halbreich said. ''It's what binds artists to the Walker.''
The next big show the museum is planning, she added, will be devoted to Chuck Close's self-portraits. Organized in conjunction with the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, it is to open at the Walker in the summer of 2005.
The Revolving Door
It's one thing to go from Sotheby's to Christie's or vice versa. It is extremely unusual to make a round trip.
But such is the case of Laura Paulson, who left Christie's in 1999 after 10 years in the contemporary art department to run Sotheby's contemporary art department in New York. In July Ms. Paulson left Sotheby's because, she said, she wanted to spend more time with her daughter. This week Christie's confirmed that she was returning as a senior vice president in its department of postwar and contemporary art.
''I really like the auction business,'' Ms. Paulson said in a telephone interview on Wednesday. ''It's what I'm good at. I won't be running the department and it's a larger team, so I won't be under the same kind of pressure I was at Sotheby's.''
When Ms. Paulson left Christie's in 1999, her departure was followed by a flurry of lawyers' letters relating to some missing documents. ''I can't really comment on that,'' she said, ''other than to say that everything was settled.''
At Christie's all seems to have been forgiven. Marc Porter, Christie's international managing director, said, ''We hired her back because Brett Gorvy is a greater supporter,'' referring to a co-head of contemporary art at Christie's who wanted her back. ''She has an undeniable presence on the West Coast and in Italy.''
Inside Art
