Making her PGA Tour debut Thursday at age 14, Michelle Wie played more like a nine-year Tour veteran than a ninth grader.
Seemingly unfazed by the hoopla, the pressure and the attention, Wie shot a two-over-par 72 in the opening round of the Sony Open, finishing ahead of past Tour event winners like Scott Hoch (73), Matt Kuchar (73), Steve Flesch (74), J. P. Hayes (74) and Rory Sabbatini (78).
Although it would probably take a round in the 60's on Friday for Wie to make the 36-hole cut, which was at even par last year, nothing that happened on Thursday at Waialae Country Club convinced her that the cut was out of reach.
Why shouldn't Wie dream big? She stands six feet tall and has a silky and powerful swing that is the envy of many Tour pros. At least two of her first-round drives measured more than 300 yards, and her touch around the greens looked much improved since last year.
After a round that included three birdies, five bogeys, several splendid shots and many smiles, Wie said at a news conference that she was grateful to display her skills in front of a huge gallery. Her playing partners may have been more impressed than she was.
''I think I learned that I can play here,'' said Wie, who has talked of one day playing the PGA and the L.P.G.A. Tours. ''I think I could play here, but I have to work harder on my game to be in the winner's circle. I never felt like I was out of place.''
Wie had several factors in her favor. The weather was almost perfect, with hardly a breath of wind and midday temperatures around 80 degrees. And Wie, a Honolulu native, was helped by her familiarity with the 7,060-yard Waialae course, which she has played at least 50 times since the beginning of November.
Yet Wie had never played Waialae under Tour conditions, with fast greens, tucked pin positions and challenging rough. Wie was hardly overmatched, however, and just missed several short putts.
''She hits it long enough to play any golf course,'' said Craig Bowden, one of Wie's playing partners, who shot a 70. ''If she plays the way she did today and she makes a few more putts, she could make the cut.''
Wie outdrove Bowden on several holes, including the par-4, 446-yard No. 12. Asked about being outdriven by a 14-year-old girl, Bowden said half-jokingly, ''It was demeaning.''
Then Bowden added: ''She's got a long swing and a huge arch. She's going to create a lot of power. I had never seen her play. It was impressive, very impressive.''
While Carlos Franco was the leader by two strokes over Jesper Parnevik with a 63, Wie, who was tied for 105th place in the field of 143 after Sabbatini withdrew, finished ahead of her other playing partner, Kevin Hayashi, who shot a 75.
''I'm not the only one she's going to beat,'' Hayashi said.
Wie followed in the footsteps of two women who played in PGA Tour events last year: Annika Sorenstam, the top female player in the world, and Suzy Whaley, a club professional from Connecticut. When Sorenstam became the first woman to play a PGA event in 58 years last May, the atmosphere was frenzied. Sorenstam, who shot 71-74 and missed the cut, played in front of a huge gallery that approached 10,000 people on each hole, with many fans screaming encouragement between shots.
Thursday's scene was far different. Wie's gallery probably exceeded 4,000 at his highest, but the atmosphere was almost subdued at times. Spectators seldom said anything to Wie between shots but cheered strongly whenever she did something positive.
''It was wonderful,'' Wie said of her fan support. ''There were so many people out there. They were really good, supporting me, and whenever I made a putt they were just awesome.''
She started play on the 10th hole, and her first birdie came at No. 12, where she made a 10-foot putt. She bogeyed the par-4, 478-yard 13th hole, hitting a 4-iron approach shot into the right bunker and then failing to get up and down. Then came another bogey at the par-4, 433-yard No. 14, where she hit a tee shot into the right rough, missed the green and failed to get up and down again.
Wie righted herself with three consecutive pars but missed a birdie putt at the par-5, 551-yard No. 18. Her 12-footer grazed the right lip of the cup and stayed out as Wie slumped to her knees in disappointment. ''I think I was putting very well today, but they just wouldn't go in,'' Wie said.
Wie missed the green with her approach shot at No. 1, leading to another bogey that dropped her to two-over par. But after making a nice 22-footer to save par at No. 4, Wie three-putted for a bogey at No. 5.
She bounced back with a 20-foot putt for a birdie at No. 6 after hitting a superb 4-iron shot from the rough to the green. Wie missed the green and bogeyed the par-3 No. 7 but ended the day with a birdie at the par-5, 510-yard No. 9, chipping her third shot to 9 feet and sinking the putt.
With the afternoon players still on the course, Wie did not know exactly where she stood in the 144-player field when her round ended. But her goal of making the cut remained a possibility, and she hoped to play Friday even more fearlessly.
''I think I was playing more safe today,'' Wie said. ''To make it to Saturday, I'm going to go at every flag.''
GOLF
