With solid quarterly results and an emphatic declaration of optimism, I.B.M. made a strong case yesterday that the recovery in technology spending is spreading to corporate buyers.
And Sun Microsystems, a computer maker sent reeling by the technology slump, provided another sign of improvement in the corporate market. Its quarterly loss narrowed sharply and sales held up better than Wall Street expected.
Sales and earnings at I.B.M. for the fourth quarter surpassed the consensus estimate on Wall Street, though the results were helped by currency gains from the weakness of the dollar. But perhaps more striking was the cheery outlook supplied by I.B.M. executives in the conference call with securities analysts yesterday morning. After the news, shares of I.B.M rose $3.71, to $94.02 a share.
Throughout the long slump in technology spending, the company's business held up better than most of its rivals. Even so, I.B.M. often stated that its corporate customers mostly remained wary and tight-fisted. Most of the recent improvement in the technology sector, including strong quarterly gains reported on Wednesday from Intel and Apple, has been fueled by rising consumer demand for everything from personal computers and cellphones to digital music players and digital cameras.
Yet I.B.M. is focused almost entirely on the corporate technology market. And the corporate business represents two-thirds of all spending on information technology.
''Our customers' confidence is growing and so is the confidence of the I.B.M. team,'' said John R. Joyce, I.B.M.'s chief financial officer.
In the fourth quarter, the evidence of a turn in corporate attitudes toward technology spending began to pile up, Mr. Joyce said. I.B.M. saw its sales of the computers that power corporate data centers, led by mainframes, rise significantly. And I.B.M. signed up $17 billion worth of new contracts in its big technology services group. The services contracts, typically spread over years, do not show up as immediate revenues, but they are a signal of growth.
Mr. Joyce predicted that 2004 is ''the year when the information technology industry will begin its next growth cycle.''
I.B.M.'s revenues in the quarter rose to $25.9 billion, 9 percent higher than the same quarter a year ago, and about $900 million higher than analysts' estimates, according to Thomson First Call. The revenue growth was less impressive than it might appear because 8 percentage points of that gain was attributable to currency gains. The weakening of the dollar means sales made in foreign currencies are worth more in dollar terms. About 60 percent of I.B.M.'s sales come from abroad.
''The revenue growth was nothing to write home about, but it was a good quarter for I.B.M.,'' said John B. Jones Jr., an analyst for the Soundview Technology Group.
The company reported a net income of $2.7 billion or $1.55 a share, compared with $1 billion or 59 cents a share a year ago.
I.B.M. also said its earnings from continuing operations came to $1.56 a share, or 6 cents higher than the Wall Street consensus and 41 percent higher than the $1.11 a share a year earlier. But the figure in the fourth quarter of 2002 included a 23-cent-a-share charge for costs related to the acquisition of PricewaterhouseCoopers Consulting in 2002. Excluding those one-time charges, I.B.M. profits from continuing operations rose 16 percent for the quarter.
Mr. Joyce said long-term growth expectations are for yearly revenues to increase in the ''mid- to high-single digit range'' and earnings per share to rise by ''low double digits.''
In the fourth quarter, Mr. Joyce noted that I.B.M.'s largest customer accounts were the fastest-growing part of its business, a stark change from the sharp cutbacks in corporate spending that made the technology slump so precipitous and long.
''The bounce up in the big-customer business is encouraging,'' said Steven M. Milunovich, an analyst for Merrill Lynch. ''I.B.M. is a pure enterprise business. They don't do iPods or digital cameras or the rest of consumer technology. Over all, the tone of their comments was that maybe it's our turn now.''
I.B.M.'s hardware sales increased 12 percent in the quarter. All of its computer lines did fairly well, but the biggest gains came from its old mainstay, mainframe computers, where sales were up 33 percent.
Software revenues increased 12 percent to $4.3 billion, and much of its software sales are products that run on I.B.M. mainframes.
The revenues from the company's largest business, services, increased 8 percent to $11.4 billion. But without currency gains, revenue from services declined by 1 percent. Analysts noted that the decline in profit margins in services, down 1.5 percent to 25 percent, was cause for concern. But analysts also pointed out that another big corporate technology services company, Accenture, reported lower profit margins this week. The slipping margins in services, they said, mostly show that price pressure remains severe in that arena.
I.B.M. executives said that the strong performance in hardware sales and a weaker showing in the services business reflected two things. First, they said, corporate customers are investing in hardware to gain greater efficiency in their computer networks before they make new services commitments. Second, they said, I.B.M. has been spending money to expand its corporate services well beyond helping companies run their computer operations efficiently to improving other business functions like procurement and marketing.
Analysts noted that I.B.M.'s strategy for years has been to increase its software and services business, while relying less on its hardware business. But the mainframe business remains a good one, they said, as the fourth quarter results showed.
''You had the old I.B.M. really showing strength -- hardware and especially mainframes -- and the new I.B.M. -- services and software -- not do so well,'' said A.M. Sacconaghi, an analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein.
The loss of $125 million at Sun Microsystems in the second quarter, or 4 cents a share, provided a glimmer of hope. The company lost $2.28 billion, or 72 cents a share, in the quarter a year ago. Analysts had forecast a loss of 5 cents a share, according to Thomson First Call.
Scott McNealy, the chief executive of Sun, called the period ''a quarter of progress.'' He attributed to the declining loss to better cost controls and efficiencies and continued investment in new development.
Sun has been steadily losing market share to rivals like Dell, I.B.M. and Hewlett-Packard, and the company has been criticized for not moving toward industry-standard technology sooner. But in a conference call with analysts, Mr. McNealy said that reports of the company's decline were exaggerated and unfair.
The quarter's results included investment losses of $36 million, as well as a restructuring gain of $10 million. Excluding these items, Sun's loss in the second quarter would have been $99 million, or 3 cents a share, the company said.
Revenues for the second quarter were $2.89 billion, a decline of 0.9 percent over the second quarter of 2003, but topping Wall Street's forecast of $2.72 billion in revenue for the period.
During the second quarter, revenues rose 13.9 percent over the first quarter, marking the highest first-quarter-to-second-quarter growth since 1998. Before the earnings announcement, shares of Sun fell 10 cents, to $5.36.
TECHNOLOGY
