Harvard University, already the nation's richest school, may soon get a bit richer.
Last month, the Internal Revenue Service published a decision that could make it more attractive for people to leave their money to Harvard. It will allow people to invest with the school's strong performing endowment in a popular type of trust that has tax advantages.
Harvard, in turn, can market the plan to further expand its rapidly growing endowment, already the nation's largest at $19.3 billion.
''People give to Harvard because they believe in it,'' said Anne McClintock, executive director for the university's planned giving program. ''But it may encourage some people to make their gifts sooner. It may encourage some people to give a little more than may have.''
The school's innovative plan could also encourage other institutions to follow suit if they can get a comparable tax ruling.
Harvard is among a very few academic institutions whose endowments have generated stunning returns. Yale University has produced average annual returns of 16 percent for the 10 years through June 30. Harvard has had annualized returns of 14.7 percent in that period. The average for 426 schools during that time was 8.7 percent, according to the National Association of College and Business Offices.
A popular way for someone to make a donation to Harvard is to create a trust that pays dividends to the owner in his or her lifetime and that goes to the school upon death. This vehicle, known as a charitable remainder trust, provides an upfront tax break in the form of a charitable deduction and can minimize estate taxes.
Until now, donors could have Harvard invest those accounts in many of the same stock and bond indexes that the endowment uses.
But they could not benefit from the outsize returns of the overall endowment, with its diverse investments, because of tax consequences.
Harvard has been among the trendsetters in endowment management. Under Jack R. Meyer, chief executive of the Harvard Management Company, which manages the endowment, it has diversified into private equity, hedge funds, real estate and commodities. For example, it now has 10 percent of its portfolio invested in timber.
That diversity has bolstered its performance. For example, in fiscal 2000 when the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index was up 7.3 percent, Harvard's endowment rose 32.2 percent. ''The primary driver was private equity, which rose 228 percent,'' Mr. Meyer recalled.
Some of Harvard's alternative investment strategies generate ''unrelated business taxable income'' that would cause a charitable remainder trust to lose its tax-free status.
Now, though, the I.R.S. has decided that if the endowment is willing to assume that tax, rather than automatically passing along the trusts' prorated share, the trusts can retain their tax-free status.
That permits donors to tap into the overall Harvard returns. ''People have been calling me about it,'' said Byron Wien, senior investment strategist at Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, and a Harvard alumnus and fund-raiser. ''They are intrigued.''
The school does not expect donations to soar -- at least not initially. For one thing, the financial decision is complicated. The endowment, which manages 55 percent of its money internally, trades aggressively and generates largely short-term gains. Not a worry for the university because endowments are nontaxable, but donors tend to prefer long-term gains and their lower tax rates.
The Internal Revenue Service has stipulated that trusts must pay out at least 5 percent annually in dividends, said David W. Scudder, vice president of trusts at the Harvard Management Company. Generally, they pay out 5 percent to 7 percent, he said.
If you make the switch as a donor to the endowment, you are betting that ''the faster your capital grows over the years, the faster your income will grow,'' Mr. Scudder said. A trust with $500,000 would generate about $35,000 in income initially based on a 7 percent payout, but if the endowment proceeded to double its assets in seven years, the donor's income would double, too.
A donor can, of course, choose to continue having Harvard manage the portfolio and just invest in stock and bond funds. But Harvard will alter its choice to be stock and bond index funds that are not necessarily in the endowment's portfolio but are intended to minimize taxes.
Some worry that Harvard will struggle to outperform the benchmarks as its assets grow. Mr. Meyer acknowledged that it gets harder as the endowment gets larger. ''But we worried at $6 billion, at $12 billion and at $18 billion, and we have always managed to add value,'' he said.
The endowment chooses outside managers for the 45 percent of its assets that it does not oversee itself. The portion that it trades is akin to a giant hedge fund. Last year, it had $83.6 billion in long positions, betting that the underlying securities would rise in value, and $56 billion in assets that it was betting would decline in value.
How risky is Harvard's investment approach? Mr. Meyer said that its trades were prompted by small pricing anomalies in various markets. ''We look for mispricings between similar securities, and we try to buy the cheap ones and sell the expensive ones.''
When asked if Harvard was taking the same risks as did Long Term Capital, the giant hedge fund that famously faltered, Mr. Meyer said that Harvard was positioned to handle volatility. ''Harvard trades were structured differently and are far less leveraged,'' he said.
A common trade might be going long on one type of Treasury note and short on another note with a different maturity. Of course, given Harvard's size and the Darwinian nature of Wall Street, ''our good friends on the street might try to squeeze us by buying the Treasury notes we are short,'' Mr. Meyer said. ''Rather than shorting the Treasury note, we might do it in the form of a swap.''
Harvard tries not to vary its asset allocation. ''We have no idea which way asset classes are going to move,'' he said. ''I don't think we are smart enough to be right. I am a terrible dinner party partner. Someone will say: So what do you think of the stock market, and I will say, 'I don't have a clue.'''
Harvard has had its share of setbacks. The portfolio fell 2.7 percent in 2001 and about half of a percent the next year.
Among the disappointments: Its real estate investments have not done as well as the industry benchmark over the last five years. ''It took me a year and a half to figure out why,'' Mr. Meyer said.
''We went with people who found buildings that could be upgraded. But the big money has been made in plain-vanilla real estate: big office buildings in major cities with triple-A credits.'' When interest rates fell so low, steady streams of income became very attractive, and investors paid incredible prices for those kinds of properties.
