Though ''Nascar and Nextel'' may not trip off the tongue as pleasingly as ''Baseball and Ballantine'' did when that beer brand sponsored broadcasts of Yankees games, Nextel will begin an extensive, and expensive, effort this weekend to promote its new role as the lead sponsor of the Nascar premier stock-car racing series.
Viewers of the AFC championship football game on CBS on Sunday will see the first commercial for Nextel Communications that celebrates the deal it made in June to become the title sponsor of the racing series, known since 1972 as the Winston Cup. The spot shows the driver Michael Waltrip interrupting a football daydream of the driver Dale Earnhardt Jr. in which Mr. Earnhardt imagines himself driving down the field -- literally -- to score a touchdown.
Additional commercials aimed at the estimated 75 million Americans who consider themselves Nascar fans are set to appear ahead of the first race in the renamed Nascar Nextel Cup Series, the Daytona 500, on Feb. 15 and continue throughout 2004.
Though spending for the campaign -- created by TBWA/Chiat/Day in New York, hired as the Nextel agency in May -- is not being disclosed, it is part of a 10-year, $700 million agreement Nextel made with Nascar that is estimated at $30 million a year for media spending and an additional $40 million a year for rights fees.
The shift in sponsorship from Winston cigarettes, sold by R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Holdings, to Nextel, a leading wireless telecommunications company, generated widespread attention because it was deemed emblematic of the changes remaking consumer and sports marketing. Nascar, for example, is evolving from a sport with deep roots among working-class Southerners, a group sought after by tobacco companies, to a sport with a more widespread fan base that a cellphone company would want to reach.
''This is a seminal moment,'' George Pyne, chief operating officer of Nascar in Daytona Beach, Fla., said yesterday in a telephone interview. For one thing, telecommunications and tobacco are categories headed in opposite directions. Marketing spending for telecommunications is growing rapidly, mirroring the growth in the use of cellphones, while marketing spending for cigarettes is contracting slowly as the number of Americans who smoke declines.
''The Nascar sponsorship gives us access to a larger, mass audience,'' said Mark Schweitzer, senior vice president for marketing at Nextel in Reston, Va., ''versus our traditional wireless business decision-maker audience.''
The Nextel sponsorship also indicates the arrival of telecommunications as a major advertising category, as illustrated by Nextel's place on the Nascar sponsor roster along marketing giants like Anheuser-Busch, Coca-Cola, DaimlerChrysler, Ford Motor, Home Depot, Kellogg, McDonald's, PepsiCo, Sears and Visa.
''It's a mark of the maturation of telecommunications, reflecting the ubiquity of mobile phones,'' said Wes Bray, chief executive at Mynamics U.S.A. in Essex, Conn., a company specializing in campaigns that market by cellphone with elements like text messages.
''Nascar is mainstream America,'' Mr. Bray said. ''Even good ol' boys have mobile phones.'' In fact, he added, Mynamics is developing a project for a client with a Nascar tie-in.
Also, as long as Nascar was linked with Winston, it suffered from the effects of the increasing restrictions against tobacco advertising.
Not only was Winston unable to run television commercials for the Winston Cup, but billboards and many types of print ads were also taboo. Nextel faces no such strictures, meaning Nascar can benefit from the broader media exposure for the Nextel campaign from TBWA/Chiat/Day, part of the TBWA Worldwide division of the Omnicom Group.
''Winston couldn't take full advantage of all the tools in the toolbox,'' Mr. Pyne said. ''Nextel can go to the marketplace in a significant way.''
Mr. Schweitzer said stereotypical assumptions that Nascar fans might not be quick to adopt wireless phones led Nextel to do a great deal of research before agreeing to the sponsorship. That research showed that Nascar fans were more likely to own cellphones and beepers or pagers than nonfans, he added, and more likely to hold jobs in which cellphones play major roles like construction, outside sales and transportation.
Rather, Mr. Schweitzer said, the Nextel qualms about stepping in to replace Winston stemmed from research results showing that ''anybody new and big'' might be viewed suspiciously by Nascar fans as ''presuming to take on the mantle at the highest level of stock-car racing.''
The Nextel campaign is aimed specifically at allaying those concerns through a blend of humor and appeals to Nascar's traditions. In addition to the funny spot about the daydream, there are light-hearted commercials showing unexpected benefits of using the push-to-talk, walkie-talkie feature of Nextel cellphones.
In one commercial, a man uses the feature to help find his friend in a sea of people packed into a parking lot to watch a Nascar race. His friend directs him by citing fanciful landmarks like a truck with a water-filled cargo bed in which bikini-clad women are frolicking.
In another humorous commercial, a man standing in a long line at a concession stand at a Nascar race uses the push-to-talk feature to get rid of everyone standing in front of him. He pretends to be learning from his phone that the lead in the race is rapidly changing; as he loudly calls out the name of each driver supposedly ahead, fans of that driver rush off the line to return to the race.
''We really tried to approach it from the perspective of the fan experience,'' said Gerry Graf, executive creative director at TBWA/Chiat/Day New York. ''And technology today drives the sport, which makes it a perfect fit for Nextel.''
Several other commercials, including one that runs for two minutes, use heritage to make an emotional connection between Nextel and Nascar. The two-minute spot uses film and video from the 1950's through the present to assert that if ''you want to know about America,'' it can be learned from Nascar moments as ''joyous as victory lane and devastating as hitting the rail.'' The spot ends with these words: ''Nextel. Proud to be fans.''
Mr. Schweitzer at Nextel said he embodied those words. Asked whether he was a fan, he replied, ''I am,'' adding, ''I would admit it has intensified recently,'' since the Nextel sponsorship deal. Mr. Schweitzer said he has attended four Nascar races, one of them before the agreement was made.
Mr. Pyne of Nascar compared the opportunity Nextel had to a hypothetical deal in which Nextel acquires the title sponsorship of Walt Disney World from the Walt Disney Company. Not only could Nextel run a campaign promoting ''Nextel World,'' Mr. Pyne said, ''it could use all the characters in the Magic Kingdom to promote Nextel phones.'' Here, of course, the characters are Nascar drivers like Mr. Waltrip and Mr. Earnhardt.
The Nextel campaign is separate from, though complementary to, brand image ads that Nascar runs on its own, created by the Martin Agency in Richmond, Va., owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies. Martin became the Nascar agency in July.
Most of the 36 other brands on the Nascar roster of official sponsors also run campaigns promoting their Nascar links. And the Nextel campaign is separate from, though again complementary to, ads from TBWA/Chiat/Day promoting Nextel products and services, which carry the theme ''Nextel. Done.''
Mr. Pyne said Nascar was considering a campaign aimed at black and Hispanic consumers, whom he described as ''the fastest-growing segment of our fan base.'' He added that, ''Our focus now is to develop minority drivers on the race track,'' who Nascar hopes would attract more minority fans.
In addition to TBWA/Chiat/Day, the Nextel agency for the general market, Nextel hired Accent Marketing in Coral Gables, Fla., last year to create campaigns aimed at Spanish-speaking consumers, Mr. Schweitzer said. Campaigns promoting the Nextel Nascar sponsorship to Hispanics are being considered, he added, when that market's interest in stock-car racing is developed further.
As for the ability of the city slickers at TBWA/Chiat/Day New York to create campaigns about Nascar, Mr. Graf and Robert Birge, director for client services there, sought to dispel any doubts.
''We've sent large groups of people -- planners, account folks, creatives -- to races,'' Mr. Birge said, ''and we have quite a few folks on the team not from New York.''
''I'm from Colorado,'' he added, laughing, ''and a couple are from Texas.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
