In his first appearance as the 14th music director in the 124-year history of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, James Levine will lead the ensemble next fall in a performance of Mahler's Symphony No. 8.
The performance on Oct. 22, combining the forces not only of the orchestra but also the Tanglewood Festival Chorus, the American Boychoir and vocal soloists including Jane Eaglen, Hei-Kyung Hong, Heidi Grant Murphy, Stephanie Blythe, Yvonne Naef, Richard Margison, Eike Wilm Schulte and John Relyea, is one of the highlights of the 23-week 2004-05 subscription season announced yesterday.
Mr. Levine, who will lead 12 weeks of concerts, will conduct the world premieres of works commissioned by the orchestra from Milton Babbitt, John Harbison and Charles Wuorinen; performances of classics, including a concert version of Wagner's ''Flying Dutchman,'' Berlioz's ''Roméo et Juliette,'' the Closing Scene from Strauss's ''Salome'' and Stravinsky's ''Rite of Spring.''
In addition to programs displaying a commitment to American repertory, Mr. Levine is to survey the works of contemporary composers like Elliott Carter, Gyorgy Ligety and Witold Lutoslawski.
In the season's opening concert, on Sept. 30, Daniele Gatti will lead the orchestra in Mozart's Symphony No. 40 and Mahler's Symphony No. 5.
Because of Mr. Levine's commitments to the Metropolitan Opera, where he has been artistic director since 1986, he is unable to conduct the opening concert but is committed to openings in future seasons, the orchestra said.
Mr. Levine, who will be the first American-born conductor to be music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, was named to succeed Seiji Ozawa in 2001 and has since held the title music director designate.
The 2004-05 season will also feature guest conductors and soloists like James Conlon, Christoph von Dohnanyi, Charles Dutoit, Rafael Frühbeck de Burgos, James Galway, Richard Goode, Evgeny Kissin, Robert Levin, Garrick Ohlsson, Kurt Masur, Anré Previn, Vadim Repin, Robert Spano and David Zinman.
Mr. Levine will also appear as a pianist at Symphony Hall twice during the season, with the Boston Symphony Chamber Players in November and in a duo recital with Mr. Kissin in April 2005.
