New York City's Correction Department spent an average of nearly $59,000 per inmate in the 2003 fiscal year. But when all city expenses are factored in -- insurance and pension benefits for correction staff, for instance, as well as more than $150 million for jail medical care -- the yearly per-inmate cost is closer to $100,000, according to the city's Independent Budget Office.
Either way, the expense of jailing people in the city is especially great, Bloomberg administration officials acknowledge -- far more, for instance, than it is in other big cities.
In an effort to limit costs, the city has become much better over the last decade at weeding out people who are accused of crimes but who do not necessarily need to be incarcerated, at a cost of $250 or more a day.
''Some people don't need to be in jail; they can perform community service to pay for their crime,'' said John Feinblatt, the mayor's criminal justice coordinator. ''We've been focusing on those people who belong in jail.''
Even so, some criminal justice experts and advocates for alternatives to incarceration say New York City is still wasting money and opportunities to most effectively and humanely handle the roughly 13,500 inmates now at Rikers Island -- huge numbers of whom are mentally ill, addicted to drugs or H.I.V.-positive.
''It really doesn't makes sense to spend almost $100,000 a year to keep drug users, petty criminals, people with mental illness jailed,'' said Nicholas Freudenberg, the director of the Program in Urban Public Health at Hunter College, who spent 15 years doing research in Rikers Island jails. ''It's not a good use of public money.''
Most Rikers Island inmates have been in jail at least once before, according to Correction Department statistics, and many return to jail several times a year, creating a revolving-door effect in which low-level crimes lead to relatively small punishments, like probation or short jail sentences, that do little to alter criminal behavior.
To help eliminate that cycle, Professor Freudenberg and other experts say, the city should take its turnstile jumpers, open-container violators and other relatively innocuous lawbreakers -- many of whom may be homeless, jobless and addicted to drugs -- out of jail, where they receive little help. They argue that they should be placed in community-based programs and shelters that help them gain practical skills.
''For $90,000 or $100,000,'' Professor Freudenberg added, ''we could put people in housing, in treatment, in college, a whole range of things that would lead to better outcomes.''
Jeremy Travis, a senior fellow at the Urban Institute in Washington and former director of the National Institute of Justice under President Bill Clinton, said the goal of groups like his, which advocate offering more alternatives to incarceration, is the same as the city's.
''At the most fundamental level,'' Mr. Travis said in an interview on Monday, ''what we're talking about is how to reduce crime.''
New York's jails are significantly more expensive than any other municipal jail system, but even some jail critics say the extra money has helped shape it into a much safer system, with some of the best medical care available to any jail inmate in the nation.
The Los Angeles County jail system, the largest in the nation, spends less than $24,000 per inmate a year, less than half of what the New York Correction Department alone spends. In Chicago, where hundreds of inmates must sleep on floors because of overcrowding, the average cost per inmate is $21,900.
New York City officials said they have already made significant progress in recent years in directing more people who have been accused of crimes, and who would have been sent directly to jail in the past, toward treatment and other alternatives.
In the early 1990's, 24 percent of people arrested in New York were sentenced to jail or prison, Mr. Feinblatt, the mayor's criminal justice expert, said. In 2001, he added, only 15 percent were.
''The trend is clearly saying not everyone needs to go to jail,'' Mr. Feinblatt said. ''You don't treat all detainees as an undifferentiated mass. But you got to be smart. You got to decide who needs careful supervision but can be released, and who needs to remain in jail because they are threat to public safety.''
The recent creation of drug courts, which allow nonviolent drug offenders to complete a judge-supervised treatment program instead of prison time, is evidence of the city's ''smart on crime'' philosophy, Mr. Feinblatt said. In September, the city announced a coordinated effort among several agencies to provide inmates released from jail access to drug treatment, jobs or job training and, where possible, shelter.
But critics like Professor Freudenberg and Mr. Travis, while crediting the city for innovative measures, say more can be done to reduce a jail population that increasingly comprises people accused of low-level crimes.
As the city's crime rate has dropped in recent years, the proportion of city jail inmates accused of misdemeanor crimes has jumped -- to 42 percent last year from 29 percent in 1994, according to Correction Department statistics. The criminal justice system should provide alternatives to incarceration to those inmates in jail only because they lack the cash to post a modest bail, Professor Freudenberg said.
''For want of an individual or family having $500, the city spends $250 a day to keep them in a cell,'' he said.
For all the good intentions on both sides, only measures that create large reductions in the inmate population will lead to significant savings, said Martin F. Horn, the correction commissioner.
Much of that $92,000 the city pays to keep one inmate in jail for a year is tied up in fixed costs -- bus fleets, building maintenance, heating fuel and food service operations -- immune to a small drop in the jail's population, he said.
''If there were one fewer inmate, I wouldn't save much,'' Mr. Horn said. ''If it were reduced by a thousand, I'd save millions.''
