For the first time since he was elected, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg was able to propose a budget yesterday that called for few cuts, no layoffs, only a modest amount of aid from Albany and Washington and a property tax rebate for most homeowners. It was a far cry from the gloom and doom budgets he has proposed before.
The $2 billion gap that Mr. Bloomberg must close in the fiscal year that begins July 1 is only a fraction of the size of the deficits he has had to wrestle down since he took office, and he presented a plan to do so without any of the deeply unpopular measures, from firehouse closings to tax increases, that he has called for before. His plan does not include the kind of expensive, showcase programs that mayors sometimes propose to leave their mark on the city. While Mayor Bloomberg found money to put in the budget to hire a new class of police cadets, keep garbage pickup at its current level and restore planned cuts to cultural institutions, he warned that the rising cost of Medicaid, debt service and pensions would saddle the city with more deficits in 2006 and 2007.
''We're a little bit over the hump, but we're certainly not back to the kinds of boom times that would let us expand everything,'' Mr. Bloomberg said in his budget address at City Hall.
Mayor Bloomberg, a Republican who angered many in his party and the city by raising the property tax, the sales tax and the income tax over the last two years, said he was optimistic enough about the city's fiscal future to plan to turn his proposal to give a $400 property tax rebate to most city homeowners into an annual event.
Because of the cuts he made, the taxes he raised and the economic upturn, the mayor said the city was on course to end the current fiscal year with a $1.4 billion surplus. He said he planned to divide that in two to help plug gaps in this budget proposal and the one for the year after that.
He acknowledged, however, that there were still risks to the city's fiscal health.
The city and state are battling in court over a plan in this year's budget to save the city $500 million a year in the final payments for its debt from the 1970's. The mayor included no money in this year's budget for raises for municipal unions, which are working without contracts; he said any increases would have to be offset by other savings. The state is facing a deficit that the governor's office said yesterday was still $5.1 billion. That could lead state lawmakers to cut, not raise, city aid.
Union leaders complained that if there is enough money for surpluses and tax rebates, there should be enough money to give their members raises, but some did say they were pleased that the mayor was no longer counting on $600 million in savings from union concessions to balance the budget, as he asked for last year.
''Once we couldn't reach a deal last May, I think everybody realized that there had to be a different strategy on all sides with respect to both bargaining and budgeting,'' said Randi Weingarten, the president of the teachers' union and chairwoman of the Municipal Labor Committee, which coordinates bargaining for municipal unions.
The $45.7 billion spending plan that Mayor Bloomberg outlined yesterday seeks to balance the optimism born of the economic recovery and higher tax revenues with the caution that comes from the fact that the city still has a structural deficit, and expenses are still set to exceed revenues in the long term.
It was a very different kind of budget from the bitter-medicine, bottom-line plans that the mayor put forward during his first two years in office, which left his popularity in tatters. The mayor, who faces re-election in 2005, spoke in a very different tone yesterday in presenting the budget.
''Budgets are not really, if you come down to it, about money,'' he said yesterday. ''They are about people; they are about making choices; they are about sharing and sacrifice and being in this together and taking care of each other.''
Analysts said the plan showed just how far the city has come from what some were calling a crisis just two years ago, but they differed about the mayor's approach.
''The city now has the types of gaps and budget problems that need to be dealt with, but which are manageable,'' said Jeffrey L. Sommer, the executive director of the New York State Financial Control Board, which monitors the city budget.
Some analysts said it was premature to offer the tax rebate. The rebate will cost the city $250 million, a small portion of the property tax increase it passed in 2002, but the proposal is structured so that it will essentially eliminate the rate increase for homeowners while leaving it in place for landlords and the owners of commercial properties.
''This year's surplus is a far cry from last year's $6 billion gap, but all the risks out there make it premature to start doing tax rebates, as small as this one is,'' said Diana Fortuna, president of the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed group.
Others said that they would like to see more spending cuts. Edmund J. McMahon Jr., a senior fellow with the Manhattan Institute, a conservative organization, praised the mayor for cutting taxes for homeowners but said he would like to see more cuts. ''He's kind of like someone who's gone halfway through the Atkins diet, and is now going onto maintenance because he's tired of eating so much bacon,'' he said.
Still others expressed concern that the plan still included cuts to children's services and other areas.
Over all, Mr. Bloomberg's plan to close next year's gap calls for using $700 million of this year's surplus, seeking $700 million in aid from Albany and Washington, and using $526 million in additional tax revenues that it now expects to collect.
While the plan calls for saving $324 million in agency spending - by cutting some services, raising fees (like charging $2 for haircuts for prisoners), or finding alternate sources of money - it also calls for $381 million in new spending for 2005.
Some of the new spending will be at the Department of Transportation, which is trying to improve Staten Island Ferry service after the crash that killed 11. The budget calls for stepping up random drug testing on the ferry, hiring more legal staff to assist with liability lawsuits, adding ferry security training, installing a public address system on some boats, and hiring a temporary replacement crew to fill in while some crew members are out on sick leave or called to make depositions.
Mayor Bloomberg, who is sometimes known for candor that is uncharacteristic in politicians, offered an unusual description of the city's fiscal obligations yesterday.
''The law says you balance the budget with no shenanigans whatsoever, or at least, very few shenanigans,'' he said.
