As anyone familiar with art fairs or auction houses knows, art is a potent social tool. Almost magically, ownership bestows status, turns nobodies into somebodies and makes those somebodies look classy and smart or, at the very least, rich. Yes, art is about ideals and beauty and all that. But it is also about the power of possession, the sovereignty of taste. Deep down, it appeals to the royalist in us all.
This is one way to talk about ''Golden Fantasies: Japanese Screens From New York Collections,'' a small but splendiferous show at the Asia Society and Museum consisting of eight painted and gilded folding screens and a few related objects.
Painted screens have a long history in Japan, now hard to trace. Made of paper or silk attached to wood, they are fragile things, and although they were evidently produced in great numbers, relatively few have survived intact. Portable and flexible, they were a kind of instant architecture, ideal for dividing interior space into extemporaneous nooks and compartments and effective for warding off prying eyes and unwelcome breezes outdoors. (Byobu, the generic name for such screens, means ''wind protection.'')
And with their taut surfaces, they were natural and versatile vehicles for painting. Screens intended for formal or official settings might use images to project moral or political messages, while others designed for domestic quarters might carry scenes of leisurely pursuits and sensual pleasure. Large screens or pairs of screens could accommodate panoramic landscapes and narratives, as is the case in the Asia Society show, organized by Rosina Buckland, a doctoral student at the Institute of Fine Arts, New York University.
The screens on view, all but one on loan from private collections, date from the 16th and 17th centuries, when a feudal Japan was undergoing jolting change. By that time imperial rule, centered in Kyoto, had long been supervised, if not entirely usurped, by shoguns, members of an ambitious military elite who acquired the cultural credibility required of leadership by patronizing and collecting art.
They did so at a time when aesthetic trends changed often and fast. Chinese styles were the measure of painterly refinement during the Muromachi era (1333-1573). But in the brief Momoyama period (1573-1615), lavishly baroque and astringently minimalist strains of art developed side by side.
Opulence, in the form of gilded and painted screens, proved particularly effective for decorating interiors of fortified shogunal castles, with their thick walls, small windows and ponderous eaves. Such screens amplified sunlight in the day and candlelight at night. They also reflected the wealth of their patrons: gold was not cheap. And they advertised the cultural aspirations of parvenu rulers intent on producing, in sometimes over-the-top ways, their own version of imperial spectacle. ''The very privies are decorated with gold and silver,'' sniffed one 16th-century observer. ''All these precious things are used as if they were dirt.''
The end of the Momoyama brought further social developments. Urban culture flowered in the new capital city of Edo, present-day Tokyo. In that elbows-rubbing environment, rigid class hierarchies enforced by military rulers loosened up. Wealth, once generated by heredity or conquest, was increasingly concentrated in the hands of a bourgeois merchant class.
And just as rough-and-ready warlords had looked to the imperial court for a model of magnificence, the entrepreneurs of Edo took shogunate culture, with its strategy of acquiring refinement by accumulating art, as a guide. Through paintings -- history paintings, nature paintings, genre paintings, commissioned or bought off the rack -- middle-class strivers forged an upwardly mobile self-image.
This image was, the exhibition suggests, largely fantastical, though sometimes the fantasy had roots in Japanese history. Such is the case in a pair of screens titled ''Battles of Ichinotani and Yashima,'' which depict episodes from the famous Genpei Wars. Fought between the Minamoto and Taira clans in the 12th century, they resulted in the establishment of the first shogunate.
The story begins on the far right of the right-hand screen with a surprise attack by Minamoto forces; it ends on the far left of the other screen with the Taira's making a stand on the island of Shikoku. In between, hundreds of antlike figures on horseback, on foot and in ships move to and fro across land masses floating like golden clouds and over the dark blue water of the Inland Sea.
A result is a tour-de-force mélange of high adventure, lofty sentiment and realistic detail, as is true of another pair of screens that dramatize the medieval war saga, called ''Chronicle of the Great Peace.'' Here, a story of noble lovers, self-sacrificing retainers and supernatural transformations transpires in a sea of roiling waves and whirlpools, and fiction and history merge.
Both screens have a sense of cinematic excitement, but the important thing they seem to share is a moral agenda. Both glorify a warrior ethos, an ideal of valor that gained resonance as samurai culture was on the wane. Whether these screens were actually bought by samurai families or by clients who simply wanted to be associated with their martial aura, as status symbols they gave their owners vicarious access to a nostalgia-gilded past.
Moralizing versions of the present were also available. From the end of the Muromachi come a pair of screens depicting the annual cycle of rice cultivation, with neat-as-a-pin farmers going about their chores. The painting is Chinese in style. So is the thinking behind it, a caste-based Confucian regard for the farmer, or rather for the supporting role the farmer plays as provider of sustenance for the ruling class.
In Edo painting, the pleasure principle gets at least equal time with moral principles. A 17th-century screen titled ''Ama-no-Hashidate'' turns a pilgrimage to a famous temple near Kyoto into a Chaucerian affair, part devotional journey, part tourist jaunt. While some travelers attend to spiritual business, others enjoy a picnic.
And in a pair of screens slightly later in date, titled ''Cherry-Blossom and Maple Viewing,'' a day in the country is also a sequence of changing seasons and colliding histories. Ladies robed like the aristocratic elite of an earlier century share space with Edo-period courtesans, actors and city swells wearing jazzy prints, who frolic and pair off like characters in a Watteau fête galante.
And here, as in Watteau's art, nature has a starring role, embodied in spring cherry trees in luxuriant bloom at the far right, autumn-tinged maples at the far left and a cluster of freakishly large hibiscus, symbolic of summer, halfway between. But the dynamic played out isn't the traditional, poetic one of transience and renewal. Instead, nature is tangled up in a zany modern world of fragmentary narratives, surreal space and confused aspirations.
Even when nature stands alone and unpeopled, as in ''Musashino at Sunset,'' the show's smallest painting, it feels more like an artifact than an organic force. Musashino is a real place, a barren plain north of Tokyo; it was evoked in classical poetry as a romantic symbol of loneliness and isolation. But in this exquisite and airless painting, it looks like a treasure chest of valuables: a dark-red ruby of a sun, a mound of emerald grass, a 14-karat sky. Here art becomes what it may always really be: not the potentially transformative vision of romantic lore, but an emblem of preciousness; a badge of attainment; a collectible to have, hold and marvel at; an enviable jewel in a fortunate somebody's crown.
''Golden Fantasies: Japanese Screens From New York Collections'' remains on view at the Asia Society and Museum, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, (212) 517-2742, through June 27. All but one of the screens now on view will be replaced by others on April 6.
ART REVIEW
