A Sea Change In Old Boston
Americans are fickle. How else can one explain the sudden change in taste in the 1790's, when Federal-style furniture suddenly seduced Bostonians, formerly happy with bombé chests and Chippendale chairs?
''It was a revolution in taste,'' said Dean Lahikainen, the curator of American decorative arts at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass. ''The ads for the period say 'furniture in the newest taste.' The elite of Boston and the nouveau riche were so fashion conscious, they wanted to have something no one else had.''
Enlightenment ideas, as interpreted in neo-Classical style, had finally made their way to Boston. These concepts are explored in ''Luxury and Innovation,'' an exhibition of 72 pieces of sophisticated Federal furniture by John and Thomas Seymour at the Peabody Essex through Feb. 16. It is the first major exhibition of the Seymours' work, and it is accompanied by ''The Furniture Masterworks of John &amp; Thomas Seymour'' (University Press of New England, $60), a 462-page catalog by Robert D. Mussey Jr., a Boston cabinetmaker, furniture conservator and scholar who spent a decade studying English and American archives in preparation for the show.
The furniture, from museum collections and private owners, includes four-poster beds, card tables, chairs, dressing bureaus, sideboards and ladies' sewing tables and tambour secretaries. Evidently the Seymours insisted on the finest grade, color, grain and figure of whichever wood they choose. The furniture is veneered in imported crotch mahogany, curly satinwood, crotch birch, rosewood and bird's-eye maple. Many pieces have geometric or floral inlays made of exotic woods, including tropical sabicu, Botany Bay oak (from an English penal colony in Australia), kingwood, blackwood and lignum vitae. Local holly, maple, birch, ash and cherry were also used.
John Seymour (circa 1738-1818), an English-trained cabinetmaker, immigrated to America in 1784 with his son Thomas (1771-1848), seeking a better life. (The family had been in Dorset since the 1500's.) He settled first in Portland, Me., where he met moderate success. In 1793 he relocated to Boston. Though their furniture looked new to Bostonians, the father and son were somewhat reliant on the London pattern books published by Thomas Sheraton and George Hepplewhite. Their furniture forms were elegant and spare, with long tapering legs. The decoration was not in carving but in finish, veneers, delicate banding and intricate inlays. ''It is essentially 'sculpture' on a flat surface, that is, three-dimensional images interpreted in two dimensions,'' Mr. Mussey writes.
In the Boston newspapers, the Seymours advertised ''a style altogether new to this country.'' Because they had no salesroom, they sold their furniture at auction, which was common at the time. They labeled few of their works. ''The Seymours apparently reserved the labels primarily for their finest pieces of furniture,'' Mr. Mussey writes. ''These sophisticated labeled pieces were probably among the very first produced in full neo-Classical style by any cabinetmaker in Federal Boston.''
What most distinguishes their work are their signature, British-derived methods of construction. ''Their workmanship was impeccable,'' Mr. Mussey writes. They also had gifted collaborators. If carving was needed, they employed Thomas Wightman, whom Mr. Mussey calls ''by far the most skilled furniture carver working in Federal Boston.'' For decorative painting, it was John Ritto Penniman; for upholstery, William Lemon. They also worked with the clockmaker Aaron Willard. By the late 1790's they had recognition and private patronage, but they never made much money. Mr. Mussey writes this was because of ''their artisan ambitions and habitual, even slavish, devotion to the highest traditions of quality and craftsmanship.'' John Seymour died in a Boston almshouse. Thomas retired in 1826 after several financial reverses.
Seymour antiques are sometimes found at G.K.S. Bush, Bernard and S. Dean Levy and Hirshl &amp; Adler Galleries in Manhattan; Thomas Schwenke and Wayne Pratt in Woodbury, Conn.; and Northeast Auctions' sales in Portsmouth, N.H. This afternoon, Christie's will auction two Seymour dining tables in its Americana sale. Sotheby's has a pair of Seymour side chairs in its sale tomorrow and a sofa in its sale on Sunday.
Young Dealer's Estate
On Wednesday, Doyle New York is to sell the estate of Fabio Silva, a Manhattan antiques dealer who died last January, in its auction of ''Important English and Continental Furniture and Decorations.'' The viewing begins tomorrow.The nearly 200 pieces of furniture and paintings start with Lot 131 in the catalog. The estimates are very low. ''I wanted the sale to be inviting, for people to say, 'I can afford this,' '' said Andrea Blunck Frost, Doyle's specialist in European furniture.
A native of Brazil, Mr. Silva arrived in New York at 18. He took a job with Arne Schlesch, a Danish dealer who sold Scandinavian antiques from his town house on East 64th Street. Customers included Babe Paley and Anne Getty. Mr. Silva worked for Mr. Schlesch for 20 years.Mr. Silva opened a small gallery on East 61st Street in 2000, selling Danish rococo tea tables, Swedish neo-Classical mirrors, Dutch Delft blue-and-white vases, Russian imperial porcelain and Baltic chandeliers with cobalt-blue glass.
Many lots in the sale are neo-Classical, including a pair of early-19th-century German mahogany consoles with gilded lion-head capitals and a fine French mahogany sideboard by Jean Baptiste Gamichon, a little known maker in early 19th-century Paris. The sideboard doors have fine gilded appliqués depicting winged mythological figures.
Lot 184 is a set of four Empire parcel gilt and mahogany fauteuils, estimated at $5,000 to $7,000. ''Doyle does not know how good they are,'' Mr. Schlesch said. ''They are signed by Jean-Baptiste-Bernard Demay, a Paris maker who was related to Napoleon's cabinetmaker Sené.'' Demay and Jean-Baptiste-Claude Sené worked for Louis XVI and Napoleon.
Mr. Schlesch said Lot 182, a vertical mahogany writing cabinet with drawers and shelves known as a secrétaire à abbatant, was mislabeled as Biedermeier. ''It was made in the style of the 18th-century German cabinetmaker David Roentgen by a royal Danish furniture maker,'' he said.
The sale also includes several rococo pieces. ''Fabio leaned toward the baroque and rococo,'' Ms. Frost said. ''I think it was his Brazilian blood.''
Asked why a European furniture sale is scheduled during Americana week, Ms. Frost said: ''We're the only ones doing anything different this month. I've already had a lot of interest. There are a lot of Europeans in town looking for good deals in America. With the dollar where it is, they are likely to find them.''
Antiques
