Oscar Gonzalez remembers that it was just a couple weeks after he first tried heroin that he said to himself, ''I don't want to use no more.'' But it was not as easy as that. He spent the next 31 years fighting and failing, trying to kick his habit.
Mr. Gonzalez, 54, had been handed his first bag of heroin when he was 19, a recent arrival to the Bronx from the Dominican Republic. At the time it was normal practice for someone to trade a bag of heroin -- which cost about $2 -- for a safe place to shoot up. Some people asked him if they could swap a bag for his brother's apartment and then kept coming back until Mr. Gonzalez found himself with five bags of heroin.
With the free bags in his hand and pressure from some new friends, he decided to just ''taste it.'' After two weeks, he tried to quit for the first time. He failed for the first time, too.
The only treatment available at the time, Mr. Gonzalez said, was methadone. But, ''methadone is like another drug,'' he said, and only eases the physical pain of quitting.
He was on and off methadone for 10 years, using it to balance his heroin use, and held a steady job as a machine operator, married and had children.
And for a time, he said, his life just spiraled downward, as he found himself using up to two or three bags a day; he lost his job, his wife, his two girlfriends and his three children.
One day he passed his brother, Nicholas Gonzalez, a pastor at the Pentecostal Temple of the Living God Church in the Bronx, on the street. His brother had been looking for him -- and Mr. Gonzalez had been hiding in shame. His brother took him to the Hope Christian Center, a drug treatment facility in the Bronx.
He was clean for a couple of years after that, but says he realizes now that he did not make it all the way because he tried to do it on his own. He started using heroin again in the early 90's and over the next several years became homeless. After two more failed attempts at treatment, his latest, and he hopes last, attempt was with the National Recovery Institute in Manhattan in 2000.
What was different about this time? First, Mr. Gonzalez said, he had at last had enough. And second, he said, it worked because he had a support network and was finally listening, even if he did not like what he heard. ''When I used to go to the group, it helped me out a lot to recognize what I really had to work out.''
After graduating from the program, he moved into a group apartment run by New Vistas, a transitional housing program of the Neighborhood Coalition for Shelter, a beneficiary of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies. The federation is one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
When Mr. Gonzalez moved in, he was given a lodging kit. The Neighborhood Coalition got $3,000 in Neediest Cases money to pay for 14 lodging kits, which included the basics needed for a new home: things like a blanket, an iron and pots and pans.
After six months, he moved to St. Anthony's in the Bronx, a single-room-occupancy residence, where he now lives. Sitting in the shared kitchen recently, he talked about where he would like to be. Now, he works in a Queens factory as a packer. He visits his children and grandchildren, whom he sees every Sunday at church. He hopes to earn his high school equivalency diploma, and is also considering becoming a counselor to other addicts. ''I would let them know that there is hope.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,813,336.14  Recorded Wednesday: 189,302.01  Total: $7,002,638.15
Last year to date: $7,300,654.39
