The Democratic presidential field shrank by one on Thursday, but the race for the Iowa caucuses appeared unusually wide open going into the final weekend.
Pollsters, aides to the rival campaigns and one of the candidates said that Howard Dean, Richard A. Gephardt, John Kerry and John Edwards were all in contention and that the race was volatile.
''It's a four-way tie,'' Dr. Dean said in a call to CNN's ''Larry King Live.'' ''We can't tell who's going to win. All we can do now is work our you-know-whats off.''
Ben Foecke, caucus director for the Iowa Democratic Party, said, ''This thing is absolutely up for grabs.''
Abandoning her own candidacy, Carol Moseley Braun, the former Illinois senator and ambassador who was the first black woman elected to the Senate, endorsed Dr. Dean, providing him a lift from a prominent African-American only days after he admitted in a debate that he had placed no minorities in his cabinet when he was governor of Vermont.
''Howard Dean is a Democrat we can all be proud to support,'' Ms. Braun said as she joined him at a rally in Carroll and reduced the Democratic field to eight. Later in the day, Ann Richards, the former governor of Texas, also came out in support of Dr. Dean.
With the race tightening, Dr. Dean, whom the polls had once shown as the front-runner, came under a biting attack from Mr. Gephardt.
Appealing to the state's elderly, Mr. Gephardt broadcast a new television commercial pointing to Dr. Dean's past support for Republican proposals to reduce spending on Medicare and Social Security.
''How much do you really know about Howard Dean?'' the announcer asks. ''Did you know Howard Dean called Medicare one of the worst federal programs ever?''
The commercial was just one sign of the growing intensity of the battle for Iowa as the four top candidates raced across the state by bus, helicopter and caravan of 18-wheelers and the campaigns pulled out the stops to get supporters to their election precincts on Monday in hope of a showing that could give them momentum in New Hampshire.
The Iowa caucuses are notoriously difficult to poll because it is hard to determine who will actually go to a caucus. But two public surveys released on Thursday showed the four top candidates in a dead heat, and strategists for the campaigns said they also saw a tight race. ''Over all, it is capturing the fact that three and maybe four candidates are very close to each other,'' a top official of the Gephardt campaign said.
Mr. Kerry, revved up by days of overflow crowds and the signs of a late revival of his campaign, zoomed across western Iowa by bus and helicopter to drum up votes and fire up his ground troops.
''Do you like the surge?'' he asked 160 people packed into a small auditorium in Sioux City, as they whooped in response. ''Are you ready to add more surge? Are you ready to make more surge more surge? And are you ready to make more and more surge a surprise on Monday?''
Mr. Edwards appeared in Des Moines with Gov. Michael F. Easley of North Carolina, who trumpeted him as a candidate who could compete in the South against President Bush. ''I want to run with someone I can run with, not from,'' Mr. Easley told a crowd at a downtown hotel, in what Edwards aides said was an allusion to fears that Dr. Dean would not play well in the South.
Democratic candidates who decided to skip the Iowa caucuses also raised questions about Dr. Dean or sought to demonstrate that they had broad appeal in other parts of the country. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman was in New Hampshire, emphasizing his proposals to bolster small businesses while taking a few swipes at his rivals. ''I find people are uneasy about Howard Dean and unsure about Wes Clark, who came in out of nowhere,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who has been rising in the polls in New Hampshire, campaigned in South Carolina, which votes on Feb. 3, and fended off questions about the consistency of his opposition to the Iraq war from the Republican National Committee.
In Iowa, Dr. Dean donned a moss-green crew neck sweater, campaigning without a suit and tie for the first time since he visited a hog farm in October. Asked about Mr. Gephardt's latest commercial attacking him, Dr. Dean called it ''silly,'' and promised a different tone. Indeed, his campaign unveiled a new advertisement Thursday afternoon that struck a more positive note and urged voters to take part in the caucuses.
The message was evidently partly the work of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who urged Dr. Dean to be more positive. ''I don't know that you get anyone to convert this late,'' Mr. Harkin told reporters as the Dean bus rolled from Fort Dodge to Carroll, ''but you do get the undecideds, and they're looking for someone with a positive message.''
Top aides to Dr. Dean, who had been leading in most polls, insisted that despite the surge by other candidates, their organization would help him prevail in the caucuses.
Joe Trippi, the Dean campaign manager, said he continued to believe that only Mr. Gephardt had a ground organization that rivaled Dr. Dean's for a political event that is heavily dependent on the ability to get voters out.
''If you're in a 25-25-25-25 dead heat in this thing,'' Mr. Trippi said, the difference between those who ultimately edged ahead and those who did not is ''they had incredibly good organizations.''
One campaign spokesman for Dr. Dean, Jay Carson, said there might even be a benefit to the tightened race: motivating complacent supporters to get to their caucuses, rather than thinking ''it's really cold tonight, he's got a six point lead, he doesn't need me.''
Mr. Edwards spent much of his day in smaller communities, continuing his strategy of appearing in rural areas where, under the complex caucus rules, a smaller number of supporters can provide as many delegates as in more populous areas.
While Mr. Edwards makes certain to campaign in Iowa television markets every day, he also drives to places like Mount Pleasant, population 8,751, where he campaigned on Thursday. His approach, aides say, is devised to counteract the strength of the unions that have endorsed Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean and are looking to turn out high numbers of caucusgoers.
''The unions, while they exist in every part of Iowa, are not as strong in rural areas,'' said Rob Berntsen, Mr. Edwards's caucus director.
After a stop in Britt, Mr. Gephardt told reporters that he released his new television spot only after Dr. Dean criticized him by name for his support of the Iraq war in one of Dr. Dean's commercials this week.
''He started with this,'' Mr. Gephardt said of Dr. Dean. ''And we're going to answer and we're going to talk about other differences that exist between us that we think voters need to hear about as well.''
Mr. Gephardt said he believed that voters were starting to think hard about who could beat President Bush.
''I feel very good about where we are,'' he said. ''I always knew this was going to be a tight race, an intense competition. We've got good candidates, everybody's been working really hard. But I believe with all my heart that at the end of the day we're going to win this.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS
