It actually seems a sadly appropriate exercise of corporate short-sightedness that, just after Disney announced it was shutting down its Florida-based animation studios and bringing the era of hand-drawn animation to a close, the studio releases ''Disney's Teacher's Pet.'' This marvelously quick-witted and gloriously goofy hand-drawn feature shows there's still more than 21 grams of life left in the form. It helps when the drawn stuff has a touch of individuality, and the artist Gary Baseman -- creator of both the Saturday morning cartoon show ''Teacher's Pet'' and the sure-footed, blessedly swift movie that was derived from it -- couldn't be more idiosyncratic.
Lovers of the show probably both laughed and cringed when Nathan Lane belted out the program's theme song, ''I Wanna Be a Boy,'' and slathered it with an extra schmear of schmaltz. Mr. Lane's shameless vocal theatrics are a perfect fit for the character he voices, Spot, a relentlessly chatty blue dog. Spot's ambition to be a human boy instead of a doggy is realized by slipping into a pair of shorts, a bright yellow short-sleeve shirt and, in a tribute to Clark Kent, a pair of glasses to suggest braininess.
One of the most wryly funny bits of the Saturday morning animated series is also in the movie: Mr. Baseman's pop-eyed Pop Art character drawings. These drawings are so peculiar -- pale, dry-ice gray kids next to children rendered in saffron-yellow alongside boys and girls with Jolly Rancher green skins -- that the idea of the indigo-blue pooch Spot choosing to join them and pretending to be a boy almost made sense. Spot didn't look any odder than anyone else in the show's classroom.
And the incredibly enjoyable feature film version bolts from the blocks and runs with that concept. Spot -- who takes on the name Scott Leadready II while around humans -- is still determined to be human, and the film capitalizes on that desire by starting with a parody of Pinocchio. The picture is worth sitting through solely for the opening section, with Mr. Baseman's visualization of both the puppet who also wanted to be human and the Blue Fairy who granted his wish. His style, with its compulsive roundness, suggests a vaguely tumescent, underground comix combination of Tex Avery and Ed (Big Daddy) Roth. And the film's animators, bless them, don't remove the hint of anguish in Mr. Baseman's lines.
Bright, sure on its feet and blessedly fleet, ''Teacher's Pet'' sprints through the slaloms of contemporary culture jokes that are now standard obstacles in animated features. But ''Pet,'' which opens nationwide today, signals its smarts by mocking and embracing the Broadway musical saw of bursting into song at any given moment, as well as adding a spoof of the Tom Hanks fantasy ''Big'' to its Pinocchio jokes.
As compared with the television show, it also expands on its cranky, too-smart-for-his-own-good but still-desperate-to-be-liked Spot. As voiced by Mr. Lane with a Lou Costello-type whine that could peel the enamel from kids' teeth faster than any Twinkie hustled during the show, Spot is a hilariously insecure pooch. He almost seems to be auditioning for the heart of his favorite human, 8-year-old Leonard (Shaun Fleming), every time he sees his young master.
The other joke is that Spot really is a teacher's pet -- he's always overachieving in class to stay in the good graces of Leonard's mom. That character is voiced by Debra Jo Rupp of ''That 70's Show'' with the same apple-pie obliviousness she uses for live-action comedy.
When Spot hears about Dr. Krank (Kelsey Grammer), the mad scientist who has perfected the technology of turning animals into humans -- a topic that seems to be a staple of daytime talk shows in the film -- he scampers off to Florida to undergo treatment. (When they meet, Spot gulps, ''He looked a lot shorter on TV. Maybe it's the ax.'')
It's here that the writers, Bill and Cherie Steinkellner, and the director, Timothy Bjorkland -- collaborators on the television series, too -- seize the opportunity to go as deliciously wild as Spot. They also bring back supporting characters like the macho parakeet Pretty Boy (Jerry Stiller) and the pillowy house cat Mr. Jolly (David Ogden Stiers), whose shape is a great visual joke of its own.
These house pets are as much in need of analysis as Spot, despite their innocuous, utilitarian names. The show gets laughs out of anxiety and overcompensatory behavior, and the movie does, too. The housebound Pretty Boy and Mr. Jolly force themselves out of doors to stop Spot. (Their journey takes them to a Florida garbage dump with a wonderful throwaway visual bit in the background.)
Dr. Krank and two of his experiments gone awry -- a dimwitted almost-human alligator (Paul Reubens) and a hybrid Homo sapiens mosquito (Megan Mullally) -- have issues as well. They could use some ego-boosting time on the sofa, too.
''Teacher's Pet'' will reward your close scrutiny with a gratifyingly high ratio of humor -- aural and eye-worthy. Pay attention to the lead guitar in the film's theme, which sounds like a Great White Way pit player's riffs; the jazz trumpeter Jack Sheldon's growly vocals on a song reminiscent of his ''Schoolhouse Rock''; and several fistfuls of jokes making fun of Disney.
The film gets more laughs out of 74 minutes than many recent live-action comedies with much more time. Just to show that ''Teacher's Pet'' knows its roots, it ends with a version of the theme song from the 1958 Doris Day-Clark Gable comedy of the same name; this movie is barking up the right tree. There's another important lesson to be learned, too: animals, apparently, can be just as over-adrenalized as humans.
''Disney's Teacher's Pet'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has some mildly obnoxious jokes that you and your kids will love anyway.
DISNEY'S TEACHER'S PET
Directed by Timothy Bjorklund; written by Bill and Cherie Steinkellner; edited by Nancy Frazen; music by Stephen James Taylor with songs by Randy Petersen, Kevin Quinn, Ms. Steinkellner, Brian Woodbury and Peter Lurye; art director, Gary Baseman; produced by Stephen Swofford; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 74 minutes. This film is rated PG.
WITH THE VOICES OF: Nathan Lane (Spot/Scott), Kelsey Grammer (Dr. Krank), Shaun Fleming (Leonard), Debra Jo Rupp (Mrs. Helperman), David Ogden Stiers (Mr. Jolly), Jerry Stiller (Pretty Boy), Paul Reubens (Dennis), Megan Mullally (Adele), Rob Paulsen (Ian), Estelle Harris (Mrs. Boogin) and Jay Thomas (Barry Anger).
FILM REVIEW
