Jets Coach Herman Edwards received a two-year contract extension yesterday, assuring that he will be under contract with the team through 2007.
It is rare that a coach receives an extension after going 6-10, as Edwards did this season. Terms of the new deal were not available, but he is believed to have received a large increase over the $1.3 million he was set to earn in 2004.
''It speaks volumes of their trust in what we're doing,'' said Edwards, who has a 25-23 record and two playoff appearances in three seasons as Jets coach. ''I'm very flattered by that. I wanted to be here for a long time. This is the only team I want to coach for. We haven't reached where we wanted to go at this point. We're headed in the right direction. We didn't have the year we anticipated. But it's a new year.''
With his future secure, Edwards must now determine the future of the defense. He said that he hoped to talk to the former Chicago Bears head coach Dick Jauron before the weekend about the defensive coordinator job and that the linebackers coach, Bob Sutton, would be retained.
Yesterday, Edwards interviewed Bo Pelini, Nebraska's former defensive coordinator, but said that he was waiting to talk to a couple of candidates whose teams were still in the playoffs. The Jets are believed to be interested in Ron Rivera, the Philadelphia Eagles' linebackers coach.
Edwards said he hoped to have his search finished by the end of next week, when he returns from scouting players in the Senior Bowl, although if the Eagles advance to the Super Bowl, Rivera will be unavailable until after the game on Feb. 1.
Edwards is not averse to moving quickly if someone impresses him in an interview, but he said he was committed to giving everyone on his list a fair chance.
''You might find a diamond in the rough interviewing one of those other guys,'' he said. ''There are a lot of guys, before they had that name, somebody gave them an opportunity. Somebody gave me an opportunity to be a head coach.''  PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
