When Bill Belichick attended Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., he sat around the dormitory with his offensive linemate Ernie Adams, drawing up plays on scratch paper.
More than 30 years later, not much has changed since their school days. Belichick is the head coach of the New England Patriots, and Adams, as the team's football research director, is his right-hand man.
Adams and Belichick still scratch out plays together. On the charter flight to New Orleans for Super Bowl XXXVI, they sat in the first-class section and devised the defensive schemes that ultimately undid the St. Louis Rams.
''After 33 years, we're real comfortable with each other,'' Adams said Thursday.
He has input on the draft, free-agent signings and weekly game planning.
''I stick my finger in as many pies as possible,'' Adams said. ''It's important that I don't have everyone in the organization thinking I'm in their way. If I come to a conclusion on something, I go to Bill and give it to him.''
The Boston news media regard Adams as the Patriots' version of Bill James, a statistical analyst who is a consultant to the Red Sox.
But Adams's role is more vital and involved.
If Belichick wants the Patriots to improve in a certain area -- be it defense in the red zone, third-down offense or rebuilding the secondary -- he will assign it to Adams.
''My responsibility is to do whatever I can think of to help us win,'' Adams said. ''Part of it, I make up as I go along. Bill and I work together. If I think I can help us win, my job is to do it.''
Adams, a Northwestern graduate, has been everything from a position coach to a director of pro personnel in the N.F.L. When Ray Perkins became coach of the Giants in 1979, Adams was the first assistant he hired. Adams, in turn, recommended Belichick, and the two have rarely been apart since.
Bill Rees, the director of player personnel for the San Francisco 49ers, said Adams's range of knowledge, from organizational structure to rookie free agents, is unparalleled in the N.F.L.
''His ability to recall particular instances is the best I've ever seen,'' Rees said. ''He could tell you a play from when he was at Northwestern in 1974 that someone ran against him, the down and distance, the yardage and how they blocked it.''
Perkins said that Adams, who wears oversize glasses, always looked more like a doctor or a dentist than a football coach. And Adams relishes the research aspect of the game, sitting in solitude in his office watching film.
He said that he works without a computer and that he rarely talks on the phone. When the Patriots moved into new offices, Adams traded a chair for an extra bookshelf. With the chair gone, visitors would not be encouraged to stay long.
Adams also does not dress the part of football coach. He said his maroon V-neck Patriots sweater and tattered brown penny loafers stretch back to his first stint with the team in 1975.
But Adams's passion for the game and his competitiveness, the characteristics that drew him to Belichick when they met in 1970, have forged a lasting bond.
''The reason we're successful here is everyone is on the same page,'' Adams said. ''We sing from the same hymn, the same notes. No one deviates.''
PRO FOOTBALL
