Here are some favorite Schumann recordings of the classical-music critics of The New York Times. Availability is hard to determine in the current state of the market. Most of the recordings here can be found on Amazon.com or in major record stores. CD's range in price from $12.99 for one CD to $21.99 for a two-CD set and $40.99 for four CD's. (An introduction appears on Page 1 of Weekend.)
PIANO QUINTET, CHAMBER WORKS. Martha Argerich, pianist; Nobuko Imai, violist; Mischa Maisky, cellist; others (EMI Classics 5 57308 2).
PIANO TRIO NO. 1. Alfred Cortot, pianist; Jacques Thibaud, violinist; Pablo Casals, cellist (with Mendelssohn's Piano Trio No. 1; Naxos 8.110185).
''DICHTERLIEBE,'' ''LIEDERKREIS'' (OP. 39). Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau, baritone; Alfred Brendel, pianist (Philips 416 352-2).
FANTASY IN C, ''FASCHINGS-SCHWANK AUS WIEN,'' ''PAPILLONS.'' Sviatoslav Richter, pianist (EMI Classics 5 75233 2).
PIANO CONCERTO, VIOLIN CONCERTO. Martha Argerich, pianist; Gidon Kremer, violinist; Chamber Orchestra of Europe, conducted by Nikolaus Harnoncourt (Teldec 4509-90696-2).
SCHUMANN was a capable symphonist, but it was the smaller-scale chamber works, solo piano music and lieder that best served his unique wedding of structure and emotion, rigor and rue. To feel his way into these creative worlds, he often relied on his first musical love, the piano, and we can thank an injury to a middle finger for the fact that he did not become a piano virtuoso himself and thus leave his greatest works unwritten. (We can also thank the primitive state of medicine at the time: Schumann's attempted therapies included bathing his finger in the entrails of a dead animal.)
At the core of his chamber output is the Piano Quintet, which epitomizes his gift for toggling between the pleasures of heart and mind. One might not expect a good recording from an ad hoc assembly of soloists but Martha Argerich and friends offer an exciting live rendition with driving rhythmic intensity, lush instrumental textures and an adrenaline-laced expressivity. More Schumann chamber music rounds out this disc, including the ''Märchenbilder,'' gracious miniatures for viola and piano, which receive a lovely reading by Ms. Argerich and Nobuko Imai.
My next pick hails from a distant sonic galaxy, far removed from the sleek modern sound and high-octane playing of Ms. Argerich and company. Indeed, the violinist Jacques Thibaud, the cellist Pablo Casals and the pianist Alfred Cortot made up a legendary ensemble from a much earlier era of music-making, and their famed performance of Schumann's D minor Piano Trio has a warm conversational quality, a dreamy legato phrasing and a mellow sweetness of tone unlike anything one finds today. The recording was made in the late 1920's, but all three musicians were born less than a quarter century after Schumann's death, and their playing maintains deep ties to the very Romantic tradition that the composer helped define. If you can listen through the inevitable surface noise, you will hear old-world Schumann at its most tender and beautiful.
Schumann's melancholic songs offer another perspective on his dark-hued genius, and in particular his keen sensitivity to the poetry and literature that so often inspired his work. Seldom is this more apparent than with the famous ''Liederkreis'' settings of the poetry of Joseph von Eichendorff. There are more vocally luxurious performances out there, but I still prefer the baritone Dietrich Fischer-Dieskau and the pianist Alfred Brendel for their stylish refinement and unflagging attention to musical and literary details. Their ''Dichterliebe'' is rawer and more hard-edged, but equally worthy.
When it comes to the big piano works, Sviatoslav Richter is utterly convincing in the C major Fantasy, conjuring both Classical nobility and Romantic ardor in all the right proportions, and with a breathtaking palette of colors. And Ms. Argerich tears into the A minor Piano Concerto with all the combustible virtuosity that her fans have come to expect. Both discs come with added incentives: the violinist Gidon Kremer's eloquent plea for the obscure Schumann Violin Concerto and Richter's dazzling ''Faschingsschwank aus Wien.''
