TO marvel is the beginning of knowledge, and not to marvel, the first step toward ignorance. So the Greeks said. You can test this axiom in the Chuck Close print survey now at the Metropolitan Museum.
In a digital age, the ubiquity of technological images may accustom people to the old-fashioned miracle of illusion in art. But as Mr. Close once put it, there is still ''something about the smearing of colored dirt on a flat surface and denying the flatness through the illusion of depth that retains its original magic from the days of the cave painters, and which can never be denied.'' What's true of paint on canvas, he might have added, is true of printmaking.
Mr. Close, who likes to point out that he loved magic as a boy, has sometimes wondered aloud whether magicians, when watching other magicians, ''see the illusion, the device that makes the illusion or perhaps a little bit of both?'' His show, which has come by way of the Blaffer Gallery at the University of Houston, where it was organized by Terrie Sultan (Nan Rosenthal has installed it at the Met), gives us both varied objects of dizzy illusion and the devices by which they were achieved.
For anybody curious about how art gets made, this exhibition is a model of eloquent didactics, including a few tools of the printing trade, which are themselves oddly riveting. The prints are compelling, on a par with Mr. Close's paintings, from which they are inseparable. At the same time, the show graciously acknowledges many of the creative helpers without whom he could not have pulled off his various printmaking exploits.
Big-time printmaking today is a collaborative business. The lone artist in a garret with a woodblock, ink and spoon is a quaint notion that bears no resemblance to Mr. Close's modus operandi. His partners have included master printers like Joe Wilfer and Kathan Brown and Tadashi Toda, experts, variously, at the ins and outs of spitbite aquatints, reduction linoleum cuts, screen prints, handmade paper pulp multiples and other arcane techniques seemingly impenetrable to the uninitiated.
Mr. Close, whose work has always had so much to do with elaborate systems and processes of operation, has needed these printers as they have needed him. Achieving a balance of authority is itself part of the art of printmaking.
A generous colleague but not the passive type -- good artists aren't passive, generally -- Mr. Close has typically erected constructive obstacles for himself and his collaborators, the conquest of which can bring about something special or new. To make ''Keith'' (1972), Mr. Close chose to take his established painting style of copying photographs via a grid and adapt it to the antique engraving technique of mezzotint, at first confounding Ms. Brown, his printer on that project. Then to make matters more difficult, he decided to make the mezzotint very large.
''I didn't want to go to a print shop where they would have all the expertise and would act as if I didn't have any, and where they would tell me that something had to be done a certain way, just because that was the way they did it,'' he explained to the curator, Ms. Sultan, in a conversation in the show's catalog. ''I wanted to do something that would require both Kathan and me to figure out how to do it at the same time. I love that kind of problem solving.''
Their work resulted in a milestone of contemporary printmaking, which in turn led Mr. Close to new ideas for drawings and paintings. It was the first work that explicitly displayed the incremental building blocks of the picture, the grid of marks. People sometimes assume prints are just art's poor cousins, copies of paintings or drawings, afterthoughts, but Mr. Close's prints are at the heart of his achievement.
Or, you might say, his collaborative achievement. It took him three months in 2000 to paint ''Emma,'' a portrait of his niece. It took two more years for Yasu Shibata to produce the Japanese-style woodcut version of the painting, a coup of verisimilitude and complexity. Mr. Shibata broke down the image into 113 separate colors and 27 woodblocks, which on their own (7 of them are in the show) look like inchoate Rorschach blots. Combined, they recreate the picture exactly. Mr. Shibata even made water-based printing inks pass for viscous oil paint. Talk about magic.
Among other eye-popping feats, ''Alex'' (1993), made from a 24-by-20-inch Polaroid of the artist Alex Katz, relied on a system of printing from light to dark in stages of successively darker grays, a procedure Mr. Close had already devised, adapted from Picasso.
The show illustrates it by presenting all seven states of the work, a reduction linoleum cut that became a silk screen. The image emerges through these states, from vague to crisp, like a photograph in a developing tray.
By that point in his life, Mr. Close, after suffering an aneurysm, didn't have the manual dexterity to carve the block for the print, so he directed a half-dozen assistants to follow his felt-tip markings. When he saw that they carved differently, he contrived a process to rotate the cutters at 10-minute intervals, disguising the medley of touches. He also chose to return to the photographic effects he had abandoned for squiggly arrays of dots and doughnuts. ''Sometimes a print technique can be a relief from what you are doing,'' he has said, ''or sometimes it extends what you are doing.''
Another time, a printer named Karl Hecksher knocked on Mr. Close's door looking for a job. On a hunch, Mr. Close handed him a poster of his painting of the artist Lucas Samaras. In the show is the jigsaw device that Mr. Hecksher cooked up for his woodcut, a stroke of ingenuity that is itself a beautiful object and another example of how Mr. Close exploits gifted collaborators.
He often teamed up with Joe Wilfer, until Wilfer died, in 1995. Mr. Close described him as ''the single greatest problem-solving mind I've ever worked with.''
''He never panicked,'' Mr. Close added. ''I would always get really crazy and hysterical and nervous and Joe would remain calm.'' Wilfer cajoled him into trying handmade paper editions, which he then continued to make with Ruth Lingen, Wilfer's colleague, after Wilfer's death.
These editions involve squirting liquid paper pulp through stencils or grills with squeeze bottles and cake decorators, or, as with ''Georgia'' from the early 1980's, gluing together dried globs of leftover pulp, shaped like small potato chips in different shades of gray, to construct a portrait of Mr. Close's daughter.
Sometimes (''Georgia'' is an example) the process is more compelling than the result. That said, when you get down to it, as a printmaker Mr. Close is really a process artist, like Sol LeWitt, except with creative troubleshooting in place of the element of chance.
The best prints reveal these processes like so many bricks that make up a building, inconsequential by themselves, but together greater than the sum of the parts. You might also think of Mr. Close as the architect of his prints.
His spitbite etchings and aquatints are composed of clearly separate dots of gray. The subtly calibrated marks are made with acid and saliva applied to the prepared copper printing plate; combined, they erect a face. (With Aldo Crommelynck, Picasso's and Matisse's printer, Mr. Close borrowed Mr. Crommelynck's spit, explaining, ''It always seemed to work better, maybe because he smoked Gauloises all the time.'')
More examples of building blocks: the recent scribble etchings are successive layerings of differently colored scribbles, which Mr. Close includes along with the final prints, to demystify the technical process and make the whole construction of the work integral to its message.
''In the process of making things, ideas will occur to you,'' he has said. ''Style is often embedded in process and not connected to iconography. A signature style is about how it happened, not what is made. I think of myself as an orchestrator of experience. I make experiences for people to look at.''
Orchestrator or architect, the results are transparent even if terms like spitbite etching still sound like Greek to many people -- which returns us to the beginning. ''We make a house by the art of building,'' wrote Plato, ''and by the art of painting we make another house, a sort of manmade dream produced for those who are awake.'' Call these prints Chuck Close's dream houses.
''Chuck Close Prints: Process and Collaboration'' remains on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, (212) 535-7710, through April 18.
ART REVIEW
