An 81-year-old Brooklyn woman died yesterday afternoon in a fire that tore through her Ocean Parkway home, Fire Department officials said.
The woman, Lillian Hecht, was found dead in the living room of her two-story home in Gravesend, the spokesman said. Investigators said the fire at 2110 Ocean Parkway began because of a space heater that had been in use in the dining room.
The firefighters' union criticized the rescue response time as too slow, while Fire Department officials said the response time was satisfactory.
Smoke was pouring from the windows of the house when firefighters responded to the call at 12:57 p.m., said Joyce Saidar, 14, a neighbor.
Mrs. Hecht's husband, Rabbi Abraham B. Hecht, was home at the time of the fire. He escaped to safety. His wife, who used a wheelchair, was lying in her bed when firefighters found her just after 1 p.m., the spokesman said.
"I saw smoke," Ms. Saidar said last night. Rabbi Hecht "was saved, but he was very worried because of his wife.''
''She was very sweet,'' Ms. Saidar added. ''We used to visit her sometimes."
Stephen J. Cassidy, president of the Uniformed Firefighters Association, said the first ladder truck arrived late because the nearest ladder company was closed yesterday so that firefighters in the company could receive medical examinations.
"We've been arguing with the department for years," he said. "They close companies every day for a variety of reasons. Today it proved to be a fatal mistake."
But department officials denied that the rescue had taken too long. Deputy Commissioner Francis X. Gribbon, a department spokesman, said two ladder trucks and three engines arrived to the fire within eight minutes of the original call. Firefighters reached the victim within 11 minutes, he said.
"By any measure that's a very short recovery time," Mr. Gribbon said. The department strives for response times of five to six minutes, he said.Engine trucks battle the fire itself, and ladder trucks carry out the rescue.
The union has long criticized the Fire Department for revolving closures, in which any number of companies are shut daily for maintenance or other reasons.
