Except for the politics and soft-core pornography, ''The L Word,'' Showtime's new series about lesbians that starts on Sunday, is old-fashioned fun -- more ''Melrose Place'' than ''Sex and the City.''
The show's equivocal message does stand out, however, though perhaps not quite as much as the steamy scenes of women making love.
''The L Word'' has been marketed by Showtime as a kind of premium-cable Certs: a manifesto of lesbian liberation and visual candy for men. This was not the case for Showtime's other groundbreaking series, ''Queer as Folk,'' about the sex lives of gay men. (For whatever reason, what is good for the gander leaves the goose cold: few women report being aroused by the sight of men kissing each other.)
In that sense, ''The L Word'' conveniently fits in with a trend currently preoccupying magazines, afternoon talk shows and parents' meetings: young women, including high school students, who experiment with bisexuality both for a sense of female empowerment and as a way to seduce men.
To some, that can seem like an oxymoron. There may be nothing wrong with performing Sapphic acts to entice the opposite sex, but it is hard to reconcile such tableaus with gay or feminist ideals of independence and self-respect. And it is surely belittling to reduce lesbians' sexual identity to a form of heterosexual foreplay. The contradiction sticks out, even if it has become fashionable to view it as post-feminist -- a way to exclude men while still attracting them.
''The L Word,'' of course, does not exclude men at all. While ostensibly celebrating the lesbian life, the two-hour pilot is in such a rush to pander to male viewers that at times it seems less like an American television show than a hastily dubbed Swedish ''art'' film. Each new plot development works as a perfunctory excuse to introduce another sexual variation -- a man alone, a man with a woman, two women, two women and a man, etc.
All the women are beautiful, which on the one hand works to dismiss the stereotype of lesbians as squat, plaid-shirted and mannish. On the other, they are all so exquisite, even by the high standards of affluent Los Angeles, that it plays into another stereotype -- and male fantasy -- of the lipstick lesbian.
The pilot, however, is a poor advertisement for the series. Subsequent episodes slow down and relax, giving the characters a chance to develop and relationships to settle in -- and unsettle. There are interesting, likable protagonists, some genuinely funny scenes and amusingly complicated romances. (It turns out that the plight of the single gay woman in Los Angeles is only slightly different from that of the single straight woman -- all the good ones are taken, or not gay.)
The real L word of the show is not lesbianism but loyalty, the fellowship that binds and softens a group of what on the surface appear to be prickly, overly indulged middle-class women. (They drive convertibles, take spinning classes and eat at the trendiest restaurants.) And these female friends are more nuanced and plausible than the stick-figure heroines on HBO's ''Sex and the City.''
The story is centered on a longstanding lesbian couple: Bette, a glamorous modern-art museum director played by Jennifer Beals, and Tina (Laurel Holloman), who takes a leave from her film-business career to devote herself to getting pregnant. Their first scene is a bit disconcerting: the two women begin to kiss passionately in their bathroom in the morning, and Bette whispers huskily, ''Let's make a baby.''
Even as they begin to hunt for a suitable sperm donor, the two women go into therapy to examine whether they are ready to have a child together.
Their closest friends are not as lucky in love. Alice (Leisha Hailey), a magazine writer, is attracted only to women who treat her badly. Katherine Moennig stands out in the role of Shane, the whiskey-voiced and sexily androgynous Casanova of the group; she roams qualm-free from girl to girl, as unattainable as the Shane in the Alan Ladd western. Dana (Erin Daniels) is a professional tennis player who conceals her sexual orientation, fearing she could lose product endorsements. And reigning above them all, cool and mysterious, is Marina (Karina Lombard), the owner of the chic lesbian coffeehouse where they all hang out.
Trouble brews when Bette and Tina's neighbor Tim (Eric Mabius) introduces the group to his girlfriend, Jenny (Mia Kirshner), who has just arrived from the East Coast. Jenny is a sensitive writer (her autobiographical novel is titled ''Thus Spake Sarah Schuster''), and Marina is sensitive to her writing. Marina ends up seducing Jenny behind Tim's back. There are a few other heterosexual characters, including Bette's African-American half-sister, Kit (Pam Grier), a jazz singer and alcoholic.
There is quite a bit of nudity and explicit sex on ''The L Word,'' but it is the quantity more than the quality that is novel to television. Far more than for men, mores have changed quite a bit since ABC tried to censor a kiss between Roseanne Barr and Mariel Hemingway in a 1994 episode of ''Roseanne.''
There was no fuss when Jennifer Aniston kissed Winona Ryder on ''Friends.'' Fox was unable to stir up interest in its cop show ''Fastlane,'' even after the writers put Tiffani Thiessen topless in a hot tub with two lipstick lesbian suspects. Last year BBC America had no qualms about showing explicit lesbian love scenes in ''Tipping the Velvet.'' Even the infamous kiss between Madonna and Britney Spears at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards was less shocking than shockingly calculated.
It is the sight of men canoodling that is still rare on television. There is a lot of talk about gay promiscuity on NBC's ''Will &amp; Grace,'' but very little action -- the straight female characters have probably kissed one another more than the gay men have. ''Queer as Folk'' was and still is a daring series to put on the air. The distaff version is not nearly as bold. But the series has something to offer besides sexual imagery and sophistry -- it is a well-written, entertaining show, with or without the L word.
THE L WORD  Showtime, Sunday at 10 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 9 p.m., Central time.
Directed by Rose Troche; teleplay by Ilene Chaiken; story by Ms. Chaiken, Kathy Greenberg and Michele Abbott; Ms. Chaiken, Steve Golin and Larry Kennar, executive producers; Ms. Greenberg and Ms. Abbott, producers. Produced by Rose Lam and Bob Roe.
WITH: Jennifer Beals (Bette Porter), Laurel Holloman (Tina Kennard), Mia Kirshner (Jenny Schecter), Eric Mabius (Tim Haspel), Karina Lombard (Marina Ferrer), Katherine Moennig (Shane McCutcheon), Erin Daniels (Dana Fairbanks), Leisha Hailey (Alice Pieszecki), Pam Grier (Kit Porter), Landy Cannon (Harrison), Preston Cook (James) and Tammy Lynn Michaels (Lacey).
TV WEEKEND
