Jason Kidd is regarded as the wisest floor leader and savviest decision-maker in the N.B.A., but on Thursday night he was confronted with a choice faced by anyone who has ever shot a ball at a hoop, and he could not make up his mind.
With the Nets down by a point with 10.8 seconds remaining, Kidd floated to the side of the key to attempt a potential winning shot. It was exactly the kind of shot the Nets have seen Kidd make countless times in the past three years, from October to June.
In midair, as he was about to let the ball fly, Kidd momentarily asked himself a seemingly simple question: to bank or not to bank? All along, Kidd was preparing to put the ball off the glass and into the basket. Suddenly, he second-guessed himself and considered shooting straight at the hoop. With Kidd caught in the middle, his shot trickled off the rim and the Nets came up just that short in an 86-83 loss to the Milwaukee Bucks.
''I was in between using the glass and going straight, and that's not a good position to be in,'' Kidd, who made only 3 of 14 field-goal attempts, said. ''I missed everything.''
In the final minute and a half, he missed a left-handed layup that could have tied the score. He missed the 10-footer that could have put the Nets ahead. And he got a clear look at the basket in the last second, but his desperation 3-pointer did not strike iron.
''You're accustomed to seeing J-Kidd make shots like that,'' Nets Coach Byron Scott said. ''So you're a little surprised.''
But it was not Kidd or any of the other Nets starters who lost this game. That burden fell to the bench, which squandered a 10-point lead in the third quarter. By the middle of the fourth, the Nets were down by 9.
Returning from his two-game suspension for fighting, Kenyon Martin spent the first three quarters scraping off the rust and the last one dominating the Bucks, one of his favorite opponents. Martin scored 14 of his game-high 24 points in the fourth quarter, but he fouled out in the final minute, and the Nets could not get the necessary stops without him.
'''I had been trying not to force anything,'' Martin said. ''I just wanted to step up in the fourth quarter. We were right there, but we couldn't do it.''
Before the game, Scott admitted his team's bench was worse than last season's and hailed Milwaukee's reserves as some of the best in the league. In order to compensate, Scott mixed up his second unit, inserting Zoran Planinic for Robert Pack and relying on Rodney Rogers more than usual.
Nothing seemed to work. Milwaukee notched twice as many bench points as the Nets, 48-24. While the Bucks were led through the fourth quarter by Toni Kukoc, who made all four 3-pointers he attempted, and Erick Strickland, who scored 11 points in 11 minutes, the Nets had nowhere to turn.
''It was a strange five in there for us,'' Planinic said.
Lucious Harris tried to elaborate for his Croatian teammate. ''It seems like every day there is a new guy in there,'' Harris said. ''Last year, we had a consistent rotation. This year, it's a lot different. It messes it up a little bit. One little wrinkle, and we look terrible. We've got to find the right combination and stick with it.''
Milwaukee was supposed to be a lottery team, not a playoff team, but the Bucks swept the Nets at home this season and have won 10 games in a row in the Bradley Center, mostly because of their sizzling outside shooting.
In the first half, the Bucks looked out of sorts, as they dropped to 28 percent from the field. The Nets beamed at their defensive performance, but they should have known the onslaught was coming. On cue, the Nets started to relax and Milwaukee went on a 25-6 run that extended from the third quarter into the fourth.
Still, the Nets were somehow poised for a victory after Kerry Kittles made a 3-pointer with less than 40 seconds remaining, pulling his team to 82-81. On the other end, Kittles gobbled up a rebound and immediately fed the ball to Kidd, who raced upcourt, seemingly readying himself for a vintage moment.
The Nets were satisfied to let the outcome of the game rest in his usually capable hands. After all, Kidd has led this team through the last two regular seasons and into the last two N.B.A. finals, mostly because he makes the right decisions at the most crucial times.
For one night, however, even he became mixed up.
PRO BASKETBALL
