The city's improving fiscal picture is already complicating Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's efforts to get millions of dollars in aid from Albany, where Gov. George E. Pataki and state lawmakers are trying to dig out of their own financial mess.
State lawmakers said on Thursday that they were happy that the city was no longer facing cuts in services and higher taxes. But they said coming to them for help when the mayor was planning property tax rebates for homeowners was awkward.
"I think the problem the mayor is going to have is, you can't declare things to be rosy and everything is fine but say to the state, 'Give us another $400 million, whatever,' '' said Senator Dale M. Volker, a Republican from western New York. ''That is not going to be easy to sell.''
Some in Albany said permission for the mayor's tax rebate plan would ultimately pass in Albany, where lawmakers from the city, who are facing re-election, also want some credit for cutting taxes -- especially after they permitted the city to raise some of them on city residents last year. The question is whether they can be as generous with other mayoral requests.
The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan who supports the rebate plan, has suggested that the mayor consider lowering tax rates locally or choosing for cuts other taxes raised last year, such as sales or income taxes.
The Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, an upstate Republican, has also weighed in on what the city should do. In the context of a battle over how to fix the city's schools, he has questioned whether the city was contributing enough money to educate its own students.
But even as he tried to paint a rosier outlook, giving cash to homeowners who shouldered much of the city's fiscal bailout in 2003, the mayor argued that the state should give the city budget relief and help pay for a new school program.
The mayor pointed out that the city had a higher local tax burden than the state average and that the city paid $2.6 billion a year more in state taxes than it got back in state spending on the city.
"We are not only paying our own way, we are paying expenses for many other programs that the state runs outside New York City,'' said William T. Cunningham, the mayor's communications director. He said the $250 million cost of the tax rebate would take no money from anyone outside the city.
Some in Albany said the mayor's Albany request, because it was so small, would not be a heavy lift. Consequently, Mr. Bloomberg may wind up getting much of his $400 million aid request. That is much less than the $2.7 billion he asked for last year.
It also helps that, on Thursday, he gave Albany a menu of $937 million worth of options to choose from, including $495 million in Medicaid relief, a concept Governor Pataki generally supports.
The mayor was also pragmatic in not assuming any state aid for city schools' operating costs to satisfy a court order to provide New York City students a "sound basic education,'' especially after the governor and Mr. Bruno said more money was not the only solution. But he did ask Albany to float bonds to pay for $6.5 billion of his $13.1 billion schools capital construction plan to upgrade, build and maintain school buildings over the next five years.
By arguing that, "the needs of the city school system are so great, the city's fiscal capacity is limited and the state's building aid formula has historically shortchanged city schools,'' Mr. Bloomberg seemed to be increasing pressure on Albany. At the same time, he is trying to wrest Medicaid relief from the state and is fighting in court for a plan to have the state pay back the city's remaining debt from its 1970's fiscal crisis -- all big-ticket items that suburban and upstate legislators are not naturally inclined to support.
Mr. Bloomberg's timing, however, might be better this year than last: the governor is expected to report next week that the state's budget plight is not as bad as had been expected, because of rising revenues for the improving economy that is also boosting the city's budget.
Aides to the governor said on Thursday that the anticipated state budget shortfall for the fiscal year that starts on April 1 would be about $5.1 billion, about a billion less than they had originally anticipated, though still formidable.
In the end, Mr. Silver said: "Obviously when the mayor comes out with a statement that he is providing tax rebates, which I support fully, it makes our job more difficult to achieve that aid for the city of New York. I just hope the financial picture that he paints does not hinder us in advocating for the city.''
