To the cognoscenti, the Knicks did not conduct a coaching search to replace Don Chaney; they went on an archaeological dig.
Lenny Wilkens, 66, was raised from the great hoop tomb on Thursday, the coach with the most victories and losses in the N.B.A. regally dusted off for one more journey. His shimmering gray strands were brushed back just so for a gym full of people who were not yet born in 1960, his rookie year as a guard in the N.B.A.
In keeping with the times, the Knicks perused a list of hot young candidates, then chose someone who remembers the Fort Wayne Pistons.
Jack McKeon guided the Florida Marlins to victory in the World Series at age 72. Dick Vermeil, 67, dusted off the N.F.L. cobwebs in Kansas City; Joe Gibbs, 63, returned the way only a cavalry could in Washington. Hubie Brown, 70, is expounding basketball fundamentals to a roster of tats and 'tudes in Memphis.
A big-name college coach or a well-respected young assistant used to be a shoo-in candidate for head-coaching jobs. Now, it seems, the talent pool can be found in senior housing.
''I don't think age has anything to do with your mind,'' said Wilkens, who was plucked out of unofficial retirement by the tradition-conscious Isiah Thomas. ''If your mind is functioning and you're very aware of what subtle changes are going on, if you know talent, age has nothing to do with that.
''Football has proven that, year in and year out. And basketball is starting to prove that now.''
Willis Reed, his hair gray-flecked at 61, explained the phenomenon Thursday as he sat on the podium with the Knicks brain trust.
''The main thing about today, guys, is that your Social Security is a lot further away than mine,'' Reed, a Knicks vice president, told a roomful of younger journalists. ''Mine is 66; yours is going to be about 80. Life expectancy is changing. People keep going, they're much younger, smarter and functional now than they were 20 years ago at that age.''
Geezer Central has to be Memphis. Brown is 70, Jerry West, the team president, is 65, and Dick Versace, the general manager, is 63.
Versace's good friend Chuck Daly, 73, was not interested in the Knicks job. ''I don't know Jack McKeon or Dick Vermeil, but for the longest time I was in a state of consternation when some of my fellow college coaches got fired,'' Versace said Thursday in a telephone interview from Memphis. ''These were outstanding guys, in their 40's and 50's, who never got a job again. Ever. And I would think: What happened? Did he get a brain transplant? Is he no longer a great coach?
''This phenomenon is one of the most refreshing things to see in professional sports, to see guys who have been down the path, who have done it, be used again. Guys like Lenny, Chuck and Hubie, they're great teachers. Why not still learn from them?''
On the Knicks' practice court Thursday, away from the questions about Chaney's firing, Wilkens's hiring and the Knicks' general upheaval, George Glymph funneled passes to Penny Hardaway.
Glymph, 61, coached 27 years at Eau Claire High School, a perennial power in Columbia, S.C. Then Thomas, the Indiana Pacers' coach at the time, asked him to help develop Jermaine O'Neal, Glymph's former high school prodigy, and other young players.
''Why is there an age requirement for the president of the United States?'' said Glymph, looking spry in his Knicks sweats. ''B.T.D.T. -- been there, done that. When you grasp knowledge, you can introduce it into the lives of your pupils. That's what this is all about.''
Glymph was the first black coach at Eau Claire, and he knew he had to succeed or ''I was done.''
''At that time they said all we could do was go up and down, run the floor with our athletes,'' Glymph said. ''I made sure my practices were organized and when we got a 2-point lead, we held the ball and won with free throws. We could play up-tempo, but I wanted to dispel the stereotypes.''
The concept of the itinerant African-American coach did not exist.
''We weren't recycled like today,'' Glymph said. ''If we failed, that was it. In that way, this is progress.''
Wilkens pronounced Stephon Marbury's first name STEH-fin instead of steh-FON on Thursday. He showed his age when he referred to the Washington Wizards as the Bullets, but he spoke mostly of being patient and imparting knowledge, among other paternal themes.
''He's old,'' said Dikembe Mutombo, who played under Wilkens in Atlanta during the last millennium. ''But he still looks good. He's still walking. He's not in a wheelchair. He landed in a good path.''
Wilkens said, ''I think it's what you do, not how old you are.''
Glymph does not know how long the ''old is nouveau'' trend will last. But he was glad to benefit from it, the way Wilkens did with a multimillion-dollar, multiyear deal.
''Everything's a fad,'' Glymph said. ''You go through stages. But you don't lose your intelligence.''
A big fan of acronyms, he came up with another for him and Wilkens.
''T.O.M.,'' he said. ''Two old men.''
PRO BASKETBALL
