Here are some favorite Schumann recordings of the classical-music critics of The New York Times. Availability is hard to determine in the current state of the market. Most of the recordings here can be found on Amazon.com or in major record stores. CD's range in price from $12.99 for one CD to $21.99 for a two-CD set and $40.99 for four CD's. (An introduction appears on Page 1 of Weekend.)
''KREISLERIANA.'' Hélène Grimaud, pianist (with Brahms's Piano Sonata No. 2; Denon CO-73336).
PIANO QUINTET. Arthur Rubinstein, pianist; Guarneri Quartet (with Brahms's Piano Quintet; RCA Red Seal 09026-5669-2).
''DICHTERLIEBE,'' ''LIEDERKREIS'' (OP. 24), SONGS. Ian Bostridge, tenor; Julius Drake, pianist (EMI Classics 5 56575 2).
SYMPHONIES (4). Staatskapelle Berlin, conducted by Daniel Barenboim (Teldec 2564 61179-2; two CD's).
''SCENES FROM GOETHE'S 'FAUST.' '' Bryn Terfel, Karita Mattila and other soloists; Tölzer Knabenchor, Swedish Radio Chorus, and Eric Ericson Chamber Chorus; Berlin Philharmonic, conducted by Claudio Abbado (Sony Classical S2K 66308; two CD's).
THIS selection of favorite Schumann recordings is not based on exhaustive comparisons of every performance of every masterpiece. That way lies madness. (Of course, some might argue that it's already kind of mad to own 25 different performances of the ''Rhenish'' Symphony, some in multiple formats.) So my choices are based partly on memory and nostalgia, although, to 'fess up, I did do some semi-exhaustive relistening. I have chosen one recording in each musical genre.
Schumann is best known as a composer for the piano. I've long had a weak spot for the playing of Hélène Grimaud, especially in German repertory. Her recording of ''Kreisleriana,'' coupled with Brahms's Sonata No. 2 (everyone couples Schumann and Brahms, for biographical as well as musical reasons), made when she was only 19, combines rangy technique, vivid personality and a rich sense of the Romantic performance tradition.
Schumann's chamber music often involves the piano. Arthur Rubinstein's recording of the Piano Quintet in E flat with the Guarneri Quartet, besides being a magisterial performance, is also a tribute to Rubinstein's many superb Schumann recordings, so influential in shaping my tastes.
The eight-volume series of complete Schumann songs on Hyperion belongs in every serious collector's library. But for a single disc, I would choose Ian Bostridge's grouping of the Opus 24 ''Liederkreis,'' ''Dichterliebe'' and seven other songs, handsomely accompanied by Julius Drake. Mr. Bostridge has an ethereal tenor, sometimes so silvery and hushed that you're almost embarrassed by the intimacy. But he can rise to the bolder, more despairing songs, like ''Ich Grolle Nicht,'' too. A remarkable disc.
Schumann's orchestral music is also wonderful, despite all the controversies that have surrounded his orchestration: thick and inept, or rich and Romantic? I tend toward the latter, but there have been wonderful performances in all styles and all kinds of instrumentation. As much as I regret not including Arturo Toscanini's fulminating account of the ''Manfred'' Overture, I will stick with the symphonies.
For decades I preferred Leonard Bernstein's raw, impassioned performances with the New York Philharmonic (better than his later, slicker versions with the Vienna Philharmonic). I love them still, but Daniel Barenboim's new set with the Staatskapelle Berlin, the same group he will lead in Schumann at Carnegie Hall next week, is wonderfully lyrical and idiomatic, and in superb sound as well. It's way better than his earlier set with the Chicago Symphony.
Finally, large-scale, quasi-operatic, quasi-oratorio effusions: Schumann could imbue his instrumental music and songs with plenty of drama, but like some other great composers, he never found his footing in opera. Still, his ''Scenes From Goethe's 'Faust,' '' in a sumptuous recording from Claudio Abbado and the Berlin Philharmonic and a remarkable roster of singers, must be on the list. And even if the work falls short of counterparts by Berlioz, Liszt, Gounod and Mahler as an evocation of ''Faust,'' its seraphic beauties and contrapuntal rigor work wonderfully on their own terms.
