Starbucks will open its first shop in France on Friday, hoping to spread ''to go'' coffee culture among Parisians long used to waiting for their drinks and lingering for hours in one of the city's 2,000 traditional cafes.
The company plans to open 8 to 10 shops in Paris by the end of the year. Along with its first outlet, on the chic Avenue de l'Opera in the heart of Paris, two more will open shortly, one in the business district of La Défense on Monday, and another in Montparnasse before the end of February, Howard Schultz, the company's chief executive, said at a news conference on Thursday.
In addition to the traditional cafes, Starbucks will be up against a French chain of coffee shops, Columbus Café, which has 31 outlets in France with a distinct American style, and indeed, ''to go'' cups.
''We were told the French would never drink coffee out of paper cups,'' said Philippe Bloch, co-president of Columbus Café, ''wouldn't take them to go, wouldn't drink anything other than espresso, and certainly not coffee beverages with a high added value like cappuccino or iced coffees. And that is not true.'' The company said its revenue grew about 30 percent last year to over 8 million euros ($10 million) for 2003, according to preliminary data.
Faced with the arrival of Starbucks in France, Columbus Café plans to accelerate its openings, and add between 15 to 20 new stores this year.
Starbucks has adopted a diplomatic approach to entering the French market. ''We didn't come here to displace any cafes or to teach the French people about coffee,'' Mr. Schultz said. Despite the American company's size and its aggressive public relations operation for the Parisian opening, it is still cautious.
''We recognize that our success around the world doesn't mean we will succeed here,'' Mr. Schultz said. Yet, he insisted, ''we're here to stay.'' Despite its cultural novelty, Starbucks might benefit from stronger-than-expected brand recognition in Paris. ''I was very surprised to see how many people already knew the brand,'' said Franck Esquerré, director of Starbucks France.
And the experience of Columbus Café could indicate that the French are ready to take their coffees to go.
