DaimlerChrysler will buy an additional 22 percent of Mitsubishi Fuso Truck and Bus from Mitsubishi Motors, Daimler's struggling Japanese affiliate.
DaimlerChrysler will spend about 52 billion yen ($489 mil by issuing new bonds. The additional cash from DaimlerChrysler will help Mitsubishi develop new models.
The move is intended to bolster Mitsubishi Motors. DaimlerChrysler holds a 37 percent stake in Mitsubishi Motors, which is one of the most indebted carmakers in the industry and has been hurt by slumping sales in North America coupled with a surge in consumer loan defaults last year.
With losses mounting, Standard &amp; Poor's downgraded Mitsubishi's credit rating in October, making it more expensive for the company to raise money by issuing new bonds. The additional cash from DaimlerChrysler will help Mitsubishi develop new models.
''Today's decision is the logical next step in our strategy to focus on passenger car operations,'' Mitsubishi Motors' president, Rolf Eckrodt, said in a faxed statement.
But given the size of Mitsubishi Motors' financial obligations, the money it earns from the sale of its truck division may be used to meet more immediate needs, like debt repayments that are coming due.
With bond financing now more expensive because of the weakened credit rating, Mitsubishi has had to turn to DaimlerChrysler, which has been reluctant to offer too generous a financial lifeline, analysts said.
''When you are in a cash crunch like they are, meeting your liabilities is a problem,'' said Kurt Sanger, who follows the auto industry for ING Financial Markets in Tokyo. ''The big question is how you pay for the future while you pay for the present.''
Mitsubishi's net debt-to-equity ratio, a crucial measure of its indebtedness, is about 350 percent, nearly twice that of any other Japanese carmaker, Mr. Sanger said. DaimlerChrysler, he and others say, does not want to buy more shares of Mitsubishi because then it might be forced to consolidate the Japanese company and its debts more fully on its balance sheet.
By buying shares in Mitsubishi Fuso, which had a solid year in 2003, DaimlerChrysler can help Mitsubishi Motors and still win acceptance from its shareholders. The transaction is also subject to approval by the antitrust authorities.
Mitsubishi Motors is trying to raise 100 billion yen ($941 million), according to the Nihon Keizai newspaper, which has also said the carmaker may sell its remaining 20 percent stake in Fuso to other Mitsubishi group companies.
Mitsubishi Motors denied the reports.
For its part, DaimlerChrysler will get a larger piece of Mitsubishi Fuso, where sales increased 40 percent in Japan in 2003. Tighter emissions standards in Japan and elsewhere have forced companies to reinvest in new trucks and buses. Strong demand for trucks in China and other parts of Asia also lifted overseas sales 7 percent.
