Even though Ana Rodriguez complained of abdominal pain and delivered a placenta after being rushed to the hospital, she insisted she had not given birth, the police said.
But when Suffolk County police officers went to her home in North Bay Shore on Saturday, they found bags of bloody rags and a dead seven-pound baby boy in a bucket under the kitchen sink, the police said. The baby was born alive on Jan. 8 or 9, and died of asphyxiation, Detective Lt. Jack Fitzpatrick said.
Ms. Rodriguez, 34, was arrested after she was released from the hospital, and she was arraigned on Thursday on a charge of second-degree murder in First District Court in Central Islip. She pleaded not guilty and was held without bail.
At first insisting she had not been pregnant, she later told the police that she had wanted to keep her condition a secret from her boyfriend, said Bob Clifford, a spokesman for the Suffolk County district attorney.
The police said on Thursday that they still did not know how Ms. Rodriguez had hidden the pregnancy from the boyfriend, Victor Sorto, 37, or from the couple's three daughters, ages 14, 10 and 8. Ms. Rodriguez often wore loose clothes, and the police said Mr. Sorto had seemed genuinely unaware of the pregnancy. ''That's his story,'' Lieutenant Fitzpatrick said. ''There's nothing to indicate he was deceitful. It certainly begs the question, 'How don't you know?'''
Reached by telephone on Thursday night, Mr. Sorto would not comment on the case.
The family lives in close quarters in a two-bedroom basement apartment on Dalton Road. Ms. Rodriguez worked part time at a supermarket.
The police said that the three girls remained with their father, and that there had been no complaints about the way Ms. Rodriguez had treated them.
The police said Ms. Rodriguez had been complaining for a day or two about vaginal bleeding and severe abdominal pain when Mr. Sorto called an ambulance, and she was taken to Southside Hospital in Bay Shore. Hospital officials suspected that she had been pregnant, but she insisted she had not.
Hospital staff members alerted the police, and Mr. Sorto let officers look through the home. The police said he had seemed genuinely astonished when a dead infant was found under the sink.
