A day after Connecticut legislators announced plans to form a committee to consider whether to impeach Gov. John G. Rowland, lawmakers in both parties on Thursday criticized a former Rowland aide who has begun investigating the financial records of leading Democrats.
''This was done to intimidate rank-and-file legislators,'' said the House majority leader, James A. Amann, a Democrat from Milford. ''The idea was, we're going after your leaders and you're next.''
The former Rowland aide, David Boomer, said he had researched financial disclosure records for three top Democrats, including Mr. Amann and House Speaker Moira K. Lyons, who made the decision to appoint the impeachment committee. He said he acted alone.
''There are no dirty tricks involved,'' said Mr. Boomer, a consultant who has worked for Mr. Rowland on and off for over 20 years and now does some work for the state Republican Party. He noted that the records he examined at the State Ethics Commission office are open to the public, and that Democratic lawmakers have spent many hours there looking at records pertaining to Mr. Rowland.
Mr. Rowland and his aides have said that standards set during the impeachment process could be applied to other elected officials, too. But the House minority leader, Robert M. Ward, a Republican from North Branford, said Thursday that he thought looking into Democrats' records was a ''bad idea'' that ''set the wrong tone.'' Some Democrats said they believed Mr. Boomer's research was done at behest of the governor's office or state Republican Party officials.
Dean Pagani, a spokesman for the governor, said he had no knowledge of Mr. Boomer's taking any action on the governor's behalf. A call to the Republican Party chairman, Herbert J. Shephardson, was not returned Thursday.
The impeachment committee is the first for a governor in state history. It is being formed a month after Mr. Rowland admitted that he had lied about accepting free work at his private cottage in Litchfield and gifts from people who did business with the state. Last week, Mr. Rowland became the first governor in state history to be served with a subpoena for personal records, as part of a vast federal corruption inquiry.
The committee's 10 members will be named by the end of next week, said Ms. Lyons, who met with Mr. Ward on Thursday to discuss the committee. The legislature will hold a special session on Jan. 26 to create the committee, she said.
Ms. Lyons and Mr. Ward will each name five House members from their respective parties, she said, and they do not anticipate any disagreement. Several lawmakers have been mentioned as likely members of the committee, including Representatives John Wayne Fox of Stamford and Michael Lawlor of East Haven, both Democrats and members of the legislature's Judiciary Committee.
During efforts to impeach governors in other states, lawmakers have sometimes suffered retaliatory accusations, said John Pavia, a professor at the Quinnipiac University School of Law. Supporters of Gov. Evan Mecham of Arizona, who was impeached in 1988, vowed to initiate efforts to recall any state senator who voted to convict him. In other cases, governors in trouble have apologized and used persuasion with lawmakers, as Gov. David Walters of Oklahoma did in 1993. He was not impeached.
On Thursday afternoon, Representative Penny Bacchiochi of Somers called on Mr. Rowland to resign, becoming the sixth House Republican to do so, a spokesman said. In the state Senate, 11 of 15 Republicans have either called for the governor's resignation or said it would be better if he stepped down.
Mr. Rowland met with about 150 local Republican leaders at his official residence Wednesday evening, to apologize for his mistakes and seek their support.
