Citing a possible ''chilling effect'' on the criminal trial of Martha Stewart and her former stockbroker, a federal judge issued an unusual order yesterday barring reporters, courtroom artists and others from attending sessions at which prospective jurors would be questioned by lawyers for both sides.
The judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan, who is presiding over the case, issued the four-page order in response to an application from the United States attorney, David N. Kelley, ''with the consent of the defendants,'' the order states. She said that having reporters and others present during the questioning of prospective jurors, a process known as voir dire, might prevent them ''from giving full and frank answers to questions posed to them'' and noted that ''without such candor on the part of prospective jurors, there is a substantial risk that defendants' absolute right to a fair trial and an impartial jury will be impaired.''
Mr. Kelley said: ''We need to do what we can to protect the privacy of the jurors, to ensure their response to voir dire questions will be candid and won't be impeded by the fear that private or personal information will be released.''
Judge Cedarbaum said she would release transcripts of each closed session the day after it takes place, with the names of prospective jurors and ''deeply personal information'' deleted.
Lawyers for various news organizations that plan to cover the trial will seek to have the judge reconsider her position. Typically, the questioning of prospective jurors takes place in open court. Exceptions have included the trial of the boxing promoter Don King, as well as trials of people accused of terrorism.
''We believe that the order closing voir dire is both unconstitutional and unwarranted,'' said George Freeman, assistant general counsel for The New York Times Company. ''Just because this is a big case is no reason, and in fact is the worst reason, to change the normal presumption of openness of all court proceedings.''
