An advance team of Self-Defense Forces prepares to leave for Iraq on Friday, while the first Japanese troops to be deployed since World War II to a country embroiled in combat continued their training inside their snow-covered base here in northern Japan.
They have taken Arabic lessons, and learned about the Koran and Ramadan. They have focused, above all, on mastering their rules of engagement, the way in which they would respond to a hostile situation in southern Iraq.
While details of the rules of engagement are kept secret, they are said to be more muscular than the rules under which the forces have operated in the past. At the same time, because the Self-Defense Forces are not considered a military, they are weaker than those under which American and other soldiers operate.
In a country where militarism led to catastrophe in World War II and pacifism has defined the postwar period, the nature of its forces goes to the heart of what kind of country Japan wants to be. The governing party is expected to propose revisions to Japan's Constitution by 2005, and Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi has said that he wants the Self-Defense Forces to become a full-fledged military.
In addition to talk of helping the Iraqi people, the government is drawing, in stark terms it has not done in the past, a direct link between its forces' overseas activities and its national interests.
Shigeru Ishiba, the defense minister, noted in an interview that Japan imports 90 percent of its oil from the Middle East, the largest share of any country.
''The reason we can lead such an affluent life, such as using electricity to this extent,'' Mr. Ishiba said, waving his hands at ceiling lights in his office, ''driving cars as much as we like, avoiding the cold and having summer fruit in winter -- it is because we have stable oil supply from the Middle East, isn't it? To have other countries, including the United States, the United Kingdom and South Korea, do all the unpleasant, hard things, while we take the oil after Iraq becomes affluent and peaceful through the painful efforts of the rest of the world, I don't think that would be acceptable.''
Mr. Ishiba said the likelihood of encountering hostile situations had been low in previous overseas missions. ''However, this time the possibility is high,'' he said. ''Therefore, we have been pushing the conventional training further to make it thorough.''
Ground forces based here will make up the core of the 550 troops to be sent to southern Iraq, with the deployment expected to take place over the next couple of months. Considered noncombat troops, they will engage in relief activities, such as supplying water and medical services, and rebuilding schools and other infrastructure.
The forces will be better equipped than they have ever been on an overseas mission. But unlike a real military, they will probably operate under ''passive'' rules of engagement, said Tetsuya Nishimoto, a former chairman of the Joint Staff Council of the Self-Defense Forces. The rules would specify appropriate ways to respond to situations like suicide attacks, he said.
Iraq will be a big step in a series of smaller steps taken by the Self-Defense Forces in the last 10 years. If they are not yet a military, they are no longer the force they were a decade ago. Severely restricted by Japanese revulsion at the nation's military past, the forces' sole mission was to defend against an attack.
In an outline in 1995, after Japan was criticized for its so-called checkbook diplomacy during the Persian Gulf war, the forces' priorities were expanded to include, in order of importance: defending the nation; responding natural disasters; and helping to provide a secure environment.
Now the Japanese forces are undergoing another transformation, one that includes introducing two missile defense systems from the United States. With the focus shifting away from countering an invasion, for example, the number of tanks is expected to be cut in favor of raising spending to address missile and terrorist threats. A new defense program outline is expected to be released this year.
With time and generational change, the Japanese aversion to a military has also weakened. For decades after World War II, most Japanese regarded the forces with little respect, considering their main role as responding to natural disasters. An overseas mission was simply unimaginable.
Katsutoshi Kawano, 49, a rear admiral in the Maritime Self-Defense Force, said popular suspicion of the military was one of the reasons Japan did not take part in the Persian Gulf war of 1991.
''At the bottom of that debate was a sense of distrust among the public,'' he said. ''In those days, because of the memory of Japan's history, the prewar era and the war, people were allergic to the military, which was passed on to the Self-Defense Forces.''
In the last decade, with the forces taking part in peacekeeping missions in places like East Timor and Cambodia, they have gained the trust of the population, he said. Many young Japanese now join the forces because of the possibility of serving on overseas peacekeeping missions.
