The operators of a global Internet child pornography service that stretched from Eastern Europe to Mount Laurel, N.J., were indicted on Thursday, and federal and state authorities arrested 15 people in New Jersey who subscribed to the service.
Law enforcement agencies in New Jersey, as well as immigration and postal service officials, collaborated for more than a year on an investigation that focused on a Belarus-based company, Regpay Ltd. The authorities said Regpay operated about 50 child pornography Web sites. The company billed subscribers more than $3 million, according to the federal indictment unsealed Thursday.
Investigators traced the billings to 15 people in New Jersey who were charged with possession and receipt of child pornography. They include a retired Presbyterian priest, a campus chaplain, a family physician and three convicted sex offenders.
The operators of a Fort Lauderdale Internet billing service, Connections USA, were also indicted and charged with money-laundering. The company wired proceeds from credit card transactions on the Web sites to a bank in Riga, Latvia, where Regpay officials maintained accounts, the authorities said.
''The Internet has a global reach, but so do we,'' said Christopher J. Christie, the United States attorney for New Jersey. ''That should concern the peddlers of child pornography here and abroad, as well as the users who make companies like these flourish.''
Yahor Zalatarou, 25, of Minsk, Belarus, who was the president of Regpay and who was arrested last summer in Paris, was indicted on charges of conspiracy to distribute child pornography, distribution of child pornography, and money laundering, as was the company's marketing director, Alexei Buchnev, 26. Both are in Paris awaiting extradition. The company's technical administrator, Aliaksandr Boika, 29, who was charged with conspiracy to advertise and transport child pornography by computer, was arrested last summer in Madrid and is awaiting extradition to the United States. Tatsiana Sienko, 25, the company's administrative and financial assistant, was also indicted and is being sought in Belarus.
While undercover investigators received details about the operation from some of the Regpay officials in Paris, other details came from the chief executive of Connections USA, Eugene Valentine, 38, of Hollywood, Fla., and another official, Keith Czarnecki, of Oakland Park, Fla. In exchange for cooperating, they were allowed to plead guilty to less serious charges, the authorities said.
Mr. Christie, who called Regpay a ''major player'' in the child pornography business, said that in the past, being overseas somewhat insulated such companies from prosecution by United States authorities. But he added that the recent focus on terrorism ''has us reaching overseas more so, and as a result, investigating terrorism is helping us in investigating other things.''
