In theory, the worst kind of budgets for mayors are those with wrenching service cuts, big tax increases and a beggar's purse held open toward Albany and Washington. But Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who has built his mayoralty around taking a tough fiscal stand, may find that better times translate into tougher politics, especially in the year before he begins his re-election bid.
Yesterday, Mr. Bloomberg laid out in his preliminary budget address a plan free of substantial cuts to city services, modest in its request for federal and state aid and including a tax rebate for homeowners. There was even a provision that allows the city to pay upfront rather than borrow for some capital projects.
But while New Yorkers over the last two years have been forced to swallow budget cuts and gloomy fiscal talk, it is almost certain that Albany legislators, labor leaders, social policy advocates and others will now come swooping down on the west wing of City Hall, looking for some candy in the budget the mayor is proposing for the fiscal year that begins July 1.
Their reasoning will be simple: if the city can afford tax cuts and is sparing almost all city agencies from draconian measures, then it can afford raises for city workers and increases in certain services. At the same time, lawmakers in Albany, who stood with the mayor against Gov. George E. Pataki last year in  allowing the city to raise taxes, may well look askance at increasing aid for the city's schools or Medicaid.
In choosing between a fiscal crisis and a surplus, ''The first is harder, but the second is more painful,'' said former Mayor Edward I. Koch. ''It is harder to deal with a fiscal crisis; you want to spread the pain and protect the most vulnerable. But having to choose what you do with extra money -- that is more painful, because you end up with everyone who didn't get it hating you.''
Being hated is par for the course for any mayor. But Mr. Bloomberg is likely to face some additional pressure from those who will try to take his job in 2005.
It seemed almost impossible that just a year ago, he stood in the same spot in the Blue Room at City Hall at the tail end of a fiscal crisis, sharing details of a budget with substantial pain for all New Yorkers, including firehouse closings, and hinting at the need for more tax increases.
Yesterday, the mayor also moved miles from his first budget address, just months after the devastation of 9/11 and in the midst of a sinking economy, in which he said: ''The budget that we're going to show you hurts everybody. It is a 'spread your pain, no sacred cow' kind of a solution to our problem.''
Besides a $400 tax rebate for typical homeowners, yesterday's budget identified plenty of the sacred cows disdained in his first two years in office. In an extraordinary move for a preliminary budget, there were very few cuts to cultural institutions, libraries or services for the elderly.
So notable was Mr. Bloomberg's failure to enumerate cuts that one television reporter begged -- some mayoral aides would argue badgered -- the mayor to lay them on the line. ''We're not cutting services,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''That's what I tried to show you here. We are arguably increasing services by $381 million.''
On one hand, the mayor and City Council have budgeted their way toward these better times over the last two years, and have been aided by rising tax revenues and a slight increase in employment in the region. But Mr. Bloomberg has also clearly decided that he would rather try to please as many constituents as possible than substantially restructure the city's budget for the long term or truly rein in spending.
But no sooner did the mayor end his hourlong budget address than the critics began to rally, looking for their own bit of good news in the status quo numbers the mayor laid out. Those representing all sorts of New Yorkers -- rent payers, straphangers, the homeless, students, children, the elderly and more -- immediately criticized the mayor's plan, especially the tax rebate.
''It's wrong for Mayor Bloomberg to ask that city subway and bus riders pay the bill for balancing the city budget and providing a tax cut,'' said Gene Russianoff, the lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy group, referring to the city's plan to get the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to take over private bus lines.
Rose Anello, a spokeswoman for the Citizens' Committee for Children, said, ''We're concerned that the tax rebate might have been premature.''
Council members gathered before the mayor even gave his address, denouncing it. And afterward, Speaker Gifford Miller released a statement saying the budget ought to have some savings for renters, and not just for homeowners.
Although Mr. Bloomberg took a much more measured tone with labor leaders and offered a softened version of productivity requirements needed to gain raises in the current contract negotiations, his rosier budget picture did not go unnoticed by those leaders. ''Today's New York City police officers have been the most productive in history,'' said Patrick J. Lynch, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association. ''We look forward to negotiating an equitable contract with a city that recognizes these facts and is willing to pay officers a professional salary more in line with what other police make everywhere else.''
The mayor may also antagonize legislators, whom he needs to approve his unusual tax rebate package, and from whom he seeks school aid, a takeover of certain Medicaid bills and pieces of legislation that would save the city more money.
Mr. Bloomberg said yesterday that anyone who thinks the city has deep pockets now is mistaken, a notion echoed later by aides. ''We need to restrain spending, or we are going to bring about the same problems that we have had in years past,'' said his press secretary, Edward Skyler.
Still, Mr. Skyler went on, ''Budgeting is always a challenge and every year presents different challenges, but I don't think he would trade his hand this year for his hand from either of the last two years.''
News Analysis
