On Sept. 11, 2001, with everything in ruins, one figure remained in Liberty Park across the street from the World Trade Center. He was sitting hunched over, staring in his briefcase, a businessman who seemed to be in shock and despair. Rescue workers, it was reported, approached him in the chaos to offer assistance, only to discover that he was not a man at all, but a sculpture.
The sculpture, created by J. Seward Johnson Jr. and placed downtown in 1982, was titled ''Double Check.'' It was named for what it depicted: a businessman making final preparations before heading into a nearby office building. Before 9/11, the sculpture was simply part of the downtown landscape. Afterward, it became an icon, as newspaper and magazine photos showed it covered in ash and, later, by flowers, notes and candles left there by mourners and rescue workers. ''Double Check'' was a memorial to all those who perished. It was also a fitting metaphor for the city: though the sculpture had been knocked loose from its moorings, it had endured.
After the attacks, ''Double Check'' was stored behind a fence in Liberty Park. When plans for its future were not forthcoming, Mr. Johnson, who owns the sculpture and had lent it to Merrill Lynch for display in Liberty Park, took the work back to his studio. There he bronzed the commemorative objects left on the sculpture, adding them to the figure permanently. And there ''Double Check'' has stayed -- largely forgotten, overlooked in the creation of a large-scale memorial design for the World Trade Center site.
The time has come to bring ''Double Check'' back home. Adding the sculpture to the redeveloped Ground Zero would help counter one of the main criticisms of the site's memorial designs, including the winning one: they all seem too remote and impersonal, a passive, abstract take on a visceral experience seared into our memories and hearts. What's more, it would give designers the opportunity to incorporate within the site an important element of the world that existed there before the 9/11.
While it would be awkward to suggest inserting ''Double Check'' into the layout of the winning design -- this redevelopment process has more than its share of forced marriages -- a place could surely be found for it on the redeveloped grounds of the World Trade Center or in its former spot in Liberty Park. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Gov. George E. Pataki and other leaders of the downtown reconstruction effort should publicly commit to finding a home for ''Double Check.''
For years Mr. Johnson's works were dismissed by the art world as being too literal. But it is precisely this quality that makes ''Double Check'' so powerful. The sculpture is a representational depiction of a mundane figure that has transcended its origins and achieved symbolic power. Like New York itself, it has weathered the storm -- and come away transformed but intact.
Stuart Miller is co-author of ''Blue Guide New York'' and ''The Other Islands of New York City.''
