From the first preview on Oct. 28 until it closes on Sunday, some 80,000 people will have seen Jack O'Brien's production of Shakespeare's compacted ''Henry IV'' (Parts 1 and 2), courtesy of Lincoln Center Theater at the Vivian Beaumont.
Most of them, it seems safe to say, will have enjoyed themselves immensely. Certainly most of the critics did: ''Glorious,'' Ben Brantley wrote in the first paragraph of his review in The New York Times. I enjoyed it, too, enough to hang in there for the full 3 hours 45 minutes. (One of the joys of no longer being a critic with a beat, obligated to review a show, is that you can slip away early if you are not engaged or amused.) For me, though, something was missing, something that held the evening short of full satisfaction. But I couldn't quite figure out what that missing element was.
I'm not sure I know yet, but serendipity has ridden to the rescue. First, I saw David Gordon's dance-theater piece ''Dancing Henry Five'' last weekend at St. Mark's Church. Second, inspired by Mr. Gordon, I rented the DVD of Laurence Olivier's 1944 film version of ''Henry V.''
What was missing at the Beaumont was that last dollop of style and spirit. In the inward-looking moments, Olivier's acting in the film sounds almost contemporary, with all the intimacy that the microphone permits. There is the towering scene in which the disguised king wanders among his exhausted troops in the predawn hours before the Battle of Agincourt, and the scene in which Henry sexily seduces Princess Katharine of France (Renée Asherson).
But in the big public moments, when Henry is delivering his stirring exhortations (''No King of England, if not King of France!''; ''We few, we happy few, we band of brothers''), Olivier rises to a level of rapturous rhetoric that in a lesser actor would seem downright hammy. This is ''thea-tuh'' with a capital T and several exclamation points. But at this level of excellence, it's thrilling theatuh, harking back to the 19th century if not before, since the film's framing scenes are set in a simulation of the Globe Theater in Shakespeare's day. Kenneth Branagh's 1989 version is more modern but not better.
Perhaps my problem with Mr. O'Brien's ''Henry IV'' was the final failure of American actors to rise to a comparably convincing level of rhetoric (as Kathryn Hunter did as Richard III at the Globe last summer, for instance). Or perhaps some churlish members of American audiences, like me, refuse to accept their doing it.
Either way, the acting slipped into the overwrought on one extreme and the underplayed on the other. And Mr. O'Brien's pacing, always pressing forward, seemed to undercut the quieter moments.
Once again, this is not to say there wasn't much pleasure to be derived from the evening. The battle scenes were terrific, and nearly every actor, considered individually, was pretty terrific, too. That includes Kevin Kline's much-admired but still controversial Falstaff. I liked nearly every line-reading yet found the performance too muted and calculating, with Mr. Kline's irrepressible, shrewd intelligence peeping out from behind every whisker. There's a delicate line between a creative rethinking and a loss of idiomatic authenticity.
The Lincoln Center Theater compaction of two plays into one is by Dakin Matthews, who in a nice echo of Globe practice also acts in the show. Although much is cut and shuffled, it is no more radical than what Olivier did to ''Henry V,'' cutting it nearly in half. Or, certainly, than Mr. Gordon's radically reduced transformation (the comic bits cut out, to start with).
Each version served its purpose, however. Lincoln Center and Mr. O'Brien wanted a workable ''Henry IV'' that a modern American audience could sit through in a single evening. Olivier was shadowed by several commercially disastrous Shakespeare films from the 1930's and by World War II: the premiere was on Nov. 22, 1944, the evening after London's last blackout.
Olivier udpated a few words (''head'' for ''pate''), interpolated Falstaff's rejection from the end of ''Henry IV, Part 2'' (as a haunted memory of Falstaff on his death bed), and cut for cinematic brevity and for patriotism: many of Henry's more calculating motives are shorn to present a stirring vision of a British king in victorious foreign combat.
Mr. Gordon has always been a theater man and a performance artist as well as a dancer and choreographer, and his wife, Valda Setterfield, is an actor as well as a dancer. ''Dancing Henry Five'' by his Pick Up Performance Company may have been presented by the Danspace Project, but it is not ''pure'' dance, whatever that is. (The human body brings its own blessed contaminant to any choreographic abstraction.)
Its lack of twisty ingenuity has even occasioned some dubiousness among dance critics as to whether it's real dance, or all dance. But for me, its postmodern layering of dance and theater, past and present, text and play and the Olivier film was thrilling, no matter which artistic pigeonhole you choose for it.
With only seven dancers and with Ms. Setterfield filling in for Shakespeare's narrating Chorus, this was a bare-bones production that created a powerful epic mood. It did so through the dancing, of course, but also through recycled props and set pieces, through William Walton's lush, slightly cheesy but still touching recorded music (from the Olivier film), and through audio excerpts from the film and other historical performances, all bathed in Jennifer Tipton's bold lighting.
Some of Mr. Gordon's pointed references to contemporary events seemed a little jarring, although Shakespeare has a character question Henry's ambitions in the face of the horrors of war. The loss of the humorous scenes was compensated for in part by Ms. Setterfield's wit, and allowed the action to sweep along over a tight, uninterrupted, one-hour span. And the dancers, led by Tadej Brdnik, every inch the warrior king, and Karen Graham, manly as a soldier and fetching as Katharine, invested Mr. Gordon's choreography (for choreography it was, after all) with just the right blend of courtly grace and martial vigor.
But other than that I enjoyed myself more at St. Mark's Church than at the Vivian Beaumont, can Mr. Gordon offer any lessons for Mr. O'Brien, or Mr. Brdnik any for Mr. Kline or for Michael Hayden, the first-rate prince in ''Henry IV''?
Not really, I suppose. Mr. Gordon's piece will never attract the attention of 80,000 people over 78 performances; it's too esoteric for that. One wouldn't necessarily want to encourage Lincoln Center Theater to venture onto the wilder shores of directorial weirdness. Still, a little more freshness, a little more creative boldness, even a little greater effort to be true to what American actors can do best, might have lifted ''Henry IV'' to an even higher level than it has undeniably achieved.
REVERBERATIONS
