Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein said yesterday that he would create intervention teams to provide tutoring to second and third graders after school, on weekends and on holidays, and an intensive but voluntary new summer school program as part of a plan to impose strict promotion standards for third graders.
The plan, announced last week, seeks to end a practice known as social promotion, in which students advance from grade to grade despite failing to meet academic standards. The city estimates that about 15,000 children will be told to repeat third grade next year based on test scores, four times as many as were left back last year.
Mr. Klein said yesterday that the city had earmarked an additional $25 million to provide special tutoring in small groups and summer school classes of no more than 15 students.
But some education experts are questioning the merits of the whole plan, warning that similar efforts, including one in New York in the 1980's, cost a lot and failed. And yesterday some critics pointed out that holding a large number of third graders back would guarantee a huge jump in scores on the fourth-grade statewide exams in 2005, when Mr. Bloomberg is up for re-election.
''It is awfully politically convenient to not have your lowest-performing kids take the state exams,'' said Eva S. Moskowitz, a Manhattan Democrat who is chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee. ''I don't want to impugn motives, but I think it's important to observe that in an election year, fourth-grade scores are going to look a lot better.''
Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott and other city officials denied any political factor and dismissed the criticism as cynical. Mr. Klein said that failing students had to be held back. ''I am confident that this approach will have significant long-term benefits for our students,'' he said in a speech at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. ''We simply cannot continue to push through the system children who don't have the skills to succeed in school or in the job market.''
Mr. Klein's aides said the initiatives would cost at least $25 million. And the chancellor again urged state officials to comply with a court ruling that said the state must increase education aid to the city. ''I call on our state officials,'' he said, ''to provide us with the resources necessary to get the job done.''
But educators and other public officials involved with the city schools said that the price tag would probably climb to well over $100 million, when the expense of having thousands of students repeat a grade is factored in. The city spends about $8,000 to $10,000 per student in the elementary grades.
Mr. Klein promised to train teachers to do more for struggling students. ''Teachers will use differentiated instruction for students with different needs and use specific techniques and materials to assist struggling students,'' he said in the speech. And he said he would create ''Student Success Teams'' to intervene with extra tutoring in small groups.
He also said these students would get additional instruction ''either before or after school -- and sometimes on vacation days and on weekends.'' And he said the new summer program, the ''Summer Success Academy,'' would focus on reading, writing and math.
Randi Weingarten, the president of the teachers' union, said ending social promotion was a laudable goal, but hard and expensive to do.
''The implementation is much harder and more important than setting the policy goal,'' she said in a statement. She said the union had long supported most of the chancellor's ideas: early intervention, extra instruction, better summer school. But, she said: ''The trickier part is implementing that promotional gate, helping kids who fall behind despite our best efforts, without stigmatizing them.''
Councilwoman Moskowitz said the city had to be more creative in its efforts to help struggling students, by improving prekindergarten programs, identifying learning disabilities earlier and perhaps having more nuanced grade levels, like a first grade-plus for students repeating first grade. ''There is a consensus among educators that policies against social promotion don't work and I think that needs to be taken seriously,'' she said.
Many education experts said it is a mistake to hold children back, a practice called grade retention in education lingo. But they said it was just as problematic to push pupils ahead without extra help.
Research shows that students forced to repeat one grade are much more likely to drop out of school, and those forced to repeat twice are almost certain not to graduate.
Lorrie Shepard, the dean of the School of Education at the University of Colorado at Boulder and editor of ''Flunking Grades: Research and Policies of Retention'' (Falmer Press, 1999), said most studies found no benefit to holding students back.
''What I think the retention literature suggests is you should send them to fourth grade with intensive help rather than holding them back with intensive help,'' she said. ''But ideally what you would do is provide the intensive help earlier.''
Mary Brabeck, the dean of the Steinhardt School of Education at New York University, said that holding children back could be used to manipulate test results. ''I think what everybody is worried about is retention becomes a way to manage scores,'' she said. And she called the impact on dropout rates alarming.
Michele Cahill, an advisor to Chancellor Klein, said that although fourth graders take a more publicized statewide test, citywide test data for third graders left back under the new policy would still be available for voters to analyze.
In his speech, Mr. Klein pointedly demanded that graduate schools of education in New York City do more to help the public schools. ''The complex issues presented by training teachers to teach in inner-city schools require an ongoing involvement with those schools, not a professor's removed academic distance from them,'' he said.
