Here are some favorite Schumann recordings of the classical-music critics of The New York Times. Availability is hard to determine in the current state of the market. Most of the recordings here can be found on Amazon.com or in major record stores. CD's range in price from $12.99 for one CD to $21.99 for a two-CD set and $40.99 for four CD's. (An introduction appears on Page 1 of Weekend.)
SYMPHONIES (4), VIOLIN CONCERTO, ANDANTE AND VARIATIONS. Leonidas Kavakos, violinist; Wolfgang Sawallisch, conductor and pianist; others; Philadelphia Orchestra (with Clara Schumann songs, sung by Thomas Hampson; Philadelphia Orchestra; three CD's).
PIANO QUINTET, PIANO QUARTET IN E FLAT. Menahem Pressler, pianist; Emerson String Quartet (Deutsche Grammophon 445 848-2).
STRING QUARTETS NOS. 1 AND 3. Zehetmair Quartet (ECM New Series 1793).
VIOLIN SONATAS NOS. 1 AND 2. Gidon Kremer, violinist; Martha Argerich, pianist (Deutsche Grammophon 419 235-2).
''DAS PARADIES UND DIE PERI,'' ''REQUIEM FÜR MIGNON,'' ''NACHTLIED.'' Barbara Bonney, soprano; Christoph Prégardien, tenor; others; Monteverdi Choir; Orchestre Révolutionnaire et Romantique, conducted by John Eliot Gardiner (Deutsche Grammophon Archiv 289 457 660-2; two CD's).
I DON'T get it: this eternal carping about unimaginative orchestration and awkward voice-leading in Schumann's symphonies. These ebullient creations are what they are, and they work for me every time -- in a good performance, that is.
At the moment, I'm particularly fond of Wolfgang Sawallisch with the Philadelphia Orchestra in performances recorded live last season and repeated at Carnegie Hall. There is nothing here either lightweight or heavy-handed, and the freshness of Mr. Sawallisch's approach is all the more remarkable given the parlous state of his health over the last year; the Second was recorded late in the season, and he began canceling appearances soon after. The ''Spring'' Symphony performance is a special treasure, quite possibly addictive. Mr. Sawallisch, a superb pianist, is heard in that role in a chamber work, the Andante and Variations, and in songs by Clara Schumann.
In advance, Teldec has issued a memento of another Carnegie series: Daniel Barenboim's with the Staatskapelle Berlin next week. I find these interpretations of the symphonies less persuasive at first hearing, a little fussy and studied in their pushings and pullings. But I'm eager to hear whether those gestures and others might sound more spontaneous in the Carnegie concerts.
An enduring favorite among the symphonies is Christoph von Dohnanyi's set with the Cleveland Orchestra on Decca. In some ways, this orchestra -- lithe, clear and precise -- has long been an ideal Schumann instrument, whether led by George Szell, Mr. Dohnanyi or, presumably, the relative newcomer Franz Welser-Möst. (The Szell recordings on Sony are also classics.) The orchestra's virtues are most apparent in the mercurial scherzo of the Second Symphony, which Mr. Dohnanyi liked to carry in his trunk as an encore.
Although Schumann's chamber music also comes in for some carping, the Piano Quintet is almost universally recognized as a masterpiece. To the worthy renditions cited elsewhere on this page, I will add the collaboration between Menahem Pressler and the Emerson String Quartet. These are all chamber musicians of abundant gifts, wide experience and distinctive styles, and it is fascinating to hear the musical ground shift between Mr. Pressler's relative mellowness and the Emerson's characteristic fire: a scintillating mix.
In music that does not strain to sell itself, fire is often a good thing; conviction is essential. Those qualities pervade the other chamber discs listed here as well. The Zehetmair Quartet's performances make a persuasive case for two of Schumann's string quartets, especially the First, as masterworks. Gidon Kremer and Martha Argerich cannot do as much with the slighter material of two violin sonatas, but their urgent performances make the works sound eminently respectable and, more important, appealing.
Veering way off the beaten path, John Eliot Gardiner offers lovely performances of three Schumann choral pieces dripping with good tunes.
''Das Paradies und die Peri'' is a large-scale work in three parts, and though it cannot be said that the drama is maintained consistently, each part builds to a compelling finale. The melting lullaby that ends the second part is itself worth the price of a disc, maybe both.
