It's tempting to call ''Artists and Prints: Masterworks From the Museum of Modern Art'' the Hit Parade of Greats, as it includes some of the best-known, best-loved examples in the medium by some of the 20th century's most renowned artists.
Assembled by Deborah Wye, the Modern's chief curator of prints and illustrated books, from the more than 40,000 works on paper in the museum's collection, the exhibition has been chosen to represent a wide range of late 19th- and 20th-century styles, periods and techniques. And while the Modern's outpost in Queens is buzzing with other shows, this one graces the AXA Gallery in Midtown Manhattan.
It is devoted to prints made by eight virtuosos: Toulouse-Lautrec, Munch, Nolde, Picasso, Bourgeois, Johns, Lichtenstein and Baselitz. With its appealing diversity and topnotch examples, the show is a fine primer of printmaking for the casual viewer and a delight for connoisseurs. Yet there are some surprises, particularly in the contemporary field.
The most versatile of modern printmakers is of course Picasso, whose nimble segues from theme to theme, mood to mood and medium to medium always amaze. Etchings, woodcuts, lithographs and linoleum cuts were all part of his repertory of no fewer than 2,000 printed images.
The span here is from a very familiar Blue Period etching, ''The Frugal Repast'' (1904), said to be his first print, depicting an impoverished couple at their meager meal, to ''Still Life With Glass Under the Lamp'' (1962), a crisp, angular linoleum cut that uses his own device of a one-block process for color printing. In another stunner, a series of lithographs from 1945-46 progressively reduce his realistic drawing of a full-bodied bull to a witty outline.
Lithography, in which an image is drawn with greasy crayon or tusche directly on the printing plate, makes its most flamboyant appearance here in the work of Toulouse-Lautrec, famous for his simplified, highly stylized designs for posters and book illustrations. Among his dazzlers is ''The Seated Clowness'' (1896), a portrait in well-keyed colors of the Montmartre entertainer Cha-U-Kao.
A particularly appropriate Lautrec image for this show is that of the dancer Jane Avril, a close friend of the artist, examining a print in an atelier as the celebrated master printer Père Cotelle works a press nearby. The 1893 print served as a cover for ''L'Estampe Originale,'' a series of quarterly albums of original prints by artists of the day.
Woodcut, lithography and etching were favored by Edvard Munch and Emil Nolde for their Expressionist prints. Lithography was Munch's choice for his famous ''Sick Child'' (1885-86), the deathly ethereal face of a young girl inspired by his sister's early demise from tuberculosis. It is shown in a black-and-white and a color version, his first attempt at color lithography.
Among works here by Nolde, the sprightliest is ''The Young Couple'' (1913), his first foray into color lithography. Shown are three versions, in red, green and blue, of two people in lively discourse, their features and bodies wittily observed.
In our time, one of the most adroit users of lithography has been Jasper Johns. His signature imagery -- maps, flags, targets, numbers, cross-hatching -- has been perpetuated by etching and other techniques, but lithography has been his primary technique.
He works and reworks his enigmatic motifs, often translating paintings and sculptures or parts thereof into prints and vice versa. One of his most popular early lithographs, ''Ale Cans'' (1964), shows two unopened Ballantine containers on a shelf against a dark void. An early attempt to render three-dimensional objects in the print medium, it was taken from a representation of his 1960 sculpture ''Painted Bronze.''
A much more complicated print, ''Decoy'' (1971), with layers of photographic transfers and brushwork, including lettering, the reproduction of a body part and a section of an ale can, involved 18 plates. Mr. Johns took advantage of a large offset proofing press, which made drawing on the plate much easier but still functioned as a lithography process.
The print differs somewhat, but not a lot, from a painting of the same subject made at the same time.
Although Louise Bourgeois does lithographs, too, her work in this show involves intaglio processes -- etching and engraving and drypoint -- that call for the scratching and scraping of copper plates. She began to make prints in the 1940's at Atelier 17, the New York workshop of the printmaker Stanley William Hayter, more or less abandoning the practice for sculpture several years later. She came back to it in the 1980's.
Her lively and whimsical subject matter, seen here in books and prints, is self-referential, but few artists have brought off such subjective issues with as much panache. Two witty versions of herself as a zaftig ''Ste. Sebastienne'' in black-and-white drypoint (1990-93) show her as a resilient target of assaults by arrow. ''Triptych for the Red Room'' (1994) involves a hair-raising but funny struggle between Man and Woman. Ms. Bourgeois may have contributed nothing new to the technical exploration of prints, but she has used the medium to telling effect.
On the other hand, Roy Lichtenstein brought to fine art the devices of commercial printing: Benday dots, bold outlining, flat areas of shrill color. He made use of them in his comic strip knockoffs and later pastiches of themes from ''high art'' and art history. His work of the 1960's at the Gemini G.E.L. workshop in Los Angeles with the master printer Ken Tyler (later to found Tyler Graphics) helped revive interest in American printmaking.
The sampling of Lichtensteins here, done in lithography and litho with screenprint, include such classics as ''Sweet Dreams, Baby!'' (1965), a comic-strip fist bouncing with a ''Pow!'' off a victim's neck, and ''Peace Through Chemistry'' (1970), a heavily stylized mural with a chemist's hand grasping a beaker, which is one of a series taking off on the classic W.P.A. mural commissions of the 1930's.
Georg Baselitz, an artist of broad experience in the print medium, is represented by several works made in the last three decades, among them the very large linoleum cut of 1977, ''Nude With Three Arms.'' Using oil paint as a medium along with printer's ink, it depicts one of his disturbing upside-down figures, done in a sketchy but unusually graceful manner, with one arm pointing out -- into the future? -- and the other two close by his side. It's a knockout work that should appeal even to Baselitz's nonadmirers.
No point pulling punches here: this is a beautiful show.
''Artists and Prints: Masterworks From the Museum of Modern Art'' is at the AXA Gallery, 787 Seventh Avenue, at 51st Street, Manhattan, (212) 554-4810, through Jan. 26
ART REVIEW
