Israel sealed off the Gaza Strip on Thursday, keeping out thousands of Palestinians with Israeli permits a day after a Palestinian suicide bomber killed four Israelis near the Erez crossing point.
Israel also closed the Erez industrial area, where the attack occurred and where at least 4,000 Palestinians work. Military officials said it was not certain how long the areas would remain closed.
The Israeli Army said that for now it would allow out of Gaza only those Palestinians who needed to leave for ''humanitarian reasons.''
As Israel buried its dead -- two soldiers, a member of the border police, and a security guard -- Gazans marched in a funeral procession for the bomber, a 22-year-old mother of two.
It was the first suicide attack by the Islamist group Hamas in four months, and its first employing a woman. Other Palestinian factions, including Islamic Jihad, had used women as suicide bombers, but Hamas leaders had previously argued that Islam did not permit doing so, as long as men were available.
Hamas leaders praised the bomber, Reem al-Reyashi, and thousands joined in the funeral march.
But in a break with customary practice, Ms. Reyashi's family did not set up a condolence tent to receive visitors on Thursday. Hamas erected a tent outside a mosque in her Gaza City neighborhood, but few members of her family or other visitors were seen there.
''I don't support what she did,'' said Yousef Awad, 31, Ms. Reyashi's brother-in-law. ''It's not accepted for a woman to do that. This doesn't exist in our traditions.''
Ms. Reyashi's brother, Ayman, 35, said: ''She was very religious. She prayed all the time.'' He said he was shocked by the bombing.
Family members of Palestinian assailants sometimes fear Israeli reprisals after their attacks.
Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a violent offshoot of Yasir Arafat's Fatah faction, claimed joint responsibility for the bombing.
While some Gazans privately criticized the attack, the mainstream Palestinian leadership did not. Though they generally condemn attacks on Israeli civilians inside Israel, Mr. Arafat and other Palestinian leaders seldom criticize violence against Israeli soldiers and settlers in the West Bank and Gaza, which Israel has occupied since 1967.
On Wednesday, the army said it was revising the charges against an Israeli soldier accused of shooting a British activist and photography student, Tom Hurndall, after Mr. Hurndall died Tuesday of his wounds.
Witnesses said Mr. Hurndall was shot in the head on April 11 as he tried to protect Palestinian children near an Israeli roadblock in the Gaza Strip. He died in a London hospital after lingering in a coma.
Mr. Hurndall, 22, was a member of the International Solidarity Movement, a group that uses nonviolent tactics to impede Israeli Army actions in the West Bank and Gaza. The Israeli soldier suspected in the shooting was indicted Monday on six counts, including aggravated bodily assault, but with Mr. Hurndall's death the charges will be revised.
