The Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said yesterday that he would seek the death penalty against two men charged with kidnapping, rape and murder in the death of a Hunter College student in East Flatbush in April.
The student, Romona Moore, 21, was last seen on April 24 when she left her parents' East Flatbush home to get dinner at a Burger King. After a telephone tip on May 10, her body was found wrapped in a blanket about three blocks from her home.
The two men, Troy Hendrix, 19, and Kayson Pearson, 21, are also charged with kidnapping and sexual assault in an attack on a 15-year-old girl, who escaped and notified the police, about two days after Ms. Moore disappeared. The men are charged with acting together in both incidents.
In State Supreme Court in Brooklyn yesterday, an assistant district attorney, Heide E. Mason, asked Justice Cheryl Chambers to authorize the prosecution to get DNA samples from the defendants.
Ms. Mason said the samples would be compared with blood and semen samples retrieved from what she said was the crime scene, a house on Snyder Avenue where Mr. Hendrix lived with his extended family. He had a small apartment in the back of the building.
The second victim, whose name was not disclosed, provided the police with a harrowing account of being kidnapped and restrained for hours with duct tape before she got away. She led the police to Mr. Hendrix.
Mr. Pearson was arrested on May 21, after the police stormed what they described as a barricaded bedroom in the Yonkers apartment of a young woman he had recently met.
Both men have pleaded not guilty.
Ms. Moore was a psychology major at Hunter. Her family, immigrants from Guyana, have complained that the police did not pay adequate attention to her disappearance.
Mr. Hynes said the defendants would be the 10th and 11th he has sought the death sentence against since New York's capital punishment law took effect in 1995. In only one of the earlier cases, involving a Brooklyn killer named Darrell Harris, did a jury impose the death penalty. That sentence was overturned by New York's Court of Appeals, and he was later sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole.
The trial of Mr. Hendrix and Mr. Pearson is expected in about a year.
