FOURTH-AND-26 is the password here this week. The City of Brotherly Love is suddenly the City of Fourth-and-26.
It's not an address. It's the down and yardage that confronted the Eagles last Sunday against the Green Bay Packers, the desperate down and yardage that is seldom converted for a first down. But last Sunday, quarterback Donovan McNabb completed a 28-yard pass to wide receiver Freddie Mitchell for the first down that led to the tying field goal in the final seconds of regulation before the Eagles won in overtime, 20-17.
''But it doesn't mean nothin','' Mitchell was saying after Wednesday's practice, ''if we don't win.''
Meaning win it all. If the Eagles don't get by the Carolina Panthers in the National Football Conference championship game here Sunday, or if they don't win Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1 in Houston, fourth-and-26 will quickly be forgotten. More than anybody, Mitchell knows that.
''I made a fourth-down catch against San Francisco,'' he said, referring to a fourth-and-9 situation in the next-to-last game of the regular season, ''but we lost, so nobody remembers.''
Nobody but Freddie Mitchell. Nobody but this 5-foot-11, 184-pound wisp of a wide receiver who knows that McNabb threw the fourth-and-26 pass to him for that vital first down. When Mitchell was asked after Sunday's game if fate, which has seldom smiled on the Eagles, had intervened on that play, he had a quick answer.
''We don't need fate; we have 5,'' he said, referring to McNabb's uniform number. ''Donovan has been the leader of this team all year and he's our guy. This win is Donovan McNabb's.''
But a pass is like the tango; it takes two. No matter who throws it, somebody has to catch it, or it's just another incompletion, another quickly forgotten moment. On the fourth-and-26, McNabb had other receivers out there but, Mitchell said, ''I just knew 5 was coming to me.'' He caught the pass and held on to it despite, in his words, being ''crushed'' by the Packers' defensive backs.
''Hollywood Freddie,'' Eagles cornerback Troy Vincent said. ''He's been making plays like that all year. Taking hits, holding on to the ball. Heart. That's heart.''
That's Hollywood Freddie, a live act before and after the Eagles took him with the 25th choice in the first round of the 2001 college draft.
As an all-American wide receiver at U.C.L.A., he introduced himself to entertainment celebrities, including Mick Jagger and the actress Elizabeth Hurley, as well as several movie producers. He has been the host of a radio show on a Philadelphia country-music station. At Kathleen High School in Lakeland, Fla., where he also lettered in baseball, basketball and cross-country, he announced the morning news on the school's closed-circuit television.
''I was a natural back then,'' he once said with a laugh.
Natural athlete, too. As an outfielder on the U.C.L.A. baseball team that shared the Pac-10 title in 2000, he was twice selected in the baseball draft, by the Tampa Bay Devil Rays and by the Chicago White Sox. He's also a yoga devotee and an off-season world traveler to Europe and South America.
''Brazil's my favorite,'' he has said, ''but I'm not a true tourist. I make sure to hang out with all the locals.''
He's not a true third wide receiver, either. When the Eagles introduced their offensive unit before last Sunday's game, Mitchell hung out with the starters. His name wasn't announced over the public-address system, but unannounced, he ran out there with the starting wide receivers, James Thrash and Todd Pinkston.
''We're called mediocre,'' Mitchell said of the Eagles' receivers, ''but I'm happy we're mediocre. We've been succeeding all year. We're mediocre, but we're in the championship game.''
One reason for the ''mediocre'' label is that McNabb distributes passes as if he were a point guard, which he was as a reserve on the Syracuse basketball team. During the season, seven Eagles had 20 or more receptions. Thrash was high with 49 for 558 yards, running back Brian Westbrook (out after surgery for a torn triceps) had 37 for 332, Pinkston had 36 for 575, running back Duce Staley had 36 for 382 and Mitchell had 35 for 498.
''Being a receiver, everybody wants 80 catches,'' Mitchell said, ''but you've got to be able to adapt. You've got to be coachable.''
In last Sunday's playoff game, Mitchell caught only one other pass, a 9-yarder. But fourth-and-26 will always be on his résumé.
''The restaurant I went to after the game, it was crazy,'' he said. ''When I walked in, I got a standing ovation. There's a lot of love going around. Everybody's showing love now, but we know that's the end of that if you're losing.''
In historical perspective, his fourth-and-26 catch has been compared to the Catch -- 49ers wide receiver Dwight Clark's leaping grab of Joe Montana's pass in the end zone late in the 1981 N.F.C. championship game against Dallas.
''But Mr. Clark,'' Mitchell said, ''went on to win the championship and then to win the Super Bowl.''
For Fourth-and-26 to be etched in Philadelphia's memory, the Eagles have to win the Super Bowl.
Sports of The Times
