Help Comes In All Sizes
On Monday thousands of organizations will celebrate the birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. by reciting his words and recalling his philosophy. Children for Children Foundation will do it a bit differently: by imitating his actions.
''We promote the idea of youth volunteerism,'' said Jenni Henry, coordinator of Children for Children's annual Grow Involved event. This year, she said, ''we're going to tie it into Dr. Martin Luther King's dream of a lifetime devoted to service.''
Grow Involved, a day of volunteering by children and teenagers, began in 2003 when Children for Children started kidsforcommunity.org, a database devoted to youth volunteer activities in New York City. On Monday, Grow Involved will take place at Chelsea Market, where it will also feature a reading of a children's biography of King, the announcement of winners in a children's and teenagers' poetry and art contest about his life and a slide show with quotations from him. A pertinent example: ''Everyone can be great because everyone can serve.''
About 10 agencies will offer projects. For instance, Dorot, which helps the elderly, will recruit children to make birthday cards for the aged. Children's Hope Foundation's Purls for Hope will enlist them in knitting blankets for babies born to mothers with H.I.V./AIDS. Homes for the Homeless will seek volunteers to make fleece scarves. ''It's like a fair,'' Ms. Henry said. ''Projects go on at different tables, and kids can go from table to table.''
Refreshments, materials and even music will be provided. Youngsters must be accompanied by adults, who are encouraged to pitch in. After all, volunteerism knows no age limits.
Grow Involved, Monday from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. at Chelsea Market, 75 Ninth Avenue, near 16th Street. Free. Information: (212) 759-1462 or www.childrenforchildren.org.
A Recipe for Fun
Cooking in relation to books usually means shady business. But in the hands of the playwright Elizabeth Swados, it means funny business, as well as an opportunity to savor the playful pleasures of reading.
Ms. Swados and a company of young actors will demonstrate that this weekend in ''Books Cook 2: Animals, Aliens and Not So Agreeable Kids,'' a reading in SoHo of about a dozen picture books from Scholastic. A sequel to Ms. Swados's ''Books Cook'' last year, this show will be just as boisterous, with titles ranging from Jenny Samuels's ''Nose Like a Hose'' (the autobiography of an elephant) to Keith Graves's ''Three Nasty Gnarlies,'' which Ms. Swados described as ''the modern-day mutant 'Ugly Duckling.' ''
The show will not feature singing, but plenty of noise. ''The books have lots of sound,'' Ms. Swados said, bursting into gurgles, swooshes and growls. A drummer will provide rhythm, and the actors will use many props, including a hose, a plastic pool, stilts, food and a mattress that will come into play when they do Jane Yolen and Mark Teague's ''How Do Dinosaurs Get Well Soon?''
''The dinosaurs' being sick is all being done on the mattress,'' Ms. Swados said. ''Kids love it.''
The children will also be involved in proving Ms. Swados's thesis: that reading can be active, not passive. ''They'll be making sounds, dancing, maybe pushing a pie in someone's face,'' she said. ''You never know.''
''Book Cooks 2,'' tomorrow at 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m. at the Scholastic Auditorium, 557 Broadway, between Prince and Spring Streets, SoHo. Free, but reservations required: (212) 389-3800.
Best Picture(s)
Members of an organization in the western United States have been scrutinizing movies for engaging stories, powerful performances and original ideas. None, however, have the Oscars in mind, although they are reviewing films for an important group of moviegoers: children.
These are the juries for the Coalition for Quality Children's Media in Santa Fe, N.M. Each year the coalition presents the Kids First! Film and Video Festival in cities nationwide, showing works that have ''no gratuitous violence, no bias, no unsafe behavior and no condescension toward children,'' said Ranny Levy, the coalition's founder and director.
That sounds like a tall order, but the coalition has selected more than 60 such films, from an adaptation of Janell Cannon's best-selling picture book ''Stellaluna,'' about a lost baby fruit bat, to ''Jumping for Joy,'' which Ms. Levy described as ''a 'Bend It Like Beckham' kind of title'' for 8- to 15-year-olds, about a girl who's mistaken for a boy and put on the boys' basketball team.
This weekend the festival begins a six-week stay in the New York metropolitan area, with screenings tomorrow and Sunday in Manhattan, Babylon, Great Neck and Port Washington, N.Y. Not every film is shown in every city, and the Chelsea Cinemas will show four: ''Jumping for Joy,'' ''The Wild Thornberrys'' (in Spanish, for ages 5 to 8) and ''Good Sports Gang No. 1: Elliott the Invincible,'' about a boy who has been ostracized (ages 5 to 8). The last is ''Little Polar Bear,'' a preschool video about the unusual friendship between a polar bear and a seal. ''You could translate that into cultural diversity,'' Ms. Levy said.
Kids First! festival, through Feb. 28 in the New York area. Tomorrow and Sunday at Chelsea Cinemas, 260 West 23rd Street; Squire Cinemas, Great Neck; Babylon Cinemas, Babylon; and Soundview Cinemas, Port Washington. Schedule: kidsfirst.org or (505) 989-8076. All-day tickets: $5; children, $2, except ''Little Polar Bear'' screenings, free.
Family Fare
