IN the fall of 2002, Morgan Stanley's luxury goods analyst, Claire Kent, issued a report saying that LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton's financial results had been surprisingly good and predicting that the company's share price would rise 24 percent within 18 months.
The report became a crucial part of the evidence that persuaded a French court this week to order Morgan Stanley to pay LVMH at least 30 million euros, or $38 million.
How could that be? Ms. Kent's valuation models called for a higher stock price, but she reduced it by 10 percent because ''management has destroyed value'' in the past.
Still, she forecast a big gain. But that essential fact was ignored. Since LVMH's market value was 27 billion euros, the judges found, ''the discount of 10 percent recommended by Morgan Stanley represents 2.7 billion euros.''
The judgment for 30 million euros is only the beginning. The court appointed an examiner to recommend further damages and told him to determine what part of LVMH's spending from 1999 through 2002 -- on everything from advertising to borrowing -- was paid ''to maintain its image and to thwart the denigration of which it was the victim because of the actions'' of Morgan Stanley.
A day later, another French company, Sodexho Alliance, a worldwide catering company, went on the warpath against another American investment bank, the Smith Barney unit of Citigroup.
Sodexho plays hardball: In the United States last year, it went to the Supreme Court in an unsuccessful effort to block a class-action lawsuit filed by some black former employees. That bias suit goes to trial this year.
It appears that when Adrian Cattley, Smith Barney's analyst, called last week to ask about a securitization of receivables that was mentioned in the annual report, the company chose to answer few questions.
Mr. Cattley then reached an erroneous conclusion about the effect of the newly disclosed securitization on cash flow, and his report sent the share price down on Monday. The error was promptly corrected after the company explained its accounting, but that is not good enough for Sodexho, which wants French regulators to investigate.
Sodexho has reason to be unhappy about its share price, which is less than half its 2001 peak, largely because of repeated earnings shortfalls in Britain. The company has a warrant issue expiring in June, one that will provide needed capital if the share price is above 24.71 euros. At Thursday's Paris close, it was at 24.66 euros. In later New York trading, it ended at $30.99, equal to 24.50 euros.
I asked Sodexho's chief financial officer, Sian Herbert-Jones, what the company had told Mr. Cattley about the accounting, but she refused to say.
The way LVMH saw it, Morgan Stanley smeared it to help Gucci, which, with Morgan Stanley's help, managed to fend off an LVMH takeover offer. But the evidence cited by the court included no smoking gun on motivation.
The judges in the LVMH case cited the analyst settlement reached in the United States as evidence of Morgan Stanley's perfidy. But the man who started that case sees significant differences. ''To the extent that the French court found liability without finding that the analyst misrepresented her opinion, I disagree with the finding,'' Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''The cases we pursued were premised on finding such misrepresentations.''
The LVMH and Sodexho cases raise the troubling suggestion that companies think they can use European courts and regulators to silence analysts who are critics rather than cheerleaders. That was not what American regulators had in mind when they went after analysts. It would be a great tragedy if it becomes the result.
