The monotonously macho action-adventure ''Torque,'' which opens nationwide today, wears testosterone as if it were a new fragrance from Mennen. Its motorcycle-riding morons circle one another, hissing threats and flaring their nostrils as if they were about to lash their wrists together and break into a dance number reminiscent of Michael Jackson's ''Beat It'' video.
They also do a lot of flexing and flashing of their tattoos -- which look like wall appliqués for a particularly surly 6-year-old's bedroom -- and seem to spend more time primping than Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie. At least the guys in the HBO series ''Oz'' are more direct when they're checking one another out. Sure, there are girls in ''Torque,'' but they seem like older-sister window dressing.
Chief among these idiots is Ford (Martin Henderson), who's just returned from Thailand, where he was either on a restful vacation or in flight from his enemies. But he can't just ride around greater downtown Barstow, Calif., on his bike or tune up his misfiring relationship with his ex-girl Shane (Monet Mazur), a bike-shop owner he abandoned. He's being stalked by the menacing motorcycle gang leader Henry James (Matt Schulze), who's so important a crime figure that even his grim whispers can be heard over the live thrash being played at a nightclub.
Apparently when not finishing a screenplay adaptation of his novel ''The Tragic Muse'' or working with Ismail Merchant, Henry runs a lucrative crystal meth business whose profits are threatened because Ford has possession of Henry's drugs. Naturally, Henry wants his valuable stash returned -- or else.
And there are other plot complications similar to those of Henry's novel ''The Portrait of a Lady.'' Henry has worked the rival biker gang leader Trey's bandanna into a knot. He tried to persuade Trey (Ice Cube) to join the drug business, but because Trey has the kind of scruples we've come to expect from most bike-tribe cynosures, he refuses. Henry kills Trey's little brother and frames Ford for the crime. Now, in addition to Henry's boys, the police and Trey's squad are also out to put their hands on Ford, who has to slip past all of them to get to Los Angeles. Why? So ''Torque'' can parade its colors as a tribute to Walter Hill's haiku of a gang-action classic, ''The Warriors'' (1979), a movie that had less dialogue and far more wit than ''Torque.''
All you can say about the producer Neal H. Moritz -- who brought us ''The Fast and the Furious'' and ''2 Fast 2 Furious,'' which are worse than ''Torque,'' despite its serial dopiness -- is that his movies have a sense of humor.
The silliness is infectious, even though his pictures tend to overmythologize the urban man's romance with the internal-combustion engine. With everyone all done up in multicolored cycle leathers, ''Torque'' ends up resembling a reunion tour of those new jack swing stars, Guy. Mr. Moritz's characters -- brought to, um, life here by the writer Matt Johnson -- have something in common with a song lyric by Blackstreet, another creation of the Guy producer Teddy Riley: all they wanna do is zoom-a-zoom zoom zoom.
Still, a few laughs seem intentional, like Adam Scott's hipster F.B.I. agent who talks in run-on sentences and dresses like a music executive in his rayon pinstripe suit, T-shirt and Chuck Taylors. And when Ford, whom Mr. Henderson manages to play with a sense of embarrassment, if not outright shame, says, ''I live my life a quarter-mile at a time,'' Shane responds, ''That is the dumbest thing I've heard.''
As Trey, Ice Cube is pretty funny, too. His snarl has become a national institution, like a Happy Meal; its threat has gone the way of his scary curl. He's now like an irritable next-door neighbor from a sitcom -- albeit one who might massage your uvula with a Glock -- and his persona is so much a part of the in-joke that one of his most infamous ''Straight Outta Compton''-era song titles is in ''Torque'' as a laugh line.
The director Joseph Kahn is familiar with the fellas'-pride-in-chrome ethos; his music video work goes back to the estimable Geto Boys' ''Straight Gangsterism'' and includes DMX's ''X Gon Give It to Ya.'' (The MTV ''Making of'' special on that one could be a movie in itself.)
There's street drama in those videos, but not in this film; the computer-generated special effects used to create the preposterous motorcycle stunts already seem a little dated. By Monday, ''Torque'' will look like a period piece with its expiration date, January 2004, prominently displayed. The inevitable movie-inspired video game will appear more realistic.
''Torque'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has rivers of beer -- both consumed and splattered all over the movie's hoochie mamas -- cartoon violence and strong language featuring a reference to an N.W.A. song.
TORQUE
Directed by Joseph Kahn; written by Matt Johnson; director of photography, Peter Levy; edited by Howard E. Smith and David Blackburn; music by Trevor Rabin; production designer, Peter J. Hampton; produced by Neal H. Moritz and Brad Luff; released by Warner Brothers Pictures and Village Roadshow Pictures. Running time: 83 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Martin Henderson (Cary Ford), Ice Cube (Trey), Monet Mazur (Shane), Adam Scott (McPherson), Matt Schulze (Henry James) and Jay Hernandez (Dalton).
FILM REVIEW
