They are lined up in a row on the subway platform bench, peaceful and nodding like birds on a wire, with little feathers peeking from holes in their puffy secondhand coats. The cold and snow have chased these homeless men from the sidewalk grates and the doorways, down to the warmth of the Pennsylvania Station subway platforms. It is about 1 a.m. on Thursday, and in the long gaps between late-night trains, the platform is quiet and still.
Two men approach. One steps forward and introduces himself the way he always does down here, many times each night, by tapping his foot against the boot of one of the sleepers. The man on the bench jerks awake, dazed, his darting, bloodshot eyes coming to rest on the standing man's windbreaker patch. It says N.Y.P.D.
''You O.K.?'' the officer asks.
''Yeah.''
''You need shelter?''
The man furrows his brow and glances around like this is some kind of a trick question. Shelter? What do you call this place? He shakes his head no.
Such is life for the Police Department's Homeless Outreach Unit, made up on a given night of as many as 12 officers in six vans roaming the city in search of people who need shelter. The officers are often busiest on nights like this, declared a cold weather emergency because the temperature has dropped below freezing. Any homeless person outdoors can be forced off the street, into the van and to a shelter.
But some nights, the weather is so bad, it does the officers' work for them. From 12:01 a.m. to midnight Wednesday, the unit reported no involuntary removals and no trips to hospitals. Of the 82 reported contacts, 46 homeless people accepted a ride to a shelter. Most of the reported 8,705 single adults who spent Wednesday night in city shelters went on their own.
For the homeless men at Penn Station, the outreach officer is like the nurse who wakes up the patient to give him a sleeping pill. It always starts with the foot tap.
''Excuse me,'' Officer Joseph Fermaint, 35, says to a man sitting upright on a bench, fast asleep. The man bolts awake and half-shouts ''I'm all right,'' at the same time his eyes open.
''You want shelter?''
''No, I'm all right.''
''What's your name?'' Officer Fermaint asks.
''You know me,'' the man replies.
They exchange goodnights, and both return to what they had been doing, the man sleeping and the officer searching the station.
''Trying to get people off the streets,'' Officer Fermaint says, ''sometimes it isn't easy.''
Many homeless men are notoriously loath to enter a shelter, the officer explained. They have had bad experiences in shelters, like being robbed or roughed up. They feel safer among friends, in a spot they may have claimed long ago.
''The problem is the shelters,'' Officer Fermaint says. ''If they had better security, or were cleaner or not as dangerous, more people would go.''
On nights like Wednesday, the homeless seem to be pretty much where they are going to be for the night by midnight or so. About that time, Officer Fermaint and his partner of seven years, Officer Arman Baksh, 38, receive a call for a pickup uptown. They climb into their van, at the outreach unit's headquarters on Washington Street in the financial district, and thread their way along snowy streets to St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Midtown. But by the time they arrive, the security officer has no idea who they are talking about. She picks up the telephone, speaks and puts it back down.
''I called the E.R.,'' she tells the officers. ''No one knows.'' The man has likely just walked away.
''If they feel like you're taking too long, they'll just get up and leave,'' Officer Baksh says.
Back in the van, they receive a call for a pickup in the subway station beneath Union Square. Once again, no one at the transit police office knows anything about the call, nor does the booth worker. The two officers walk down to the platform and spot a human shape with a yellow coat over its head. Foot pokes foot.
''I'm on my way to work,'' the awakened man says.
''Where do you work?''
''Long Island.''
''You need shelter?''
''No.''
In warmer weather, the outreach officers are called to parks and front stoops to address complaints about sleeping men and women. In the winter, cold afternoons are a busy time, as people begin thinking about where they will sleep. Sometimes, officers use a bus, picking up 10 or more people in a single trip.
The officers are trained in the delicate art of walking the subway tracks, in search of the homeless. There are many small rooms in the tunnels, and the officers go down to roust squatters while transit workers slap on new locks. The squatters can be arrested for trespassing. A man lying down across a bench can be cited. But there is little to do with the person sleeping upright and minding his own business. For dozens of homeless men on early mornings, the two officers' faces are the first they see. Like concerned mothers, but with guns and goatees.
''You need a shelter?'' they ask one elderly man at a subway platform in Penn Station.
The man laughs. ''No, I have a home,'' he says, rattling off his 37th Street address.
At 2 a.m., the partners are halfway through their shift. Between them, they share 20 years on the police force. Both worked in the anticrime unit before moving to outreach. They rarely arrest anyone anymore. Some nights, they feel like salesmen in a slump, offering a product everyone needs but no one wants. On their days off in the city, they cannot turn off the radar. They notice every shape sprawled out on steps, but they walk past like everyone else. ''I never give to panhandlers,'' Officer Fermaint says.
They like to eat their dinner around this time in the shift, off the street and back at the precinct house downtown. They prefer it the way another man prefers his piece of bench for the night. It is not home, but it beats being with strangers.
Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  A picture caption on Friday with an article about a homeless outreach effort by the New York police misidentified the subway station where two officers were looking for people in need of shelter. It was 34th Street and Broadway, at Herald Square, not Pennsylvania Station.
