The top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee is calling on President Bush to provide a public accounting next week of why prewar American intelligence assessments that Iraq possessed illicit weapons now appear to have been mistaken.
Mr. Bush should use his State of the Union address on Tuesday ''to acknowledge the problems and outline specific steps to fix them,'' Representative Jane Harman of California will say in a speech in Los Angeles, according to an advance text provided by her office.
Despite months of intensive searches, American inspectors in Iraq have not yet found evidence of the chemical and biological weapons and the nuclear weapons program in Iraq that the intelligence agencies said existed.
The Bush administration, which pointed to those assessments as a main reason for invading Iraq last March, has said almost nothing publicly since October about the status of the search for illegal weapons, except to insist that it still too soon to say whether the intelligence agencies were wrong.
But Ms. Harman, whose position on the intelligence committee gives her access to highly classified intelligence briefings, says in the advance text of her speech that the intelligence agencies ''connected the dots to the wrong conclusions.''
The planned criticism by Ms. Harman, in a speech to the Los Angeles World Affairs Council, is expected to be the sharpest yet from a leader of the panel that oversees the Central Intelligence Agency. It comes a year after Mr. Bush devoted much of his State of the Union address in 2003 to portray what he called ''a serious and mounting threat to our country'' posed by Iraq's possession of illicit weapons.
''If our intelligence products had been better, I believe many policy makers, including me, would have had a far clearer picture of the sketchiness of our sources on Iraq's W.M.D. programs, and our lack of certainty about Iraq's chemical, biological and nuclear capabilities,'' the speech reads, using an abbreviation for the phrase ''weapons of mass destruction.''
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is among the senior administration officials who have recently defended the intelligence agencies' prewar assessments, noting that the search effort begun last June by David Kay, a senior adviser to George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, is still under way.
''I don't know that there was anything wrong with the intelligence,'' Mr. Powell said in an interview this week with NPR. ''We are still looking. We are still searching. The one thing that was absolutely clear is that he had the intention to have such weapons and he had programs to develop such weapons.''
The Harman speech does say that ''there were good reasons to support regime change in Iraq'' and notes that Iraq had repeatedly violated United Nations resolutions by failing to prove after the Persian Gulf war of 1991 that it had dismantled the illicit weapons and weapons programs that were discovered to be part of its arsenal at that time.
The last public report by Dr. Kay, in October, acknowledged that inspectors had not yet found illicit weapons or a continuing weapons program in Iraq, but said there was evidence of plans to reconstitute its nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs. Dr. Kay is officially on leave in Washington, but he has told associates since last month that he is considering stepping down from his post, and some people close to him have said they believe the C.I.A. is searching for his successor.
In recent interviews, senior intelligence officials, including Stuart Cohen, the vice chairman of the National Intelligence Council, have defended the prewar assessments on Iraq as the best possible based on the information available at the time. They have said it is too soon to judge in retrospect whether those prewar intelligence assessments were in fact mistaken, and they have said that for that reason neither the C.I.A. nor any other agency has changed its assessment procedures.
Both the House and Senate intelligence committees have begun drafting what Congressional officials have described as reports critical of the intelligence agencies' performance on prewar Iraq, but they have not yet said when they intend to make those findings public.
Ms. Harman, who was among the Democrats who voted to authorize the administration to go to war against Iraq, says in the text of her speech that ''we are finding out that Powell and other policy makers were wrong, British intelligence was wrong and those of us who believed the intelligence were wrong.
''Quite frankly, this willingness to learn lessons should start at the top,'' Ms. Harman's speech says. ''The president should lead the effort to improve his intelligence on weapons of mass destruction and terrorism.''
The speech is particularly scathing of the National Intelligence Estimate that was produced in October 2003 by the National Intelligence Council, which reports to Mr. Tenet, calling it a ''seriously flawed document.'' The estimate declared flatly that Iraq possessed chemical and biological weapons and an active nuclear weapons program.
The speech is also critical of the address that Mr. Powell presented last February to the United Nations Security Council, which he prepared with the help of Mr. Tenet and in which he described allegations about Iraq's illicit weapons program as ''not assertions'' but ''facts corroborated by many sources.''
Referring to Mr. Powell's speech, Ms. Harman's text says, ''I believe that unanswered questions regarding U.S. intelligence have left the nation in a precarious position and endanger our ability to understand and deal with threats posed over three administrations since the end of the cold war.''
Ms. Harman's speech also refers to the quotation over the entrance to the C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va.: ''And ye shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free,.'' and then adds:
''Freedom depends on accurate, timely and actionable intelligence. It is the point of the spear in the war on terrorism. We must do better.''
Correction:  January 17, 2004, Saturday  An article yesterday about the plans of a top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee to call on President Bush to explain problems in the prewar intelligence on Iraq misstated the issue date of a National Intelligence Estimate that said that country possessed chemical and biological weapons and an active nuclear weapons program. It was October 2002, not 2003. The article also misidentified the radio network that interviewed Secretary of State Colin H. Powell this week about the intelligence on Iraq. It was Public Radio International, not National Public Radio.
