Lenny Wilkens gathered the Knicks in a loose semicircle Thursday and, without a silver hair out of place and with a cerebral smile for all to see, watched his first practice come to an end.
The rookie Mike Sweetney sank the mandatory free throw to send everyone home barely more than an hour after their new coach arrived.
On a sun-splashed afternoon after the most turbulent 12 hours of Isiah Thomas's whirlwind tenure as president of basketball operations, Don Chaney was only an apology when Wilkens was introduced as the Knicks' new coach. A grinning Stephon Marbury sneaked into the news conference to throw a bearhug around his fellow Brooklyn legend. New school and old school were in harmony.
Wilkens, 66, preached respect and defense, and promised to make changes gradually. Thomas said Wilkens walked in with an aura, bringing five decades of basketball knowledge to the task of turning a 16-24 team into a playoff contender.
''I'm not a yeller or a screamer, but you're accountable and you know it because you're going to know your role and you're going to know what I expect,'' Wilkens said. ''You don't do it, you sit down. I don't have to yell and scream to sit you down, and if you still don't get it, you don't play.''
Wilkens will coach his first Knicks game Friday night at Madison Square Garden against the Seattle SuperSonics, with whom he won an N.B.A. championship in 1979.
Wilkens, who had been out of basketball since being fired as coach of the Toronto Raptors last year, was at his home office in Seattle early Wednesday morning when the phone rang. ''When Isiah talked to me, I sort of hesitated,'' Wilkens recalled. ''I almost wanted to say, 'Are you sure?' ''
He had to call Thomas back after checking with his wife, Marilyn.
''When I left, I said there was a lot of coaching still left in me,'' Wilkens said.
After 25 days of tumult for the Knicks, Thomas's plan is coming into focus, but it is far from finished. ''It's been a busy few weeks here,'' said James L. Dolan, chairman of Madison Square Garden. ''Isiah has my full support in all the changes. I think you can recognize the new sense of urgency and excitement in the organization and a sense of expectation at the same time.''
Dolan's expectation is the same: the Knicks must make the playoffs. Wilkens believes it is possible this season.
''He's the perfect person to lead us in this environment of change,'' Thomas said.
Thomas began compiling names for a new coach three weeks after he replaced Scott Layden in the Knicks' front office. The process came to a conclusion Wednesday afternoon after it was reported that Mike Fratello would be the new coach.
Thomas said he never made an offer to Fratello, and Fratello disputed a claim that he had made exorbitant contract demands.
''That is 100 percent wrong,'' Fratello said Thursday in a telephone interview. ''We never talked a nickel or a day or anything with personnel.''
Dolan apologized Thursday to Chaney and his top assistants, Brendan Malone and Lon Kruger, who were also fired. ''Ultimately, sports is about winning, that's how we're all judged and that's what this organization is committed to,'' Dolan said.
Wilkens has the most coaching victories (1,292) and losses (1,114) in the N.B.A.
Dick Helm, Wilkens's longtime top assistant, is expected to join the Knicks.
''He's very good with a veteran team,'' one Eastern Conference official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said of Wilkens. ''His teams for the most part were high in execution, low in turnovers, very simple in what they do, but very efficient.''
The official added that many scouts have said that Wilkens has run the same eight or nine plays throughout his career.
In Cleveland, Atlanta and Toronto, Wilkens had a reputation for running light practices. When he coached the United States Olympic team to a gold medal in 1996, Penny Hardaway recalled that the players asked Wilkens to scrimmage. He shrugged and said they did not need it.
''No matter what happened in practice, no matter how long was the practice, the game was most important for him, that's what Lenny cared more about,'' said the Knicks' Dikembe Mutombo, who played for Wilkens in Atlanta.
''He's not one of those coaches who would curse you up and all that,'' Mutombo said. ''He would just move you on the side and forget about you in a second. He will play the guys who want to win.''
Wilkens brought calm to turmoil in Toronto the season after Coach Butch Carter was fired. The Raptors upset the Knicks in the first round of the playoffs in 2001.
''Lenny did a good job the first year, a pretty good job the next year,'' said Glen Grunwald, the Raptors' general manager. Last season Vince Carter was injured for 39 games. The Raptors started the season with a 7-28 record, and speculation began about Wilkens's job security.
''We needed to make a change to get back on track; we wanted to get a new approach, a fresh face,'' Grunwald said. ''Lenny can coach if he has players.''
Carter did not think so, telling reporters after Wilkens was fired on April 17: ''We didn't really know our roles and what we were supposed to do. We should look for a coach that understands the game today. To heck with the past.''
But at practice Thursday, the Knicks had nothing but respect for Wilkens, as well as relief that the team's coaching situation had been resolved.
''I would say there's definitely a sense of now we know who our coach is going to be for the rest of the year, and so you can take that off of your mind,'' forward Keith Van Horn said. ''There's a respect factor off the bat, the things he's accomplished in this league.''
PRO BASKETBALL
