First came the snow and bitter cold that closed down schools throughout most of the region and made a mess of the morning commute. Then came a bright sun that made the afternoon tolerable for those who didn't have to work outdoors. Then came the wind and hyper-chill that sent nighttime temperatures plunging toward record lows.
It felt like three different days Thursday: cold, colder and coldest.
Rich Sanita, a Federal Express driver who was picking up a package in Lido Beach in Nassau County's south shore, said the heater in his truck was no match for the temperature.
''I don't feel my toes and I have two pairs of socks on,'' Mr. Sanita said. He wore three layers of shirts, two pairs of socks and steel-tipped boots.
The National Weather Service said the mercury dropped to 5 degrees in Central Park as of 8 p.m. yesterday, creating hazardous conditions for anyone outside for more than a few minutes. From 2 to 5 inches of snow fell throughout the region, but because it was so cold, the snow was as light as Styrofoam packing peanuts, making shoveling an easy chore for suburban homeowners.
The weather service issued a wind chill warning, saying that it anticipated that the combination of wind and low temperatures overnight would bring the wind chill to minus 25, which could cause frostbite to exposed skin within minutes. Today, the high is expected to be 20 degrees, and while it will be partly cloudy, no snow is expected.
Many suburban school districts closed yesterday, but the New York City school system was open. But the cold temperatures forced cancellation of many after-school programs, and kept many people in the city indoors.
In Times Square, many visitors stayed away, giving it the feel of a Sunday morning. Many of the vendors whose piles of wares normally clog the streets were gone yesterday. Even ticket scalpers tried to stay indoors.
At the Edison Hotel, several people were inside the vestibule on West 46th Street, selling tickets to ''The Producers,'' the hit Broadway play that was sold out weeks ago.
At midafternoon, Central Park was shimmering and peaceful. Nadia Haussmann, 27, a visitor from Cologne, Germany, was strolling with her friend Joseph Gohnen, 41.
The winter in Germany has been warm so far, Ms. Haussmann said, "so we said that we had to go to New York to see some snow.''
"There's a great atmosphere in Central Park,'' she said. ''Very romantic."
But the low temperatures brought a different set of problems for produce distributors in the region.
On the loading dock of the regional produce market in Hartford, three men hoisted 50-pound bags of onions and mammoth crates of lettuce and tomatoes with glove-less hands and assembly-line efficiency. The thermometer read 11 degrees at 3 p.m.
Joe Ruffini, an owner of Northeast Produce, was helping to load the trucks, keeping an eye on the time the produce stood on the cement floor.
''Nobody wants a mushy tomato,'' he said.
It was too cold today, even for some animals. In southern New Jersey, employees at the Associated Humane Societies' Popcorn Park Zoo in Lacey Township, where stray, abandoned and injured animals are taken in, brought animals indoors earlier than usual.
''A lot of this is just normal for us, but we take extra precautions on a day like this,'' said John Bergmann, who oversees the zoo.
The Marjorie Anders, a spokeswoman for Metro-North Railroad said the high winds and snow were causing some delays of up to 20 minutes for some commuters.
