Well, We Loved Him In 'Morgan Almighty'
As she shivered with the press on a polar Tuesday night, our Boldface correspondent contemplated the jarring incongruity of holding the winter awards gala of the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures at Tavern on the Green.
Boldface Name after freezing Boldface Name puffed past the press: among them KIM CATTRALL, LIV TYLER and CHARLIZE THERON, to name but a few. But it was the last arrival, CLINT EASTWOOD, who commanded attention.
The shades of Rowdy Yates, Dirty Harry, the Man with No Name, and Secret Service Agent Frank Horrigan strolled along the press line, as if it were a particularly lazy day at the beach.
A word, please, with Mr. Eastwood, our correspondent asked one of his phalanx of publicists?
Why yes, the answer came back: just sit at Mr. Eastwood's table. Alas, no one told Mr. Eastwood's praetorian guard, who stopped our correspondent well short of the high table.
Enter Mr. Eastwood himself, who postponed going into dinner to talk in the foyer. His face was ruddy and wrinkle free (except when he smiled) and his eyes were blue.
Our correspondent decided to ask him about fate.
''Everything is a crap shoot,'' said Mr. Eastwood, who has directed two dozen films, from ''Play Misty for Me'' in 1971 to last year's ''Mystic River,'' which won the best film award from the board of review.
''If you make the film the best you can and you believe in it...''
Is it a new beginning for Mr. Eastwood, who is 73?
''I'm maybe too far along in the career to think it's a beginning,'' he said. He added, ''One of these days I'll say, I'm going to work in the garden, but that hasn't come, and it won't be for a while.''
If Mr. Eastwood was relaxed, then MORGAN FREEMAN, 66, was electric, his gray hair sticking out as if his small gold hoop earrings were channeling a charge. Mr. Freeman recently starred as the Supreme Being in ''Bruce Almighty'' and was presented with the career achievement award by Mr. Eastwood.
Was Mr. Freeman ever not famous? ''I was always famous,'' he said in his baritone. Perhaps our correspondent's eyebrows rose. ''You don't believe me? You think I'm pulling your arm? It's true. It's true. I've always been a big fish in a little barrel.''
He continued: ''I always wanted to be a force. At some point you have the realization that what you want is what you are going to get. I want to have enough power over me and my surroundings to get things done.''
What Did Tom Waits Say About a Frontal Lobotomy?
A well-reviewed independent movie that lacks the flash of, say, a nude scene by WILLIAM H. MACY, must struggle to get attention. So it is with ''The Station Agent,'' the preternaturally low-key movie starring PETER DINKLAGE, PATRICIA CLARKSON and BOBBY CANNAVALE.
Last week, another press screening was held for the movie, which had its premiere in October. Mr. Cannavale; MICHELLE WILLIAMS, who also stars in the film; BEBE NEUWIRTH, the actress; and NEIL LABUTE, the playwright, were there.
PAUL RUDD, the actor, said he wanted to be the host for the screening because he admired the movie. But he said he was uncomfortable being quoted. Few people look good in print, except for Tom Waits, the lowlife troubadour, he said.
''It was atmospheric,'' Mr. Rudd said, attempting his best Tom Waits. ''It was spending three hours on soccer practice without having to play at all or get winded. The grass. And the white skies. The sounds of nothingness and the stillness in the air of that location that was maybe interrupted every once in a while by a train. You know it's funny, it reminds me of something Tom Waits said.''
What followed was a Tom Waits riff about slamming a fist on a windowsill. How do you think this is going to look in print, our correspondent asked. Ms. Williams, who was standing nearby, interjected, ''I don't think it'll look like anything in print because I don't think it will get printed.'' If this were a scene from ''The Station Agent,'' there would be a long pause, as things sink in.
Yesterday, the film earned the Screen Actors Guild's best-ensemble nomination for the cast, the guild's term for best movie of the year.
with Lily Koppeland Campbell Robertson
Boldface Names
