Diane Hamilton, a longtime Democratic activist here in rural Buena Vista County, came home this week from a four-day Mexican vacation to find her mailbox stuffed like a piñata.
There were impassioned letters from Howard Dean, Richard A. Gephardt and Dennis J. Kucinich; a handwritten note from John Kerry's county chairman; a gleaming full-color pamphlet from John Edwards; three pamphlets from Mr. Kerry and six from Dr. Dean. The stack on her kitchen table was two inches high.
About what she had expected.
Ms. Hamilton, who has organized all 19 of the county's caucuses for next Monday night, knows that the candidates are increasingly eager to appeal to that huge reservoir of Iowa voters who remain undecided, a group in which she finds both herself and her husband.
''Usually we know way ahead of time who we're going to support,'' Ms. Hamilton said. ''But this time it's terrible. We waffle. We like Gephardt. We like Kerry. We like Edwards. A lot of people are like us this year. They can't make up their mind.''
While no one knows the exact size of the undecided vote in Iowa in the final week before the caucuses, campaign officials and party leaders say they believe that it is exceptionally large, and unusually fluid.
''I think there is still a huge segment of undecided voters out there,'' said John Lapp, state director for Mr. Gephardt. ''And it is causing all the campaigns, at this point, to be multitasking, trying to reach those voters while organizing their forces in the field for the caucuses.''
Many Democratic officials and campaign strategists say they suspect that the way these undecided voters break on Monday night could well prove a decisive factor in the caucuses -- if not anointing the winner, then determining the crucial order of finish among the top four candidates as the campaigns sprint toward New Hampshire for the primary a week later.
Publicly released polls, though notoriously unreliable in assessing the caucuses, find an undecided pool of anywhere from 9 percent to 25 percent, matching the internal polling of some of the campaigns. The same polls also show a significant number of voters who profess support for a candidate while acknowledging that their support is weak and that they may well change their mind by Monday night.
''Our polling is showing 10 to 15 percent undecided,'' said John Norris, state director for Mr. Kerry's campaign. ''But the bigger question is, How fluid are the weak supporters of the other candidates? My sense is that each of the candidates has a core of solid support and a few percentage points of weak support which, when combined with the undecided, ends up with 20 percent or more people still up for grabs.''
The other question that campaign officials are asking themselves about these undecided voters is whether they will even show up. ''Maybe they're so disaffected that they just stay at home,'' a top official of one campaign said.
Certainly the recent appearance of hard-hitting television commercials in Iowa could further dampen the interest of those who have yet to find a candidate to support, as such advertisements are sometimes intended to do.
Fueling speculation that some may simply stay away are reports from a number of campaign officials that their telephone banks are finding it increasingly difficult to reach undecided voters, who either seem to have stopped answering their phones or, if they do answer, complain about being inundated with calls.
On the other hand, party leaders and campaign officials say they have seen growing numbers of undecided voters turning up at campaign events of almost all the leading candidates, an indication that these voters are not alienated but instead are still shopping.
Pollsters say it is almost impossible to develop a statistical sample that properly matches the group of people who will actually turn up at their neighborhood caucuses on Monday night. Better, party officials say, to rely on anecdotal evidence of witnesses in the field, where party activists have a tighter grip on the pulse of the race.
Here too, though, the evidence points to widespread indecision, despite months of repeated visits by more candidates than Iowa has seen in any other caucus season since 1988.
''I'm still undecided, but I've sort of narrowed it down to Kerry and Edwards,'' said Connie McClain, a librarian who joined an overflow crowd of about 150 to hear Mr. Edwards at the Baker's Court Restaurant here in Storm Lake. ''I think it will come down to who I think can win against Bush.''
Organizers had prepared for an audience of 50 at the restaurant. Just a month or so ago, Mr. Edwards had drawn about half that number here in Storm Lake, so it was with some surprise that the organizers saw the parking lot fill beyond capacity.
Mr. Edwards's supporters attributed the turnout to what they described as his growing momentum, but interviews with 20 people in the crowd found that roughly two-thirds remained very uncertain about whom to support and had come in hopes of catching some spark that would clarify the race for them.
Ann Mackrill-Wilson, who works in marketing at a local medical center, said the event had done the trick for her. After months of flirting with support for Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean, she left as an Edwards supporter. ''I made my decision today,'' she said. ''Finally.''
Paul and Norma Smith, however, remained undecided. Ms. Smith listened while her husband, a retired farmer, described their small community as finally getting into the caucus spirit, with passions rising and crowds growing. ''This tells me that people are looking for something,'' Mr. Smith said, ''and they're getting excited.''
His wife nodded and said she knew exactly what she was looking for. ''I just want somebody who is going to beat George Bush,'' she said.
The practical effect of all the undecided voters is that candidates must make special efforts to figure out what is keeping them from committing. Mr. Kerry, for instance, has taken to highlighting his national security credentials, in the belief that this will make him seem more electable than Dr. Dean.
And while the candidates are being more aggressive in appealing to the undecided, they must also tread carefully, for fear of a last-minute blunder. ''If something goes wrong or comes out at the last minute,'' one top campaign official said, ''it could really punch a hole in the side of a candidate's boat, especially in a fluid situation like this, with so many undecideds out there.''
Ms. Hamilton, the caucus organizer, said everything she was seeing and hearing led her to expect huge turnouts in the county. ''I think we will have the largest crowds we've had maybe ever, and certainly since 1988,'' she said.
Both she and her husband intend to be at their caucus and to make their choice at last, though perhaps not even until they arrive in the room and see which of their neighbors are siding with which candidates.
''In the beginning, I was just set on voting for Kerry,'' Ms. Hamilton said. ''Then I met Dick Gephardt and I thought, 'Oh, gosh, he's such a nice person with such good ideas.' And now all this John Edwards stuff is happening. So, you know, I guess it'll be one of the three.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS
