NOW that the World Trade Center memorial has assumed clear form, subject to change though it still may be, perhaps it is not out of order to reflect on absence of another kind. This is the prolonged absence of memorable words from our leaders articulating where we are as a city and as a people more than two years after the evil.
Sure, there have been speeches, as there were again on Wednesday when the latest memorial plans were unveiled. But in the main, officials have contented themselves with stating the obvious -- Sept. 11 was a day of anguish -- or the clichéd -- New Yorkers are a tough breed, not about to let the terrorists win.
It was striking on the first anniversary of the 9/11 attacks how New York's elected leaders shied from summoning any thoughts of their own. Instead, they read from the Gettysburg Address, the Declaration of Independence and the Four Freedoms, as if those memorable documents are there to guide us through any calamity.
Similarly, it is striking that 16 more months have passed and still the only words anyone can remember are those uttered by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in the first hours of our communal pain.
Mind you, Mr. Giuliani was himself no Churchill as a public speaker, prone as he was to stumble on the verbal debris that litters modern English. A good example came six years ago when he sneered at criticism of his ban on fireworks in Chinatown to celebrate the Lunar New Year. ''Before we do this, like, cultural thing,'' he said, ''we have to sort of, like, get real here.''
But he rose to a spare eloquence on Sept. 11 when asked at a news conference to estimate the number of casualties at the trade center. The toll, the mayor said, will be ''more than any of us can bear.''
Why is it that nothing has since been said to build on that?
''The tradition of grandly memorializing events is dying,'' suggested Peter Quinn, who wrote speeches for Govs. Hugh L. Carey and Mario M. Cuomo. ''The closest we have come in a while is Reagan's speech when the Challenger went down. But I can't think of anything since.''
He was referring to President Ronald Reagan's speech to the nation in 1986 after the space shuttle exploded. ''The future doesn't belong to the fainthearted,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''It belongs to the brave.'' Drawing on a sonnet written by an airman killed in World War II, he ended his remarks by saying that the seven Challenger astronauts had ''slipped the surly bonds of earth to touch the face of God.''
How often do you hear public officials talk like that, even if they have the aid of a talented speechwriter, as Mr. Reagan had in Peggy Noonan?
''Maybe the task is to be left to the poets, like Yeats with ''Easter 1916,'' Mr. Quinn said. (''All changed, changed utterly:/A terrible beauty is born.'')
''But I don't even see that kind of public poetry,'' he said.
THE linguist John McWhorter, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, is convinced that the days of grand eloquence -- not to be confused with grandiloquence -- are over. That kind of speech is now seen as ''not being real.''
''We have a sad problem that to be resonantly articulate is perceived as being phony,'' said Mr. McWhorter, who recently wrote ''Doing Our Own Thing: The Degradation of Language and Music and Why We Should, Like, Care'' (Gotham Books).
''Because we have sincere feelings about those people who died,'' he said, ''the last thing we would want to do is make an elegant and planned speech because it might sound as if we don't care. Maybe Rudy can get off one sentence, but that's enough. To do anything more would seem like you really didn't care.''
In short, the blame lies not just with politicians. People in general today are moved more by images than words, by the picture of a firefighter's child holding his father's helmet than by a leader's oratory.
''You cannot have a soaring rhetoric that does not arise out of the culture itself,'' said Clark Whelton, who was a speechwriter for Mr. Giuliani and for Mayor Edward I. Koch. With the general ''impoverishment of the language,'' Mr. Whelton said, ''it's easier to say nothing. It didn't used to be O.K. for politicians to say nothing. Now it is.''
Maybe a solution is to take those few words from Mr. Giuliani that stand out -- ''more than any of us can bear'' -- and inscribe them somewhere at the memorial. The sentiment still holds.
That could work, Mr. Quinn said. Even so, he said, ''we've gone from the Gettysburg Address, a couple of hundred words, to seven. It's sound bites now.''
NYC
