The four-story walk-up is a form of housing not often produced in New York City any longer. But two new side-by-side walk-ups in Park Slope, Brooklyn, may lead the way to resurrecting it for rental housing designed for moderate-income tenants throughout the city.
The developer is CPC Resources, the development arm of the Community Preservation Corporation, a lending consortium of banks and insurance companies best known as the mortgage lender for rehabilitations of older apartments in upper Manhattan, Brooklyn and the Bronx. The Park Slope buildings, each with eight apartments, are nearing completion on 16th Street between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.
''We're trying to see if it's possible to build small multifamily buildings on vacant lots around the city that are economical to build, efficient from a zoning point of view, and affordable to a moderate-income population,'' said Michael D. Lappin, president of the Community Preservation Corporation and CPC Resources.
To do that in producing a prototype in Park Slope, CPC Resources set itself the task of holding construction costs to $100 a square foot, Mr. Lappin said. That goal would have been met, he said, except that during construction a decision was made to take advantage of market conditions and sell the apartments as condominiums. To meet expectations of condominium buyers, more money had to be spent on interior finishes than was originally anticipated.
The 16 apartments, when they go on the market through the Corcoran Group, are expected to sell for about $400 a square foot. That translates to $280,000 for a 700-square-foot one-bedroom condominium. Pure construction costs turned out to be about $118 a square foot.
If sales go well, the project will have turned out to be highly profitable, despite the additional development costs involved, which include architectural, legal, marketing and other professional services; taxes; and interest on acquisition and construction loans.
The architect who was given the task of designing a low-cost multifamily building was Carmi Bee, a partner in the firm of RKT&amp;B Architects. The most distinctive characteristic is each building's glass-enclosed external scissors staircase in front, taking residents to landings on which two floor-through apartments are entered on each floor. There are duplex apartments at the top with sloped ceilings running to 18 feet in height, sometimes a feature of loft conversions but not usually seen in new walk-up housing. The absence of elevators or parking facilities on the property also contribute to the efficient use of floor area, holding down costs per square foot of usable, or salable, space.
According to John West III, CPC Resources' senior vice president for design, future projects will be built without full cellars, which on 16th Street provide some common space for workout equipment or other recreational uses. Future projects will also have less-expensive roofing and a different arrangement of plumbing risers, which will lower costs.
Three years ago CPC Resources formed a private equity fund for institutional investors to underwrite its ventures. The fund will be the financial beneficiary in the Park Slope project, and is expected to participate in future ventures in walk-up construction. ''We could use this building model anywhere where the zoning permits,'' Mr. Lappin said, ''but we won't do it in prime locations.''
Profits from the sale of the apartments will be applied to investment in later projects, geared for the low-income rental market. These projects will normally use the federal tax-credit program, which generates equity capital for lower-income rentals by providing tax advantages to investors.
CPC Resources is already working with city housing officials and East Brooklyn Churches, a nonprofit housing developer for the moderate-income market, to develop its walk-up multifamily model on sites in East New York and Bedford-Stuyvesant, said Kathleen Dunn, executive vice president for development. ''We could be doing about 200 units there,'' she said.
In the Bronx the plan is to acquire sites and do much of the predevelopment work in-house, perhaps entering later into agreements with nonprofit producers and managers as well as private owner-builders, Ms. Dunn said.
Residential Real Estate
