The long chill between the Bush administration and the United Nations over Iraq appears to have warmed considerably. In preparation for Monday's meeting in New York among Secretary General Kofi Annan, the chief American administrator, Paul Bremer III, and leaders of the Iraqi Governing Council, high-level American and U.N. officials have begun promising discussions on related issues. Both sides are speaking of each other in far more constructive tones than those used in the past year. This welcome breakthrough needs to be sustained and built on. Iraq's future depends on strong coordination between the United States and the United Nations.
The United States, Britain and other Security Council members have been pressing the U.N. to return to Iraq at the earliest possible date. That is to be one of the main items on Monday's agenda. This week, a top U.N. official sent an encouraging signal by announcing the dispatch of a team of experts to Baghdad later this month to assess security there.
Meanwhile, Mr. Annan has sought assurances that if the U.N. returned its staff to Iraq, it would play a significant role. It might, for example, provide independent monitoring of how Washington and its appointees on the governing council carry out their agreement to transfer power to an interim government after June 30. To show that America is now serious about more robust U.N. involvement, Mr. Annan had urged Washington to send Mr. Bremer to Monday's meeting. The Bush administration has agreed to do that.
On his way to New York, Mr. Bremer will stop at the White House to discuss a response to demands from Iraq's most important Shiite leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for direct election of a new government and constituent assembly. Tens of thousands of Iraqi Shiites have already taken to the streets in support of this demand, which would maximize the political influence of the Shiite community. Although Shiites represent more than 60 percent of the population, they have long been excluded from national political power.
This is an issue where the U.N. may be able to help broker an acceptable compromise. The problem, as Mr. Annan has pointed out, is that there is no longer enough time to organize full elections before June 30. That may be, but the transition date should not be considered immovable. Another answer could be letting the transfer proceed, with elections of some kind held several months later. Every effort should be made to ensure the broadest possible democratic involvement. That would keep faith with America's promises of Iraqi democracy and make it more likely that the new authorities will be accepted as legitimate.
Monday's meeting will not produce finished solutions to Iraq's complex problems. But if the Bush administration is now prepared to embrace the U.N. as a serious partner, the prospects for achieving such solutions look much brighter.
