The Rangers were not embarrassed by the Devils at Madison Square Garden last night.
Even though they were able to salvage a 3-3 tie on Matthew Barnaby's goal with 1 minute 49 seconds remaining in regulation, the Rangers could still not figure out a way to defeat the Devils in regulation at the Garden. They have not accomplished that in seven years.
Barnaby took a pass from Mark Messier and slipped a shot from the bottom of the left circle past Martin Brodeur and inside the far right post.
''I don't think it's a success when you don't win,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said. ''But sometimes you have to settle for what you can get.''
The Rangers have not defeated the Devils in regulation at the Garden since Jan. 12, 1997. Since then, the Rangers are 1-6-10-0 against New Jersey on home ice, with the Rangers' lone victory coming in overtime on Oct. 17, 2001.
That was the Rangers' last victory in the series. Last night, the Devils extended their overall unbeaten streak against the Rangers to 11 games (6-0-5-0). In the last 36 regular-season meetings between the teams, dating from Feb. 17, 1997, the Rangers have won just twice, and the Devils are 21-1-13-1.
In their first meeting of the season, a 5-0 Devils victory on Nov. 15, the Rangers offered only token opposition from the start. But they played a competitive first period last night.
''There was only room for improvement after that game in November,'' Rangers center Bobby Holik said.
Anson Carter blasted a 45-foot one-timer from the top of the right circle past Brodeur at 18:49 of the first period to give the Rangers a 1-0 lead.
Carter helped set up his ninth goal of the season and first since Dec. 12, ending an 11-game drought. He intercepted a pass from Devils defenseman Paul Martin intended for Erik Rasmussen, who was in the neutral zone. Carter passed to Jan Hlavac, who all but teed up a drop pass for Carter above the right circle. Carter then used Martin as a screen to beat Brodeur inside the far left post.
Brodeur, who was making his 50th consecutive regular-season start against the Rangers, dating from Dec. 26, 1993, stopped all 13 shots he faced in the second period. When Rasmussen and Jay Pandolfo scored goals in a span of 3:08 early in the second period, the Devils had a 2-1 lead.
Rasmussen tied the score at 1-1 with his second goal of the season at 5:33 as he adroitly moved the puck from his backhand to his forehand while falling. Pandolfo then gave the Devils the lead with his ninth goal of the season on a two-on-one break with John Madden. Defenseman Tom Poti was the only man back after Brian Leetch had skated into the Rangers' attack.
In an attempt to defend against Madden from passing through the slot, Poti dropped to the ice on his belly. Madden simply outwaited Poti, however, and threaded a backhand pass behind Poti's skates to Pandolfo for the tap-in around Mike Dunham.
The Devils had a chance to put the game away midway through the second period, when they had a five-on-three power play for 1:53. But they could not score their first five-on-three goal of the season.
''That was the game,'' said Messier, whose slashing penalty gave the Devils the two-man advantage. ''They're already up a goal. They get another one and it's slam the door shut.''
The 2-1 lead did not last through the first shift of the third period. At 42 seconds, Chad Wiseman, the Rangers' rookie left wing, recorded his first N.H.L. point with his first career goal. Wiseman maneuvered around Jeff Friesen and Turner Stevenson, then chipped a loose puck from the low slot over Brodeur's left shoulder.
Sergei Brylin restored the Devils' lead at 4:05 of the third period with a backhand shot from the bottom of the right circle. It came after Dunham allowed a long rebound on a shot by Martin, who had been set up by a pretty pass from the N.H.L.'s oldest player, 43-year-old Igor Larionov.
SLAP SHOTS
LOU LAMORIELLO, the Devils' president and general manager, said last night that SCOTT STEVENS, the Devils' 39-year-old captain, was being treated as if he had sustained a possible concussion. Stevens, who also was battling the flu, missed his fourth consecutive game. ''We want to make sure he rests the next 7 to 10 days,'' Lamoriello said, adding that Stevens would probably be placed on injured reserve today. Lamoriello said Stevens had been put through ''every type of test you could possibly imagine'' and had been examined by a neurologist. ''He feels tired and run down,'' Lamoriello said. ''The good news is that he said today he was feeling better than he felt any other day.''
Lamoriello said that the Devils still planned to honor Stevens with a brief ceremony at Continental Arena before tomorrow's game against Washington. Stevens, who has played in 1,635 games, passed Larry Murphy on Nov. 26 for the most games played by a defenseman in N.H.L. history. The Devils recalled defenseman SEAN BROWN from Albany of the American Hockey League. Brown did not dress. . . . Rangers left wing CHRIS SIMON sat out the second game of a two-game suspension.
HOCKEY
