WHO -- Susan A. Budai, 50, real estate agent and developer  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house on 187 acres with a trout stream  WHERE -- Delhi, N.Y.
This property is something I know is almost impossible to duplicate. I hear over and over again, when you want to get away, you don't want to see anybody. It's very, very rare that you can buy a piece of property with 187 acres, and that you will own what you see, and there will be no development in your eye range in any direction. My husband, William, and I purchased it in February of 2003, so this is our first winter.
It's an old dairy farm. We're sitting nestled in a valley, and we're totally protected. We will not be hindered by a subdivision going in next door. Nobody can build around you, which is so rare. When I first saw it, that was it. It only took a day to decide to buy it.
My brother-in-law, daughter and son-in-law fish, but we're not avid fishermen. We loved the creeks, we loved the water, and we were drawn to Delhi not so much for the trout stream as for the waterfalls. There's a rock-lined stream and a foot bridge, and it's very pretty. Finding a trout stream in Delaware County is extremely difficult, in part because the government is buying rights to the streams through a water quality improvement program. You can't do anything but fish on it, and then it's only for personal fishing. I have friends who have caught some good-size trout in there. I like the water; I just enjoy having a waterfront.
My primary home is in Salt Point, N.Y., and there's a trout stream on that property, too. The commute from there is about an hour and 45 minutes. We may decide to move to Delhi full time and raise alpacas. It's unbelievable how wonderful these animals are. They make a sound like little dolphins.
As told to Tina Kelley
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by the listing companies.
WHERE -- Blue Ridge, Ga.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $299,900
This seven-room two-story house has a partially screened wrap-around deck on the Toccoa River and is near Lake Blue Ridge. The house is 1,900 square feet and is offered fully furnished. A fourth sleeping area is in a loft. There are cathedral ceilings and a rock fireplace in the main living area. The house has two bathrooms and an eat-in kitchen as well as a formal dining room. Blue Ridge is 90 miles north of Atlanta. Broker: Nathan Fitts, Century 21 Professional Realty Group, (800) 541-1877; www.georgiamtnproperties.com.
WHERE -- Three Forks, Mont.  WHAT -- Ranch with 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $699,000
Little Coulee Ranch, as this property is called, is 175 acres a 10-minute drive from the confluence of the Gallatin, Jefferson, and Madison Rivers, all of which are ideal for fly fishing. It is a half hour from Bozeman. The house is 3,000 square feet and has three sandstone fireplaces and three bathrooms. The exterior is hand-hewn log siding. Agent: James Esperti, Fay Ranches Inc., (406) 586-4001; www.fayranches.com.
WHERE -- Crystal Bay, Nev.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $425,000
This 1,000-square-foot 1957 house has views of Lake Tahoe and is 25 minutes from fly fishing on the Truckee River. The house has knotty pine walls and ceilings. The living room, kitchen, master bedroom and dining room are on the main level, which has vaulted ceilings; two bedrooms and one of the two bathrooms are downstairs. There is a wrap-around deck. The property is a street-to-street quarter-acre lot with National Forest Service land on both sides. Agent: Alvin Steinberg, Tanager Realty, (800) 666-4718; www.atahoe.com.
WHERE -- Branchburg Township, N.J.  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $439,999
This house is on a lot just under three acres and about five miles from fly fishing on the south branch of the Raritan River. The house has a fireplace in the family room, a formal dining room, marble floors, a deck, two and a half bathrooms and a finished basement with a pool table. There is a separate laundry room and an attached oversize two-car garage. The property is an hour from New York City. Agent: Juli Quezada, Coldwell-Banker Hillsborough/Montgomery, (908) 874-8421; coldwellbankermoves.com.
WHERE -- Gold Beach, Ore.  WHAT -- 7-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $1.2 million
On a 17-acre lot on the north bank of the Rogue River -- which has salmon as well as trout -- this 7,500-square-foot house has access to fly fishing from its private dock. Most of the house has views of the river, as does a covered deck that runs the length of the house. There are five bathrooms, concrete-paved parking areas and driveway, a boat shed, a red barn and a workshop on the property, which is four miles from Pacific Coast beaches. Broker: Lois Whitehead, Whitehead Real Estate, (800) 841-7194; www.whitehead-realty.com.
WHERE -- Mountain Rest, S.C.  WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $85,000
This primitive 1940's fishing shack is bordered on two sides by Sumter National Forest and is minutes from both the Chauga and Chattooga Rivers. Jerry's Creek, a trout stream, is behind the property, which is a third of an acre and at the end of a gravel lane. The house is 640 square feet and has a wood-burning stove, one bathroom and central heating and cooling. Atlanta is an hour and a half away; Highlands, N.C., is 45 minutes away. Agent: Gwen Fowler, United Country Upstate Realty, (864) 638-3599; www.walhallascrealestate.com.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
