Here are some favorite Schumann recordings of the classical-music critics of The New York Times. Availability is hard to determine in the current state of the market. Most of the recordings here can be found on Amazon.com or in major record stores. CD's range in price from $12.99 for one CD to $21.99 for a two-CD set and $40.99 for four CD's. (An introduction appears on Page 1 of Weekend.)
''HUMORESKE,'' ''FANTASIESTÜCKE,'' ''NOVELLETTEN.'' Sviatoslav Richter, pianist (Melodiya 74321 29464 2).
FANTASY IN C, ''FASCHINGS-SCHWANK AUS WIEN,'' ''PAPILLONS.'' Sviatoslav Richter, pianist (EMI Classics 5 75233 2).
PIANO SONATA NO. 1, ''KREISLERIANA.'' Murray Perahia, pianist (Sony Classical SK 62786).
PIANO CONCERTO. Leif Ove Andsnes, pianist; Berlin Philharmonic, conducted by Mariss Jansons (with Grieg's Piano Concerto; EMI Classics 5 57562 2).
ROBERT SCHUMANN never quite had a grip on reality. In his later life, his condition turned tragic. But even as a moody youth, he apparently spent whole days in some fantastical realm of his own invention.
Though it's dangerous to romanticize mental illness, one can't help thinking that Schumann's unhinged imagination, counterbalanced by a probing musical intellect, led to some of the Romantic era's most original music. The instrument that best served his needs in that exploratory early period was the piano. So though I adore Schumann's lieder and chamber works, I'll leave those genres to others and stick to the piano for some recommendations.
To experience how wonderfully strange Schumann's imagination could be, listen to the ''Humoreske.'' Some find it a rambling collection of indistinctly defined sections. I find it audaciously inventive, full of startling fits and turns. The opening section, a wistful tune with a softly rippling accompaniment, jumps right into a hypercharged dance that seems at once bumptious and terrifying.
Sviatoslav Richter's colossal performance, recorded in Moscow in 1956, is a landmark in the Schumann discography. Richter produces piano effects that might seem impossible. In a section marked ''Hastig'' (''Hurried''), for example, a restless right-hand pattern that faintly outlines a melody is supported by a chordal left-hand accompaniment. Schumann also adds a middle staff to the score for an ''Innere Stimme'' (''Inner Voice''), though in a footnote he explains that this voice is not to be played but simply ''read between the lines, as it were.'' Well, somehow, Richter plays it. By highlighting notes that are merely grazed by the right- and left-hand parts, he makes a hazy and unperturbed inner melody magically emerge from the texture.
If you have trouble finding this disc (it has also been released by BMG as part of a 10-CD set of Richter performances), you can certainly find Richter's enthralling 1962 recording of three other Schumann works, drawn from concert performances in Italy and reissued in 2002. The album begins with a sweepingly grand account of the Fantasy in C; despite its title, this is Schumann's most ingeniously structured score. There is also an ebullient version of ''Faschingsschwank aus Wien'' and, best of all, a mercurial ''Papillons,'' played with infectious innocence and sudden bursts of power in the stern march sections but not a trace of sentimentality.
Murray Perahia's 1997 recording of ''Kreisleriana,'' a sprawling suite of eight movements aptly subtitled ''Fantasies for Piano,'' beautifully balances the music's impetuosity and its refinement. But the marvel of this disc is Mr. Perahia's bracing account of the formidable First Sonata; his playing untangles the webs of counterpoint in a sprawling work that can easily sound dense and convoluted.
Finally, Leif Ove Andsnes's scintillating, lucid and lyrical recording of the Piano Concerto, with Mariss Jansons and the Berlin Philharmonic, released last year, makes this repertory staple sound newly vibrant and important. It proves that Schumann could compose deftly structured compositions when he put his mind to it. Of course, his mind eventually had an agenda of its own.
