The next battle over how this year's elections will be financed is starting to take shape, this time before the Federal Election Commission.
The commission announced on Thursday that it would consider new regulations that could determine whether so-called 527 committees can continue to raise and spend millions in unlimited soft money contributions from companies, labor unions and wealthy donors.
The committees, particularly those run by Democrats, have become the focus of the fight over election financing after the Supreme Court last month upheld a new campaign finance law, which was intended to curb soft money.
Some campaign finance experts say that the fate of these committees could have a strong impact on the law's integrity, determining whether it effectively controls soft money or contains loopholes that allow millions to pour into the system.
''This is an institutional question that goes to the heart of the new campaign finance law,'' said Michael Toner, a Republican commissioner.
With several committees already collecting millions to pay for television advertising and voter mobilization efforts, the regulations -- they could be completed as early as May -- have the potential to bring about a major midstream change in the way money is raised and spent this year. Democrats, who are behind in party fund-raising and are operating several large 527 groups, may be particularly vulnerable.
Though Republicans also have 527 organizations, political operatives say they are raising little money. Instead, party officials have gone on the offensive in an effort to stop Democratic groups from raising money.
This week, the Republican National Committee filed a submission asking the commission ''to not sanction the undermining and evasion'' of campaign finance laws by 527 organizations. Ed Gillespie, the committee's chairman, has sent several letters on the 527 issue in recent weeks.
The new law gave Republicans a fund-raising edge in the current election by banning political parties from collecting soft money, which Democrats relied on more heavily than Republicans. Instead, the law favors smaller, regulated hard money contributions, which Republicans are skilled at raising.
The result is that Democrats were being outraised two to one through November of last year, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, which tracks campaign finance.
The commission's decision to consider new 527 regulations comes in addition to several separate requests from individual organizations for the commission to spell out what these groups are allowed to do. The commission will answer these separately, providing more opportunities to define how the 527 committees -- so named for the section of the tax code that created them -- may operate.
''There's the potential for significant evasion of the existing statute,'' said Scott E. Thomas, a Democratic commissioner. ''The commission is obligated to take a serious look at this.''
The regulations will involve public comments and a hearing in coming months before the six-member commission, which is split evenly between Republicans and Democrats. Political operatives and campaign finance activists will joust over which highly complicated campaign finance rules apply.
Officials at the 527 committees say that they are operating within the law and that Congress could have regulated these organizations when it passed the law in 2002 if it desired.
While the new law restricts the committees, it does not expressly prevent them from raising soft money.
''Congress had every opportunity to address this,'' an official who works with a 527 committee said, ''and they chose not to.''
Campaign finance activists say these groups are undermining the new law. The Center for Responsive Politics, Democracy 21 and the Campaign Legal Center filed a complaint against several 527 groups with the commission on Thursday, arguing that their activities are illegal.
''These section 527 groups are attempting to replace the political parties as the new conduits for injecting soft money into federal campaigns,'' the complaint said.
The organizations argue that 527 committees should have to abide by contribution limits and prohibitions on donations from corporations and unions, which have been part of the law for decades. They say the Supreme Court's recent ruling, which used strong language to uphold almost all of the new law, bolsters their argument.
Though some Democratic 527 committees have announced lofty fund-raising goals, it will not be clear how much they raised until reports are filed later this month. Still, the numbers were enough to draw attacks from Republicans.
In one case, Representative Bob Ney, an Ohio Republican who is the chairman of the Committee on House Administration, sent a letter to a Democratic 527 committee this week asking that it deliver documents and cooperate with a committee investigation. Last year, six Democratic operatives declined to attend a hearing, and Mr. Ney received subpoena authority from the committee.
''I call it a second chance letter,'' he said. ''I'm going to see what happens, then make a decision.''
Democrats say Republicans are simply playing partisan politics.
''They are trying to intimidate our activities because they don't like it,'' said Suzy Ballantyne, executive director of Voices for Working Families. ''We will persevere.''
