BASEBALL
Expos Decision Promised
Major League Baseball hopes to pick the future home of the Montreal Expos before the All-Star Game, promising a decision in the coming season after two years of missed deadlines.
The Expos were bought by the other 29 teams before the 2002 season, and the commissioner's office originally hoped to relocate the team by 2003.
After a two-day owners' meeting in Scottsdale, Ariz., Commissioner Bud Selig expressed confidence that the Expos would be relocated by the start of the 2005 season. He said keeping them in Montreal was not an option. (AP)
Deal for Cubs' Closer
Chicago Cubs closer Joe Borowski agreed to a two-year contract worth $4.3 million, avoiding arbitration. He had 33 saves with a 2.63 earned run average last year. (AP)
Phillies Re-Sign Rollins
Philadelphia Phillies shortstop Jimmy Rollins avoided arbitration by agreeing to a one-year contract for $2.4 million.
Rollins, 25, was an All-Star in 2001 and 2002. (AP)
Eaton and Padres Agree
Pitcher Adam Eaton, who had a 9-12 record and a 4.08 earned run average last season, agreed to a two-year contract with the San Diego Padres. (Bloomberg News)
TENNIS
Roddick's Tough Opener
Andy Roddick, seeded No. 1 for the first time in a Grand Slam event, will face Fernando González of Chile in the first round of the Australian Open next week.
While Roddick has the biggest serve in tennis, González is considered by many to have the most potent forehand. In two previous matches, each won one by the score of 7-6, 7-6.
In the women's draw, top-seeded Justine Henin-Hardenne of Belgium, ranked No. 1, will face Olivia Lukaszewicz, a 15-year-old who is ranked 922nd. (Reuters)
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL
Minnesota Is 15-0
Minnesota (15-0) remained the only unbeaten team in the country, defeating visiting Illinois, 74-59.
Lindsay Whalen, a senior closing in on Minnesota's career scoring mark, had just 12 points for the Gophers, who are 4-0 in the Big Ten. She leads the nation in scoring at 23 points a game. (AP)
