Islanders defenseman Kenny Jonsson resisted the urge to slam his hockey stick down on the goal post. Instead, he skated with his head down back to the bench early in the third period Thursday night and sat slumped over.
The transgression that led to Jonsson's dejection was serious. Moments earlier, with the Islanders clinging to a two-goal lead over the Ottawa Senators, Jonsson stood 20 feet from the Islanders' net with a chance to clear the puck to safety. Instead, with Senators forward Martin Havlat forechecking, Jonsson tried to pass the puck to his his defensive partner, Janne Niinimaa.
But the puck slipped off Jonsson's stick and skidded toward his goaltender, Garth Snow. Havlat pounced on the puck, poked it past Snow at 5 minutes 40 seconds of the third, and an Ottawa rally was percolating.
Less than three minutes later, the Senators' comeback was complete when defenseman Zdeno Chara's goal on a one-time shot from the point tied the score at 8:31. The teams settled for a 4-4 tie in front of 17,197 at the Corel Center.
''I just missed the pass,'' Jonsson said. ''We had been up, 4-0, and I wanted to slow it down and give our guys a chance to get in position.''
His mistake was disheartening, Jonsson said, because the Senators are a good team and ''you don't want to let them back in the game.''
The Islanders (20-19-4-1) have one victory in their past seven games and remain a point behind the Rangers, who hold the eighth spot in the Eastern Conference.
It was a disappointing outcome for Snow, who made 40 saves and was nearly perfect for the first two periods against the high-octane Senators, who rallied with three third-period goals.
''That was a tough way to lose two points,'' said Michael Peca, the Islanders' captain, who scored twice for the first time this season. ''We keep shooting ourselves in the foot. You'd think we'd grow up.''
The Islanders also got goals from Mattias Weinhandl and Mariusz Czerkawski. Oleg Kvasha and Trent Hunter each had two assists.
The Islanders arrived in Ottawa seeking a reversal of their recent fortunes. On Jan. 1, the last time they were here, the Islanders were riding a season-high six-game winning streak. But the Islanders lost, 1-0, and had since lost four of five games.
So on Wednesday morning, the Islanders spent the first 30 minutes of practice trying to improve a power play that had scored only once in its past 10 chances.
The Islanders had plenty of time Thursday night to work out their power-play kinks against the Senators (23-11-7-3), one of the N.H.L.'s best teams. Facing an Ottawa team without Daniel Alfredsson, who had the flu, the Islanders had a man advantage seven times in the first two periods alone. They finished with two goals on seven power-play chances.
Peca opened the scoring at 8:30 of the first period, tipping in a rebound off a shot by Hunter.
Weinhandl made it 2-0 at 14:25 with a power-play goal. Czerkawski knocked in a goal-mouth rebound past Ottawa goalie Patrick Lalime for his 15th goal of the season, midway through the second period on another power play.
Peca then put the Islanders ahead by 4-0. Taking a cross-ice pass from Hunter, Peca wired a shot past Lalime for his sixth goal.
But the Senators' Josh Langfeld scored his second goal of the season before the end of the second period, and Todd White notched his ninth goal early in the third period, setting the stage for Jonsson's giveaway.
HOCKEY
