IT was four days before Christmas and only three lifts at the Crotched Mountain Ski &amp; Ride Area were working. Repair crews were fiddling with the fourth. None of the seats had arrived. And the computers, of course, kept crashing.
It had all the makings of a disaster, except for one thing: just the fact that the mountain was open was itself a minor miracle. Almost 15 years ago, Crotched, in Bennington, N.H., near the state's southern border, closed, seemingly for good, a victim of mounting debts and changing tastes.
But in late December, some 600 skiers and a few snowboarders were on hand to witness Crotched's rebirth. Freshly painted chairlifts sprouted where rusty poles once piled up like used toothpicks. Ninety-five snow-making guns were armed and ready. And a dozen trails, cleared of rocks and stumps, rippled down the mountainside like frozen rivers dusted with snow.
Essentially rebuilt from scratch, Crotched is the first new ski resort to open in New England since 1973, when the Bretton Woods Mountain Resort opened in northern New Hampshire. (Other resorts have closed briefly, for renovations or a change in ownership, but Crotched is the first resort, according to ski industry experts, that can be considered completely new.) The $9 million rebirth has seemingly captured the imagination of its backyard neighbors. ''I used to race here all the time,'' recalled Will Towner, 43, a commercial pilot who lives half an hour away in Amherst, N.H., and who visited four times during the first week.
But there is some question whether Crotched can survive when small to medium resorts everywhere -- but particularly in New Hampshire -- have struggled.
During the last 30 years, more than 150 ski areas have closed in New Hampshire, according to Jeremy Davis, a meteorologist who runs the New England Lost Ski Areas Project (www.nelsap.org), which seeks to preserve the memory of abandoned trails. Many of these were microscopic in size, like the Bent Family Tow in the central New Hampshire town of Etna, which consisted of nothing more than a homemade rope tow. But others were venerable resorts. The Mittersill Ski Area in Franconia, N.H., featured a 1,500-foot vertical drop and a full-service hotel. It closed in the early 1980's.
Crotched, with its 875-foot vertical drop, falls somewhere in between and, like many others, it was a casualty of skyrocketing insurance costs, competition from corporate ski giants and a demographic shift toward skiers-as-tourists who demand lattes with their lift tickets. Add to that the Northeast's capricious snow and a few mild winters can spell wipeout.
''Very few things in the ski business are a sure bet,'' said Rick Kahl, editor of Ski Area Management, a trade publication based in Woodbury, Conn. ''Crotched is up against the same Eastern obstacles that led to its closure in the first place.''
But some obstacles are also unique to New Hampshire.
Although the Granite State takes pride in its majestic White Mountains, which boast the tallest peak in the northeast (Mount Washington at 6,288 feet), they are dwarfed by the rolling Green Mountains of Vermont in terms of popularity. Both states have 20 ski areas, but Vermont attracts twice as many alpine skier visits. Last winter, Vermont logged 4.44 million skier visits, while New Hampshire saw only 2.2 million, according to their state ski tourism groups.
Part of it has to do with the terrain. Vermont's ski areas have a combined vertical drop of 30,200 feet, compared with 22,500 for New Hampshire. ''That extra 8,000 feet,'' Skiing magazine recently noted, ''is the approximate equivalent of Vail and Jackson combined.'' But part of that disparity also has to do with location. To start with, Vermont is easier to reach by car from the denser populations of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut: Interstate 91 forms a direct north-south corridor along the length of Vermont. By contrast, the main thruway of New Hampshire, Interstate 93, is anchored to Boston.
In addition, New Hampshire's four biggest mountains are all located in the northern half of the state, while Vermont has nine ski areas with 2,000-foot-plus vertical drops, and three of them are close to the Vermont-Massachusetts border.
And in terms of après-ski, Vermont offers more in the way of luxury condominiums, minimalls and night life, which in turn has drawn more visitors away from New Hampshire. ''Several ski areas in New Hampshire will never see development because they are located on public land,'' said Jeff Leich, executive director of the New England Ski Museum in Franconia.
But for average skiers, the overriding difference is one of perception. ''The Vermont brand is really more natural, purer and less about manufacturing than New Hampshire,'' said David Dillon, president of the Vermont Ski Areas Association. He was in New York last weekend promoting his state by blanketing Central Park with machine-made snow. ''Vermont still believes in an agrarian society.'' For her part, Alice Pearce, executive director of Ski New Hampshire, had this to say about her state's tourism efforts: ''Our key message for New York is, 'Closer Than You Think.' ''
Nonetheless, Crotched's resurrection is being hailed nationally as a harbinger of so-called feeder ski ways -- half-pint mountains near cities that serve as a breeding ground for larger resorts. ''Crotched's reopening is a window into the future,'' said Michael Berry, president of the National Ski Areas Association in Colorado. ''The sport is growing. There is vitality now at entry-level ski areas, and a place like Crotched sees an opportunity in that sector.''
Much of that optimism about Crotched and other small resorts has been placed at the feet of snowboarders, who now make up 30 percent of ski area visitors. Even as fewer skiers hit the slopes each year, the enduring popularity of snowboarding has sparked growth in snow sports, which had remained stagnant for 25 years.
This bodes well for places like Crotched. Snowboarders, after all, tend to be younger and less affluent, and are not yet in the market for slope-side condos with fireplaces and hot tubs. Moreover, novice snowboarders may be more inclined to practice their frontside smith grinds and other maneuvers at places like Crotched than to trek to a giant destination resort just to fight the crowds and spend more money.
That, in any event, is the hope of Felix Kagi, the chief operating officer at Crotched. ''We're targeting mostly young people -- teenagers and snowboarders,'' Mr. Kagi explained. ''We're not Stowe or Stratton. Our market is southern New Hampshire and the lower Boston area.''
The model has worked elsewhere. Crotched is leased by Peak Resorts in St. Louis, Mo., which runs five other small resorts in the Midwest, near cities not commonly associated with snow sports. Hidden Valley, for instance, is 15 miles west of St. Louis and has a 282-foot vertical drop.
To insure against bad weather at Crotched, Peak Resorts invested almost half its total budget in a $4 million snow-making system that ''can cover 80 percent of the mountain overnight,'' Mr. Kagi said. A cavernous, no-frills base lodge, which looks more like a prison than a cozy cabin, contains a cafeteria and a rental shop with 500 snowboards and 1,200 skis. And starting tonight, in another bid for the youth market, trails will stay open until 3 a.m. on Friday and Saturday nights.
Whether the snowboarders who come to Crotched will return often enough to buy vacation homes is an open question. In the mid-1980's, the former owner of Crotched built 75 condos along the mountain. Needless to say, their values plunged when the resort closed. ''They became worthless,'' said Roger Luby, the condos' property manager. Some condos have now returned to their original value; a town house recently sold for $159,000. And real estate speculators have started looking at new sites.
But the crowds -- if they come at all -- are probably a season or two away. On a Sunday afternoon in the middle of the just-passed holiday season, fewer than two dozen people were sitting in the lodge. A single car was parked at the frowzy Highland Inn across the road. And the only people standing in the lift lines were checking tickets.
''It's amazing how empty it is,'' said Logan Snow, 37, who grew up skiing at Crotched and returned to teach his 6-year-old daughter, Casey. ''We hope more people come, so it survives.''
HAVENS
