The European Union asked the World Trade Organization on Thursday for permission to impose sanctions on the United States for failing to change a law that the W.T.O. has already ruled an unfair subsidy for American corporations.
The Europeans said they would begin retaliating with new duties on United States goods as soon as the world trading body approved their petition, a move sure to add to trans-Atlantic trade tensions.
Canada, Japan, South Korea and Chile, which were also parties to the successful case against the United States, said they, too, wanted to begin imposing sanctions on the United States. New duties on American exports could total at least $200 million annually until the law is changed. Though that is a tiny amount compared with the value of American exports to the affected countries, the sanctions would be a symbol of what the Europeans see as Washington's continuing noncompliance with international trade rules it has championed.
The W.T.O. ruled against the United States in January 2003 and set a deadline of last Dec. 27 for Congress to change the legal provision that it judged an unfair subsidy. The provision allows American corporations to receive antidumping fines collected from foreign nations by the United States government.
Congress failed to meet the deadline, and now Europe has, as expected, taken the next step.
''I hope the U.S. will now take action to remove this measure, thus avoiding the risk of sanctions,'' said Pascal Lamy, the chief European trade commissioner, in a statement released Thursday.
Senator Robert C. Byrd, the Democrat from West Virginia who sponsored the measure that the W.T.O. faulted, said that while he was committed to following international trade law, he considered the trade body's ruling unfair. It is logical, Mr. Byrd said, that when foreign nations break international rules, the fines they pay should go to the companies they injured.
''If foreign countries follow the rules that they themselves helped to enact, there will be no negative consequences; but if they break these rules, they must be required to repair the injury they have caused to American producers and their workers,'' Mr. Byrd said in a statement.
This is the latest in a series of trade setbacks for the United States. Late last year, it lost its appeal of a W.T.O. ruling that steel tariffs imposed by President Bush were illegal. Mr. Bush then dropped the tariffs, avoiding more than $2 billion of sanctions on American exports that Europe would have imposed.
Besides the $200 million in new duties relating to the Byrd amendment, Europe could begin phasing in $4 billion worth of sanctions on American exports in March, because Congress failed to meet another December deadline to repeal an overseas tax shelter for American businesses. Those tax breaks for exporters were also declared an illegal subsidy by the W.T.O.
Europe and Canada argued successfully before the W.T.O. that the so-called Byrd amendment encouraged United States companies to file more antidumping cases, because any fines would go to them rather than the federal Treasury.
The office of the United States trade representative said that while the Bush administration wanted Congress to make the changes necessary to comply with the W.T.O. ruling, it would challenge the move to impose sanctions.
''The retaliation being sought by the other complaining parties does not appear to be based on actual harm to their exports,'' said John K. Veroneau, the office's general counsel. ''Accordingly, we will object to their proposed retaliation, sending this matter to arbitration.'' He added that the administration appreciated the willingness of some countries to hold off on imposing sanctions. Australia, Thailand and Indonesia were also complainants, but have said they don't intend to file to retaliate.
The ruling will affect several industries in the United States, especially the soft-lumber industry, which has won rulings against Canada.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Finance Committee, said that he was disappointed at the move to impose sanctions on the United States. But he also criticized Mr. Byrd for including his amendment in an appropriations conference report without a full debate in the Senate.
''I'm not surprised that a bill that was never considered by the committee of expertise or even the full Senate was found to violate our international commitments,'' Mr. Grassley said.
