Manufacturing companies are more optimistic than they have been in four years, according to a report released on Thursday, but industry executives predicted that factories would add only a small number of jobs.
In an otherwise buoyant report, the National Association of Manufacturers predicted that factories would add 250,000 jobs in the next 12 months -- less than 10 percent of the 2.8 million they cut in the last three years.
And even that outlook may be optimistic. Manufacturing companies added barely that many jobs during the previous two economic recoveries, and productivity increases have been so high over the last year that demand for workers could climb more slowly than in the past.
''To be honest, I am less sure about the employment numbers than I am about anything else in this report,'' said Jerry Jasinowski, president of the association, after releasing the forecast for this year.
Even if the association's outlook turns out to be correct, it would reinforce the view of many economists that unemployment will decline only modestly while the broad economy expands at a robust rate of 4 percent a year or more.
That could be bad news for President Bush. One of his greatest vulnerabilities in the November election campaign is the stubbornly high unemployment rate.
Though the rate dropped slightly last month, to 5.7 percent, that was mainly because more than 300,000 people stopped looking for work.
Economists estimate that the nation needs to add about 250,000 jobs a month to achieve a significant drop in the unemployment rate. But while service industries like health care and banking have been expanding, that growth has been nowhere near enough to offset the jobs lost in factories. And manufacturers are still shedding jobs, though at a much slower pace than several months ago.
Mr. Jasinowski predicted that industrial production would expand by 6 percent this year, faster than the economy as a whole, after having declined for more than three years.
Exports will be propelling much of that growth, in part because the decline in the value of the dollar against the euro and other currencies makes American products cheaper in foreign markets.
Manufacturers are also getting a lift from new spending by businesses, which picked up last summer after being depressed for at least three years.
Surveys released on Thursday by the Federal Reserve's district banks in New York and Philadelphia showed that various measures of industrial activity increased sharply in the last month. The New York Fed's index of manufacturing activity rose much more than economists had predicted, with companies reporting increases in orders and higher prices for their products. About two-thirds of companies in the New York survey said they expected business to improve in the next six months.
The Philadelphia Fed's index of manufacturing activity rose to its highest level in 10 years, an increase also much larger than economists expected.
That said, industrial companies continue to be very cautious about hiring people, or even rehiring laid-off workers.
The Philadelphia Fed noted that its index of employment expectations dropped slightly in the last month, with 28 percent of companies in its region expecting to expand their work forces and 13 percent expecting to reduce them.
Mr. Jasinowski said it was ''unlikely'' that factories would ever replace more than half of the jobs lost since 2001.
But it may be difficult to recover even that many. Manufacturers replaced about half their lost jobs after the previous two recessions, but the landscape has changed considerably since then.
Productivity has been increasing much faster than before, at an annual rate around 5 percent for the last two years and at a staggering pace of 9.4 percent in the third quarter of 2003.
On top of that, manufacturers have stepped up their production in China or simply ceded ground to companies that import from Chinese suppliers.
