Profits at Samsung Electronics, the world's largest maker of memory chips, jumped 24 percent in fourth-quarter profit as demand for its liquid crystal display screens and flash-memory chips used in digital cameras charged ahead.
The company also announced on Thursday that it would close plants in Spain and Britain, with an expected loss of 800 jobs that may be transferred to other countries, according to the Reuters news service.
Samsung has invested heavily in production and research, a move that critics called foolhardy during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, but one that has left the company well positioned.
Samsung said that it would continue to invest heavily this year, with an increase of 1 trillion won ($850 million) from 2003 spending, to 7.92 trillion won, or $6.7 billion. Samsung also projected that earnings growth would continue in the first quarter of this year, though January is generally a quiet month for sales.
Net profit for the final quarter of 2003 was 1.86 trillion won ($1.6 billion), up from 1.5 trillion won in the year-earlier period, Samsung said. Sales jumped more than 20 percent, to a quarterly record of 12.89 trillion won ($11.0 billion), while operating profit soared more than 60 percent, to 2.63 trillion won ($2.2 billion), also a record.
''Sales volume of higher-profit-margin flash chips surged to 82 million units in the fourth quarter from 66 million units in the third quarter,'' Samsung said.
Sales of large flat-screen televisions, 22 inches or more in size, soared 122 percent, to 140,000 units, the company said.
Samsung said that it expected demand for liquid crystal displays would outstrip supply in the first half of this year, while demand for flash-memory chips was also likely to grow, said Chu Woosik, the head of investor relations at the company.
Despite the growth in earnings, the results were beneath market expectations. Mr. Chu said the pared profit figure reflected losses at the company's credit card affiliate, Samsung Card, as well as a decline in the value of its stockholdings in other companies.
Cellphone sales during the fourth quarter rose to a quarterly record of 15.5 million units, with a value of almost 4 trillion won ($3.4 billion). For 2004, the company projected that cellphone sales would rise 17 percent, to 65 million units. Samsung is the world's third-largest maker of cellphones.
Analysts said the company might well set another record in the current quarter given its focus on consumer products and cost cuts.
Choi Suk-Po, an industry analyst at Woori Securities, noted, however, that momentum from strong earnings is reflected in the current price of Samsung Electronics shares and added that the company remained heavily dependent on semiconductors and mobile handsets.
''Handset markets are close to saturation and the global supply of DRAM's is exceeding demand,'' he said.
In other news, the company told Reuters that it would be closing a plant in Wynyard, England, that produces microwave ovens and PC monitors and shifting some of those jobs to Palau de Plegamans, in Catalonia, Spain.
The Spanish factory's audio-visual equipment production would be transferred to Slovakia, and its mobile phone production would be moved to China, Reuters said.
