The chairman of the Republican National Committee released excerpts Thursday from a September 2002 Congressional hearing that he said showed that Gen. Wesley K. Clark had changed his position on Iraq once he began running for the Democratic presidential nomination.
But General Clark said the complete transcript of his testimony showed that his position had been consistent. He said the attack, coming as he has attracted growing crowds and attention, was a sign that the Republicans believed he would be the biggest threat to President Bush's re-election.
The foreign policy discussion came on a day when General Clark strongly criticized President Vladimir V. Putin, saying that under his leadership Russia was ''not a democracy'' and ''not our ally.''
''This administration has tried to cozy up to Vladimir Putin,'' General Clark said at a town hall meeting in Merrimack, N.H. ''He may wear a crucifix around his neck, but I promise you he is not a Christian. He is not a person who shares American values. He is a person was born and brought up in the K.G.B. He wants to re-establish greater Russia.''
Earlier, in General Clark's home state, Arkansas, the Republican chairman, Ed Gillespie, said: ''Just Tuesday, he demanded that Congress probe why our country went into Iraq. But the Congress knows full well the reasons.'' The lawmakers, Mr. Gillespie said, ''heard compelling testimony'' supporting Mr. Bush's policies, including some from General Clark.
The full transcript reveals positions far more nuanced than the excerpts released by the Republicans.
One example cited by Mr. Gillespie, from General Clark's testimony before the House Armed Services Committee on Sept. 26, 2002, quoted him as saying ''there's no question that Saddam Hussein is a threat.''
That was the first sentence, however, of an 1,800-word statement in which General Clark argued for more diplomacy before any military action, saying ''time is on our side.''
In another instance Mr. Gillespie cited, the general said: ''I do believe that the United States diplomacy in the United Nations will be strengthened if the Congress can adopt a resolution expressing U.S. determination to act if the United Nations cannot act. The use of force must remain a U.S. option under active consideration.''
The next sentence, which was not included by Mr. Gillespie, read: ''Such a resolution need not, at this point, authorize the use of force.''
The exchange was only the latest in which critics have accused General Clark of changing his stripes after deciding to enter the race.
''What I was saying then is what I'm saying today, that Saddam Hussein was not an imminent threat,'' General Clark said in Manchester, where he announced a plan to help protect transportation centers against terrorism.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
