Stephon Marbury could not wait for Lenny Wilkens to take the practice court. Antsy, he had to greet Wilkens, the Knicks' new coach, beforehand. So like a kid on Christmas Eve, peeking at his presents through a crack in the doorway, a beaming Marbury sneaked awkwardly into Wilkens's news conference Thursday morning.
Given the go-ahead by the Knicks spokesman Joe Favorito, Marbury bolted toward the seated Wilkens, welcoming him to New York with a hug. Already, there is a bond in the making.
Marbury, playing for his ninth head coach in his eight seasons in the N.B.A., has had great starts with coaches before, but now more than ever he knows he needs to make sure his connection with this one remains strong. The Knicks' immediate future and Marbury's legacy depend on it.
''Point guards are born; they're delivered by God,'' Marbury said hours later after the Knicks' first practice under Wilkens. ''You can't make point guards. And to play for a guy who's in the Hall of Fame for coaching and playing is an honor. This is another chapter in my book. For myself, everything just keeps getting brighter for me.''
Wilkens, a Brooklyn native like Marbury, has been a career changer for point guards. Before Wilkens's tutelage, Gus Williams averaged 10 points a game over two seasons for Golden State. Under Wilkens, he became a 20-point scorer and helped Seattle win its only N.B.A. title in 1979.
In Mark Price's rookie season with Cleveland, he was a 7-point scorer thought to be too slow, too short and too soft to become special. But as he continued to play under Wilkens, Price blossomed into a four-time All-Star.
In Atlanta, Mookie Blaylock enjoyed his best seasons under Wilkens, earning the only All-Star berth of his 13-year career.
If Wilkens, who called the Knicks ''Stephon's team,'' can transform him from a dazzling individual star into a true team leader, then Marbury could go down as an all-time great. If not, he may well be remembered as a tremendous talent who could never lift a team to real victory.
''Steph has no excuses now,'' said an Eastern Conference scout, speaking on condition of anonymity. ''He's playing for a legendary coach and a Hall of Fame player. If it doesn't work, it's on him.''
Wayne Embry, who as the general manager in Cleveland hired Wilkens and traded for Price, says he thinks that it will work and that Wilkens will help Marbury reach another level.
''What Lenny can teach Marbury is the overall significance of a point guard,'' Embry said in a telephone interview. ''Lenny is so good at teaching point guards how to get everyone involved. I think he will take the terrific talent that Marbury has and give him a greater understanding of how he doesn't sacrifice any of his talent or his stardom by getting the other guys involved in the game.''
Though Marbury shoots and scores a lot, as a shooting guard does, so did Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president and a legendary point guard. Marbury can also find creases in the defense, penetrate, draw defenders and find an open teammate with a pass.
What Marbury can learn from Wilkens is how to lead, how to inspire, how to pat a teammate on the backside and say ''next time'' when he misses an open shot, how to build confidence, how to earn trust.
''Certainly, I want to talk to him about what point guards do, what they're capable of doing, about leadership, about running the show, about it becoming his team,'' Wilkens said. ''So I'll spend a lot of time, talking, showing, explaining and encouraging.''
It is sometimes tough for a superior talent like Marbury to put up with the shortcomings of those around him. That was evident in his two and a half seasons with the Nets. He seems to have improved through natural maturation, and Wilkens could help him with the rest. After all, Wilkens was a superior talent himself.
Wilkens said that at a practice decades ago he learned from an old coaching friend, Marv Harshman, to accept and to improve those who lacked his gifts on the court.
''I was real impatient because the guards couldn't make the play or couldn't see it or whatever,'' Wilkens said. ''And we talked about it and he said: 'Well, you have to show them. Maybe they don't see it like you see it. It comes to you a lot quicker.' So that was a good lesson for me.''
If Marbury learns that lesson, he knows he could join his coach and his team president in the Hall of Fame, and the Knicks could become a noisemaker in the Eastern Conference playoffs, as soon as this spring.
But Marbury is not the only one in need of learning. Wilkens spent the entire day pronouncing Marbury's name as STEH-fin instead of Steh-FON.
''He can call me whatever he wants to call me, that's all right,'' Marbury said. ''Everybody calls me Steph or Stephon. My name is Stephon. But if he calls me STEH-fin, that's cool. I heard he was calling Mookie 'Mooie' or something like that. So it's cool, it doesn't bother me at all, especially coming from him.''
The Knicks are hoping Marbury receives all of Wilkens's words so well.
PRO BASKETBALL
