Mike Cerasaro has worked at the Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant here for 18 years. As a senior technician, he handles the shipping of radioactive waste, a job that requires skill and no shortage of courage.
But on Wednesday, Mr. Cerasaro held something he considers even more dangerous: a placard warning that the workers at Indian Point 3 were prepared to strike if their union and the plant owner could not reach an agreement on their contract.
The contract that governs 276 workers at the Indian Point 3 reactor is set to expire at 11:59 p.m. on Saturday, and members of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America say they will go on strike against Entergy Nuclear Northeast, the owners of the power plant, if an agreement is not reached.
''Nobody wants to go on strike,'' said Mr. Cerasaro, 50, of Hyde Park. ''We're just asking to be compensated fairly.''
The contract for 282 workers at the adjacent Indian Point 2 reactor is set to expire in June. Those workers would not participate in a walkout this weekend, union officials said.
A strike would have no impact on security at the plant, said Jim Steets, a spokesman for Entergy, because the security force is not covered by the contract.
Entergy plans to keep Indian Point 3 running if a strike is held, with the plant's management staff substituting for maintenance and operations workers. The company could also send workers to the plant from Indian Point 2 and eight other plants that Entergy owns, Mr. Steets said.
''We will have workers who have come up through the ranks as inspectors and are now part of management,'' he said.
Steve Mangione, a spokesman for Local 1-2, said union members hold positions like reactor operators, who generally work in the control room with management supervisors, and technicians, who inspect the equipment for leaks and measure the air and water for radiation and chemicals. He called Entergy's assertions that the plant would be operated safely by management and replacement crews ''propaganda.''
''The public should not believe that for a minute,'' Mr. Mangione said.
The Westchester County executive, Andrew J. Spano, has said that if there is a strike, Indian Point 3 should shut down.
Scott Vanderhoff, the Rockland County executive, also called for the plant to shut down. And union leaders asked Gov. George E. Pataki and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to recommend a shutdown if a strike is held. Mr. Steets dismissed the call for a shutdown as ill informed.
A spokesman for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Neil A. Sheehan, has said that the agency has reviewed Entergy's contingency plans and found them acceptable.
The issues being negotiated include salary and health benefits.
