Wesleyan University economics professor Richard Miller received a handwritten note a few years ago from one of his former students.
A shaggy-haired football player named Bill Belichick took classes with Miller in the early 1970's and kept in touch after he chose football coaching over the financial world.
In the note, Belichick, then head coach of the Cleveland Browns, said he used many of the economic principles he learned at Wesleyan to keep the Browns under the N.F.L.'s salary cap.
''He used incremental analysis,'' Miller said of an approach that is taught in almost every economics course on the Middletown, Conn., campus.
As Belichick's current team, the New England Patriots, stands one game from reaching its second Super Bowl in three years, his name and the words ''coaching genius'' increasingly appear together.
There is more to Belichick, however, than his image as an X's and O's savant.
He is, at heart, an academic.
Raised in the shadows of the United States Naval Academy, where his father was a football coach, Belichick went on to attend Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., the prep school of President Bush and his father.
He graduated from Wesleyan with an economics degree. That education, at two of the country's most elite schools, helped lay the foundation for Belichick's emergence today as one of the best theorists in the N.F.L.
''That was a common thread at Andover and Wesleyan, both those schools, they taught me how to think, how to solve problems,'' Belichick said.
The football education began in his childhood home in Annapolis, Md., the home of his father, Steve Belichick, who played fullback for the Detroit Lions for one season and coached at Navy for 33 years.
Game film flickered on walls as after-dinner entertainment, and the bookshelves overflowed with tomes on football theory and strategy.
Bill Belichick virtually grew up at the Academy, idolizing Navy players like Roger Staubach and Joe Bellino, both of whom won the Heisman Trophy.
He spent muggy summer nights on the porch listening to Steve Belichick talk about football with assistants and fall afternoons accompanying his father on scouting trips.
''When the other coaches were around, he didn't ask a lot of questions,'' said Jeannette Belichick, Bill's mother. ''They liked having him around because he wasn't a pest. He was very, very good at listening and learning and remembering.''
When it came time to choose a college after high school, Belichick remembered his father telling Navy football recruits that they would be better off with an additional year of prep school. Preparation is not just one of Belichick's football buzzwords; it is a family trait.
So in 1970, Belichick attended Phillips Academy for one year, leaving his conservative surroundings in Annapolis for the liberal prep school in northeastern Massachusetts.
He arrived with his hair long, the proud owner of nearly every Beatles album.
The campus during the 1970-71 school year provided a distinct change for Belichick.
He entered a place where the Doors and Iron Butterfly blared out of dorm room windows, Vietnam protests sprang up, and many students smoked marijuana.
''Bill was not rebellious; he was not a flower child,'' said Stratis Falangas, one of Belichick's classmates and teammates. ''He was more diligent and very reflective.''
Belichick, who scored more than 1,400 points on his Scholastic Aptitude Test, played center on the undefeated football team and attack on the 13-1 lacrosse team.
His slight build earned him the nickname ''Weak Link'' on the offensive line, but he understood the blocking schemes so well that, after the huddle broke, players like Falangas would ask Belichick to remind them of their assignments.
Looking back, Belichick said that prep school meant more than making friends and snapping for punts.
''The appreciation I got is how talented people are in areas -- music, art, language -- that I never even gave a second thought to,'' Belichick said.
As a reserve defensive end at Wesleyan in the fall of 1974, Belichick never stopped asking questions like ''What if the offense did that?'' and ''Whose responsibility is that?''
Undersized, shuffled from position to position and often injured, Belichick made curiosity his hallmark.
''What I remember so vividly is how interested he was in the technical aspect of his position,'' said John Biddiscombe, then Belichick's position coach and now the university's athletic director.
Belichick long snapped and played offensive and defensive line, but his career was so anonymous that the school does not even have a picture of him on the field.
He served as the lacrosse team co-captain his senior year, dabbled in squash and was president of his fraternity. But Belichick said Wesleyan's true value came through in the classroom.
''You learn how to think and solve problems,'' Belichick said. ''Here's the problem, you go figure it out.''
That is exactly what Belichick did after college when he caught on as a volunteer assistant for the Baltimore Colts in 1975. Breaking down film and doing odd jobs, Belichick's salary jumped from no pay to $25 a week to $50 a week by the end of the season.
''You could see immediately Billy was a hard-working kid,'' said Ted Marchibroda, then the Colts' coach.
''One of those guys that once you gave a job to do, you didn't see him until it was over.''
Belichick moved on to assistant jobs in Detroit and Denver before landing with the Giants in 1979, where he stayed 12 years. After serving as defensive coordinator for two Super Bowl victories, Belichick won the head coaching job in Cleveland. He was fired in 1995 after four losing seasons in five years.
The N.F.L. also fundamentally changed in 1993 with the introduction of the salary cap and free agency. Winning became as much about off-the-field strategy as on. When Belichick landed in New England in 1996 as defensive coordinator, he impressed the owner, Bob Kraft, with his understanding of that sea change.
''He knew the players,'' Kraft said. ''He would say, 'We should sign this guy,' players who are maybe in that mid range. It was clear to me that he had a system, an outlook that was different.''
Richard Miller, the economics professor, still gets handwritten notes from Belichick, and when he watches games, he wears the Patriots hat that Belichick sent him.
Twice last semester, Miller said he thought of Belichick and his Wesleyan background. The first moment came when Belichick cut the popular All-Pro safety Lawyer Milloy.
The move shocked much of New England, but Miller understood.
''It was simple cost-benefit analysis,'' Miller said. ''He learned that in economics.''
Soon after, Miller was lecturing 100 freshman in an Introductory Economics 101 class and mentioned how his former student, Belichick, used economics to stay under the salary cap.
After class, a young Andover graduate approached Miller and introduced herself as Amanda.
''Bill,'' she said, ''is my dad.''
PRO FOOTBALL
