ON guard in the hallway of her Upper West Side office -- to which she repairs when she feels the urge to learn her lines in private, tinker with new formulas for the perfume she markets, or tend to the business of being not just her actress/supermodel/celebrity self but the dutiful daughter of Ingrid Bergman and Roberto Rossellini -- Isabella Rossellini unfurls a Mona Lisa smile and automatically extends her hand.
Private to the core, public on the surface, she knows how to make a gracious first impression, or pretend to. Good thing, as she is on the cusp of her New York City theatrical debut in ''The Stendhal Syndrome,'' two one-act plays by Terrence McNally. No starlet at age 51, but a New Yorker since she moved here at 19 and worked on RAI Italian Television's weekly comedy show ''The Other Sunday'' alongside Roberto Benigni, Ms. Rossellini is equal parts terrified and ecstatic.
''More than the fact of the live audience is the fact that the critics are frightening,'' she says, anticipating, and elegantly shrugging off, the worst. ''English is not my first language, so I was always a little intimidated about doing theater, but look, I've turned 50, and there is a sense of adventure in this. An opportunity like this doesn't happen that often. May never happen to me again.'' She deems herself lucky to originate a role -- no famous predecessor to be measured against -- in an original play written by a writer who awes her, and directed by Leonard Foglia, who sought her out for the main roles.
Conceivable that nepotism or nostalgia was part of the casting? Maybe once upon a time, but not now: ''I've worked for 35 years of my life, as a model and an actress and for Lancôme as a spokesperson, and it can't be just because I'm Ingrid Bergman's daughter. That might get people to take a look at me, but it doesn't make them hire me.''
In the first play, ''Full Frontal Nudity,'' she plays an Italian tour guide; voyeurs, take note that the nude in the title is not Ms. Rossellini, whose nonpareil nude scene in her former paramour David Lynch's film ''Blue Velvet'' remains a conversation piece nearly 20 years after its release, but Michelangelo's statue of David. That she portrays a middle-aged woman with a Continental accent is encouraging: Ms. Rossellini's upbringing in Paris and Rome left her with an accent that has proved as time-resistant as her looks. (That alluring accent is a liability no voice coach has tamed.)
Previews begin Feb. 1 at Primary Stages' new home on East 59th Street. Ms. Rossellini, also guest-starring on the ABC series ''Alias'' on Sunday night, has just come from inspecting the unfinished theater: this explains the constellation of construction dust in her gamine cap of brunette hair, and the adrenaline in her system.
Her grip is fleeting but firm; her fingernails are trimmed and uncolored. That chip to her front tooth is a souvenir of a childhood skirmish: her brother, Roberto, hurled a telephone. She waits politely as her personal assistant and a publicist make a tandem exit. Then, this vision in basic black -- leather jacket over loose-fitting sweater above draped trousers -- points a visitor to the only real chair in the room.
Ms. Rossellini, exuding a translucence that defies gravity and geometry, perches on an ergonomically correct stool. She gazes lovingly on two of her parents' vintage movie posters, ''Europe 51'' and ''Stromboli,'' part of a collection she has assembled for the film archive at Wesleyan University. She twiddles a yellow pencil in her hands, then switches to a silver chain with a Scottie dog charm (she has two dogs and a thing for strays).
SHE is, she says, well trained to suffer the spotlight: her place is guaranteed there by incessant magazine covers, a multimillion-dollar, 14-year contract that wedded her face to Lancôme cosmetics and concluded in her firing soon after she turned 40, high-voltage liaisons with Mr. Lynch and the actor Gary Oldman, and a first marriage to Martin Scorsese. And if she seems sick of recounting her saga -- ''It's all in my book,'' she says wearily, referring to ''Some of Me,'' the slyly ''semi-fictional memoir'' Random House published in 1997 -- or talking up the resplendence of her face, which was the subject of a Paris museum exhibition and which bears a spectral resemblance to that of her mother, who died of cancer in 1982, well, that's no lie.
Ms. Rossellini, who oversees a line of makeup and perfume for Lancaster Group, has not indulged in cosmetic surgery; until she finally got a driver's license last year, she was known in Bellport, Long Island, where she has a weekend house, for biking to the supermarket even in snowstorms, famous face exposed to the elements. ''Some days I wake up and think that with all the new technologies out there, why not use them? And some days I wake up and think, 'Is this all just the new form of Chinese foot-binding?'''
More even than family, she says, her mother loved acting -- but she did quit for the two years it took to nurse Ms. Rossellini through scoliosis in her teens. Her own daughter, Elettra, had a brush with the ailment but, at 20, is modeling in Milan. Ms. Rossellini approves: ''It's nice to know your children don't hate your job, that she didn't hate me for doing it, and that she even finds it appealing.'' When her adopted son, Roberto, 10, sweeps in dragging a bulging backpack and issuing directives, Ms. Rossellini, now single and liking it, raises a pair of maternal eyebrows but snaps to attention.
Interview over. Charmed.
PUBLIC LIVES
