Continuing a string of economic changes before elections, India's government on Thursday raised the ceilings on foreign investment in private banks, and did away with the limit on foreign investment in private oil exploration and marketing companies.
The opening is expected to attract a fresh wave of investment to India, one of the world's fastest growing economies, with expansion of more than 8 percent expected this year.
The limit on foreign investment in banks was raised to 74 percent from 49 percent. The Parliamentary affairs minister, Sushma Swaraj, told reporters in Delhi that the new ceiling would include financial investment by foreign companies and individuals.
Share prices of Indian banks surged on the Mumbai stock exchange amid an overall 2 percent decline in the market in trading on Thursday.
Low interest rates and a strong economy are expected to lead a boom in India's banking sector.
With the relaxing of limits on oil exploration, overseas companies will be allowed to set up wholly owned oil and gas units. The ceiling on that type of investment was previously 51 percent.
However, analysts noted that India's energy sector remains largely in the hands of government companies, which are not affected by the new investment rules. Nonetheless, India has been trying to draw investment into oil infrastructure and to lessen its dependence on imported oil.
The government again did not raise the 49 percent limit for foreign investment in telecommunications companies.
Some analysts said the economic changes were intended to enhance the ruling coalition's chances in this year's elections. General elections are scheduled for the end of the year, but it is widely expected that the elections will be brought forward to April.
Last week, the government announced tax cuts on a wide range of consumer goods and tax breaks for farmers. India signed a free trade agreement this month with six other South Asian nations that would lower tariffs on a host of products by 2006 and mostly end them in about seven years.
In a departure from previous Indian elections, normally fought on communal and caste issues, the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party is making economic liberalization a major plank in its campaign platform, and hopes to ride the wave of India's rapid growth.
