Elizabeth Edwards, 54, gritted her teeth as yet another voter, an elderly woman with white hair, told her how young her 50-year-old husband looked.
''Truth is, my hair is more like yours,'' Mrs. Edwards said with characteristic bluntness at a restaurant in rural Marshalltown, Iowa, the other day. ''But I don't want to walk around and hear people say, 'Oh, look, there's John Edwards with his mother.' ''
Mrs. Edwards's candor is hardly limited to her contrasting her looks with those of her husband, North Carolina's senior senator.
Last month, at a living-room gathering in New Hampshire, she freely dissected the previous night's Democratic presidential debate. She concluded, for instance, that the Rev. Al Sharpton was ''very vulnerable on Tawana Brawley'' but that the moderator ''didn't have the goods'' on Mr. Sharpton's implicating a white prosecutor in a young black woman's rape, which a grand jury found to be a hoax.
In contrast to Judith Steinberg Dean, who is keeping a distance from her own husband's presidential campaign, Mrs. Edwards, a former bankruptcy lawyer who holds a master's degree in English and displays a depth of knowledge rivaling that of any candidate, is deeply involved in Senator Edwards's drive for the Democratic nomination.
Like the wives of several other candidates, Mrs. Edwards has hit the campaign trail hard, but with an outspokenness that sharply contrasts with the caution and discipline of her husband. She does not hold her tongue behind the scenes, either, weighing in on big strategic decisions, some policy matters and just about anything having to do with her husband's public image.
''If you think she is candid with you, you should see her in a staff meeting,'' said one senior adviser, who allowed that some staff members occasionally chafed at her directness and influence.
Mrs. Edwards often participates in the campaign's daily conference call, in which strategy and tactics are discussed. She stands in for Mr. Edwards when he is not available for the call and even sometimes when he is, jumping in if she believes that consultants are leading him astray.
''Sometimes when they're talking about planning a message, some of the folks will get full of themselves sometimes and they'll start being more negative than John would be,'' she said in an interview. ''Sometimes he'll let them talk on -- I don't know why he does that -- but I won't let them talk on. I'll say, 'O.K., that's all fine, but that's not the way John thinks about it.' ''
If Mrs. Edwards has her way, and she usually does, her husband will not be seen dancing at campaign events, or putting on hats, helmets or other garb he would not ordinarily wear. She has little tolerance for gimmickry.
And if the lighting and Mr. Edwards's delivery in a future commercial appear just so, partly credit his wife, who during a recent campaign stop conferred with his media adviser about the way the shooting was going. She hated the dark look of a previous ad.
For all her semi-feigned annoyance at the attention to his boyish looks, his image makers believe that the contrast between the senator and his wife helps him. That is especially true, the advisers say -- and they tread carefully here -- when Mr. Edwards introduces as ''my wife of 26 years'' a woman who looks smart, maternal and glitz-free.
''Given his looks, voters, I think, expect to see some blond trophy or something when he introduces his wife,'' an aide said.
Mrs. Edwards's involvement is all the more remarkable given that while juggling campaign duty, she is also caring for their two young children: Emma Claire, 5, and Jack, 3. (An older daughter, Cate, is a senior at Princeton.)
The couple decided to have children again after their son Wade, 16, was killed in a car accident in 1996.
''Right after Wade died, time stood still,'' Mrs. Edwards said. ''I remember one time driving from the cemetery home, and somebody was mowing their lawn and you want to say, 'Don't do that, don't change anything,' as if somehow we'll be able to move back in time some way.''
In tribute to their son, the Edwardses created a foundation in his name that operates after-school centers in Raleigh. Mr. Edwards, a trial lawyer, resumed his career after several months, but Mrs. Edwards gave up hers and devoted much time to the centers and grief support groups, making friends on the Internet with other people who had lost children.
For some time, the couple did not do much by way of entertainment, not even watching television. ''It was the Weather Channel with sound,'' Mrs. Edwards said, ''and then the Weather Channel without sound.''
To ''bring joy back in our lives,'' she took hormone shots to be able to conceive again. She gave birth to Emma Claire at age 48 -- 10 days before Mr. Edwards's Senate primary victory in 1998 -- and to Jack at age 50.
Mrs. Edwards says caring for a newborn Emma Claire limited her involvement in the general election that year, though she and Mr. Edwards discussed matters often.
Then it came time to decide about a race for president. ''I really believed he should do it, but I didn't want to put that pressure on him,'' she said. ''It was mostly me saying it's all right with me, he could do it. I try to be more of a sounding board for him. I didn't want to put pressure on him thinking that I would be disappointed if he didn't do it.''
Once the decision was made, she dived right in, too. She listened in on some meetings with policy advisers and then offered her opinion, particularly on education, an area she says she would pay close attention to as first lady.
She recalls her dissatisfaction after meeting with some advisers on education.
''After they left, I said, 'This is the same stuff we've heard for years and years, and none of these have been solutions,' '' she recounted. ''I remember sitting in the bedroom, in what I call the talking chairs. We sat in the talking chairs and just talked about our educational experiences and our children's educational experiences and what would have made them better.''
His education policy -- with emphasis on after-school programs, small class sizes and college tuition subsidies -- ''came a lot out of that conversation,'' she said.
As a lawyer and a candidate's spouse unafraid to talk policy, she is seen by some voters as a bit akin to Hillary Rodham Clinton.
''She is like Hillary, but she had some things that Hillary doesn't have,'' said Harriet Hamilton, a retired artist in Des Moines who heard Mrs. Edwards speak recently on everything from rearing children to the USA Patriot Act. ''She had a tenderness that I don't always see in Hillary.''
Mrs. Edwards says she doubts that she would be as publicly involved in policy as Mrs. Clinton was when first lady. But she would counsel her husband privately.
''We've talked policy the entire time we've been married,'' she said. ''It would be silly to think all of a sudden because he's running for president we don't talk about these things.''
She declined, though, to identify any serious policy differences with him.
''When you're married,'' she said, ''sometimes you win the argument, sometimes he wins the argument. When he's the person who gets to vote, he always gets to win the argument.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: SPOUSES
