Bare shoulders gleaming in the Maui sunshine, the girls leapt, kicked and did hip-hop moves in preparation for their big day: a performance at halftime of the Hula Bowl on Saturday.
''We're going to end on a big 'YEAH!''' a drill instructor told the more than 400 cheerleaders from around the country on Thursday. The girls twisted and turned and maneuvered -- ''a five-six-seven-eight!'' -- landing on one knee and shouting ''YEAH!''
Lauren Crossan, 18, a star cheerleader from Randolph, N.J., never got the chance to rehearse. The popular young woman left home last weekend with two other cheerleaders from her school's squad, and one mother as a chaperon, for the adventure of a lifetime: the chance to see the glorious Hawaiian island of Maui and to perform on television in the activity she loved. But mere hours after arriving -- before most of the other girls had even arrived -- she was dead, her naked body found in shrubbery after what is believed to be a fall from a ninth-floor balcony at the Hyatt Regency Resort and Spa.
The police said Ms. Crossan fell from a room occupied by two men, 19 and 20 years old, from Folsom, Calif., at least one of whom she had met in the lobby when she arrived. The authorities originally treated the case as a potential murder and held the men for questioning. But after receiving a preliminary autopsy report, they released them and classified Ms. Crossan's death as an accident, with alcohol involved.
''There was no sign of any struggle or any other injury when the body was examined,'' Acting Lt. Tivoli Faaumu of the Maui Police Department said in an interview. ''There was no evidence of foul play at the scene, so with that and the report, we released the individuals.''
The Maui County coroner's physician, Anthony Manoukian, said he expected final tests to show that Ms. Crossan's blood-alcohol level was about twice the legal limit of 0.08. He said his examination also showed that there was no sexual assault or struggle. He does not think drugs were involved.
The cheerleaders who were set to perform at the game were chosen from all over the country by the National Cheerleaders Association, a division of the Dallas-based National Spirit Group. Ms. Crossan arrived a day before the program formally began, and her body was found early on the day when most of the other young women arrived. The cheerleaders were told at an orientation session on Monday that there had been a fatality, many said, but they were not given any details. Cheerleaders and parents said the young women were urged by organizers to move in groups and to be careful.
''You just watch out who you meet and who you speak to,'' said Jessica Holland, 18, of Winona, Miss. ''Everybody is just more cautious. Not so much afraid, but cautious.''
Many of the girls said that the incident was in the back of people's minds, but that they were not spending a lot of time talking or thinking about it.
''It's not something you sit and dwell on,'' said Carey Harris of West Plains, Mo., who was on the trip with her daughter Ashley, 12. ''I feel this is a very safe environment for our kids, a lot safer than most places.''
Some have mourned in their own way. The lush tropical garden where Ms. Crossan was found lies just outside the ballroom where the girls practice. Amid the flattened ferns, a pile of purple orchid leis has materialized.
Few of the cheerleaders had a chance to meet Ms. Crossan, but Denise and Robert Fisher of Westchester, whose daughter Tristan, 16, is in the program, said they had been seated behind Ms. Crossan and the other girls on their flight to Maui and had chatted with them.
''Adorable,'' Mrs. Fisher said.
Mr. Fisher added: ''We were on the plane for seven hours with her. You can tell if someone's wild, carrying on. And she wasn't like that.''
If there is any sign of wildness here now it is well hidden. Several parents said the cheerleaders had nightly bed checks and a 24-hour ''buddy'' who acted as a chaperon, and that the teenagers had been forbidden by the cheerleaders association to venture any farther than a nearby shopping center. Giggles and door-slamming subsided by 11:30 on Wednesday night, and all was quiet until morning.
Lieutenant Faaumu said that Ms. Crossan's clothing, which was found in the room occupied by the two California men, would be sent with the bedding for fiber analysis. More toxicology reports are pending.
Lieutenant Faaumu said that investigators had not found any empty bottles at the scene, and that the police did not know how the alcohol was obtained. A blood sample has been sent to a laboratory in California for extensive drug screening, Dr. Manoukian said, though he added that preliminary investigation suggested there were no drugs present. Those results could take a couple of weeks to come back, he said.
