TOM PETERS, chief designer of General Motors' performance cars, couldn't sleep nights worrying about the headlamps on the 2005 Chevrolet Corvette, unveiled at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit earlier this month. The dilemma: Should the headlamps on the redesigned sports car pop up from the hood when the lights are switched on, as they have for more than 40 years? Or would the Corvette still be a Corvette if he went with more traditional exposed headlamps?
Ultimately, Mr. Peters went the exposed route: the headlamps were easier and cheaper to build, could use new xenon technology for brighter illumination, and allowed a steeper slope to the front of the car for better aerodynamics. ''I concluded if the car's overall statement said 'Corvette,' then we were successful,'' Mr. Peters said in a telephone interview.
If the cars unveiled at the auto show are any evidence, there's a new hot spot in auto design: the lights. On everything from futuristic concept cars to 2004 models on dealers' lots now, once lowly lights have been turned into design points, helping to differentiate models and set cars apart in terms of technology -- and image. ''Lighting is definitely a styling differentiator,'' James L. Johnson Jr., executive vice president and general manager of global automotive lighting for Osram Sylvania, one of the world's largest producers of automobile lights and bulbs, said in an interview at the show.
Part of the reason for all the changes is better technology, which has given designers more flexibility. Using acrylic, a moldable plastic, instead of glass to cover the headlamps, for instance, gives car makers even more leeway in headlamp shape. So on the new Chrysler Crossfire sports car, the ribbed metal of the hood is echoed by similar lines on the headlamp covers, while on the Cadillac CTS, the taillights rise onto the upper fender, mimicking the tail fins that Cadillac made famous in the 1950's.
As new light sources, like xenon and light-emitting diodes, or L.E.D.'s, become cheaper to manufacture, light designs are likely to change even more radically. Already, on Infiniti's QX56 sport utility and G35 sedan, rows of L.E.D.'s -- tiny bulbs that never burn out and use less power than conventional lights -- break the taillights out of their usual simple shapes. And on concept cars like the Hyundai HCD-8, traditional lights were replaced by a wedge-shaped array of square and round L.E.D.'s. On the Ford Bronco concept S.U.V., the taillights are outlined by L.E.D.'s. Taking things even further, the lights on the Chrysler ME Four-Twelve supercar concept look like fire shooting from the back of the car, an illuminated nod to the powerful 850-horsepower engine.
Beyond style, practical reasons have spurred car companies to focus on lighting. In Europe, there are strict regulations on lights' brightness and height levels as well as the kinds of lights used. As European cars find their way to the United States, so do the innovative light designs. Then there are the aging baby boomers with diminishing vision who demand brighter and better lighting.
For them, there are innovations like so-called bending lights, which can be found on the 2004 Porsche Cayenne and 2004 Lexus RX 330 sport utilities. Inside the headlamp housing is a second smaller lamp angled toward the side. When the car's computer recognizes that the driver is turning the steering wheel, the smaller light switches on, illuminating the car's path around a sharp corner or bend. In some BMW's, the lights also move up and down, to adjust when going uphill or down.
Designers say the new lighting will make cars safer, too. Because L.E.D.'s illuminate faster than other brake lights, the driver behind can act faster to stop the car in a panic situation, noted James Schwyn, research and development director for Valeo, a lighting manufacturer. At 70 miles an hour, L.E.D.'s might give drivers as much as 25 feet more room to stop. On BMW's 6 Series luxury coupe, the L.E.D. taillights can even signal how hard the driver is braking. If a driver just taps the brakes, a few of the L.E.D.'s illuminate; but if the driver slams on the brakes, all of the L.E.D.'s light up, warning the driver behind.
DRIVING
