Giants Coach Tom Coughlin brought in Dick Jauron yesterday to talk about becoming assistant head coach, even though Coughlin has already hired Tim Lewis as defensive coordinator and Jauron's specialty is also defense.
Until Wednesday, Jauron was in the running for the Buffalo Bills' head coaching job, but when that went to Mike Mularkey, Jauron came in to consider Coughlin's proposition to take a job one step above Lewis. Jauron is also said to be considering several defensive coordinator positions, including in San Diego.
Jauron was Coughlin's defensive coordinator in Jacksonville when Coughlin took over the expansion Jaguars in 1994. Their success put Jauron in line for his first head coaching job with the Bears in 1999. Chicago fired Jauron two weeks ago after he went 35-46 over five seasons.
Coughlin is still looking for an offensive coordinator after Bill Callahan, the former Oakland Raiders coach, took the job at Nebraska.
Lynn Zinser
Vermeil Signs for Two Years
Dick Vermeil signed a two-year contract extension yesterday to coach the Kansas City Chiefs but said that he doubted he would coach into his 70's. Vermeil is 67.
The contract signing was a formality. Vermeil said on Jan. 1 that he had told his staff and the Chiefs' president, Carl Peterson, of his decision to remain for at least one and possibly two more years.
Terms of the new contract were not announced. Vermeil signed a three-year, $10 million deal in 2001.
After going 6-10 and 8-8 in Vermeil's first two seasons, the Chiefs finished 13-3 this season and had one of the highest-scoring offenses in the league for the second straight year. But a suspect defense could not stop the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday, and the Chiefs lost, 38-31. (AP)
49ers Hire Robinson
Willy Robinson, the Pittsburgh Steelers' defensive backs coach for the past four seasons, was named San Francisco's defensive coordinator. He replaces Jim Mora Jr., who left to become the Atlanta Falcons' head coach last week.
Robinson, a longtime Fresno State assistant, coached under Dennis Erickson, San Francisco's head coach, at the University of Miami, the Seattle Seahawks and Oregon State. (AP)
Chargers Interview Phillips
Wade Phillips, the former coach of the Denver Broncos and the Buffalo Bills, interviewed for San Diego's defensive coordinator job yesterday, meeting with Coach Marty Schottenheimer for about six hours. He was not immediately offered the job.
Schottenheimer said he had also talked to Dave McGinnis, who was fired as the Arizona Cardinals' head coach on Dec. 29. Phillips was defensive coordinator of the Atlanta Falcons this season. (AP)
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
