It's funny to think that there was ever a time when it seemed daring to produce a first-class antiques show in New York. But in 1954 it was. Back then the cavernous drill shed of the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue at 67th Street had never been used for selling art and antiques. (Now it is booked years in advance, with back-to-back shows from September through June.)
The Winter Antiques Show, celebrating its 50th anniversary this week, was hatched after the directors of the East Side House Settlement, one of the city's oldest charities, took a booth at the National Antiques Show at the old Madison Square Garden to dispose of duplicate goods donated to its thrift shop.
According to Laura Beach's history of the show in this year's catalog, an antiques dealer named Henry Coger, seeing the booth's success, proposed that the charity start a show of its own. It could be an annual fund-raiser and, if managed properly, it could also be a major social event in the bleak days of January.
London had the Grosvenor House Antiques Fair, which began in 1934 as a way for antiques dealers to drum up business during the Depression and grew into a super-successful event. So why shouldn't New York have something as elegant, something unlike any other fair in the country?
Officials from the charity went to work recruiting the country's top dealers in areas ranging from American, French and English furniture to Chinese porcelains and antique textiles. Besides the big-city dealers, they asked an array of country dealers to come to New York with more-affordable merchandise. Sanford Smith, a Manhattan show organizer, says he believes the charity was allowed to use the Seventh Regiment Armory largely through the good graces of Jean MacArthur, the wife of Gen. Douglas MacArthur.
''She was involved in the charity,'' Mr. Smith said, ''and because all the ladies who worked with her all lived around the corner, she was able to use her Washington connections to get the armory.'' So on Jan. 24, 1955, the Winter Antiques Show as we now know it opened its doors.
The first exhibitors included some of the country's top dealers: French &amp; Company and the American antiques dealers Israel Sack, Stair &amp; Company and Ginsburg &amp; Levy. For sale was everything from Louis XV furniture and a George I walnut secretary bookcase to Chinese armorial porcelains and simple tavern tables.
People lined up outside the cavernous armory, longing to be the first to glimpse the best antiques the country had to offer. In time the show became such a New York institution that Sotheby's and Christie's began scheduling their Americana auctions to coincide with it. The result was Americana Week, when New York became a mecca for collectors and dealers.
Over the years the show has gone through troubled times and transformations. From 1961 to 1987 Russell Carrell, an antiques dealer from Salisbury, Conn., who was an exhibitor at the show, became its manager, bringing with him more leading American antiques dealers as well as some specializing in folk art. Interior designers also became involved in the show. Among the most high-profile was Mario Buatta, the chairman from 1977 to 1990.
Mr. Buatta, who always had an eye for the theatrical, turned the opening night party into the social event of the winter calendar. Personalities like Lee Radziwill, who was invited to decorate the Armory's famous Louis Comfort Tiffany room, became part of the show's attraction.
Working with Mr. Buatta was a public relations wizard, Joanne Creveling, who had worked for Halston and run the public relations department at Henri Bendel. Over the years she used her fashion connections to ask designers like Paloma Picasso, Zandra Rhodes, Bill Blass and Mary McFadden to be the party's chairmen, a job that involved inventing a theme and decorating the Tiffany room. Each invited friends. Over the years attendance grew, and the elite crowd was splashed across the society pages of newspapers around the country.
On Mr. Buatta's watch, many dealers he considered second rate were not invited back, and others were added.
Like all successful enterprises, the show had its imitators, and as the years went on, it faced some serious competition. In 1979 Mr. Smith introduced the Fall Antiques Show, which was so successful that by 1986 he added a Modernism show to the fall calendar. (Mr. Smith now produces six shows a year at the armory.) Perhaps the biggest threat of all was the appearance of Anna and Brian Haughton, London-based organizers who brought the International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show to the Armory in autumn 1989.
Since the Haughtons' show was vetted -- that is, the objects were authenticated by outside experts -- the Winter Antiques Show had to follow suit. It did, beginning in 1993. At the same time it began going through something of an identity crisis. Organizers thought that to compete with the International Show, it needed more European dealers, and it slowly started losing its very distinctive American flavor. It also lost several leaders. Mr. Buatta resigned in 1990. Three years later James F. McCollom Jr., a top official, and N. Pendergast Jones, the manager, also left, citing differences between the show and its charity.
In 1995 Arie L. Kopelman, the president of Chanel, became chairman, and Catherine Sweeney Singer became executive director. They are still running the event. Now about a third of the dealers are American. The show also tends to have fewer museum-quality works than the stuffier International Show, but a larger variety of goods, ranging in price from a few hundred dollars to millions. The Winter Antiques Show is the only one whose entire proceeds go to its charity, rather than to the organizers.
But its definition of what is considered an antique has changed considerably. Fifty years ago Victoriana was thought to be too new. Now the show has an array of decorative arts from the early years of the 20th century -- objects that no doubt would have made Mr. Coger and the show's other founders cringe in horror.
Season for Fairs
A sampling of the events where fine and decorative arts will be shown this weekend in Manhattan. Free shuttles link some of these events.
WINTER ANTIQUES SHOW, Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue and 67th Street, (718) 292-7392, www.winterantiquesshow.com. Through Jan. 25. Hours: Daily except Sundays and Thursday, noon to 8:30 p.m.; Sundays and Thursday, noon to 6 p.m. Admission: $16.
THE AMERICAN ANTIQUES SHOW, Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street, (646) 638-4073, www.folkartmuseum.org. Through Sunday. Hours: Today, noon to 8 p.m.; tomorrow, noon to 7:30 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 5 p.m. Admission: $15.
THE NEW YORK CERAMIC FAIR, National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 289-0496, www.caskeylees.com. Through Sunday. Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Sunday, noon to 6 p.m. Admission: $15.
ANTIQUES AT THE ARMORY, 69th Regiment Armory, Lexington Avenue and 26th Street, (212) 255-0020, www.stellashows.com. Through Sunday. Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Sunday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $12.
ANTIQUES @ THE PIERS, Passenger Ship Piers, 12th Avenue and 55th Street, (212) 255-0020, www.stellashows.com. Tomorrow through Sunday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $12.
PARK AVENUE ANTIQUES SHOW, Wallace Hall, Church of St. Ignatius Loyola, Park Avenue and 84th Street, (212) 288-3588. Through Sunday. Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; Sunday, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Admission: $10.
