KEVIN CONNORS, a scratch golfer from Rancho Santa Fe, Calif., pulled his 3 wood from his bag and gazed up the bunker-strewn 17th fairway, the immemorial Road Hole at the Royal and Ancient Golf Club at St. Andrews. Here he was at the game's spiritual Scottish home, and as he stepped up to the ball, from somewhere far away the skirl of bagpipes drifted over the moor. He swung, and the ball took flight in a long, beautiful arc -- and landed squarely in the sandy abyss of a pot bunker.
Such is golf in all its beautiful glory and unspeakable frustration, but here with a difference: the club, the swing and the ball all were real, but the fairway at St. Andrews was merely a projection on a screen 10 feet tall and 12 feet wide. In the milliseconds from the moment the ball was struck until the moment it smashed into the screen, its speed, spin and trajectory were read by two sets of infrared sensors, which then created a virtual ball that soared and rolled through the projected scene just like a real one would have. So while Mr. Connors's shot landed in the sand at No. 17 at St. Andrews, he was actually standing in Dave &amp; Buster's sports bar in Irvine, Calif.
''I had played the real St. Andrews, so my expectations were pretty low,'' he said. ''But then when I stepped up to the simulator and saw the heather and heard the pipes and the wind, I was just amazed.''
With a new generation of golf simulators delivering an experience approaching the real, there has been a boom in what might be called virtual golf. At Full Swing Golf in San Diego, a leading maker of golf simulators, the number of $55,000 set-ups sold last year was up 15 percent from the year before, to 230 systems, according to Scott Werbelow, a vice president for sales. Roughly 70 percent of Full Swing's business, Mr. Werbelow said, is from the sale of simulators to golf facilities, fitness clubs, cruise ships and sports bars. Par T Golf and DeadSolid Golf, two other simulators that are roughly half to two-thirds the price of the Full Swing system, are among the other machines on the market.
Each Full Swing simulator comes with a library of 38 courses worldwide, each hole on each course videorecorded from a helicopter and photographed from the ground at multiple angles and loaded into the computer system. The images are augmented with appropriate ambient sound, like the snap of a flag in the breeze, the overhead call of a flock of geese or, at St. Andrews, the skirl of the pipes counterpoised with the periodic roar of fighter jets from the Royal Air Force base nearby. There are also apt visual sweeteners, like the elk that roam the Banff Springs course in the Canadian Rockies or the rattlesnakes among the rocks at Bighorn in the California desert. The older DeadSolid simulators have a feature that enables players to order up their own animation-style courses, making manifest the existential possibility of, say, a New Yorker virtually playing the Van Cortlandt course in the Bronx, then hopping the uptown No. 1 train to play it for real.
Immersed in any of these simulated environments, the golfer hits a shot from plastic grass on the simulator floor and watches the projected ball, along with enhancements like aerial views of the hole, yardage figures to the various hazards and inevitably, mulligans on demand.
''Once you get over your initial reaction of how real it looks, like 'wow, I'm at St. Andrews,' you get into 'how am I going to beat St. Andrews?' '' said Chris Farmer of Portage, Mich., who plays the virtual game at Year Round Golf in Schoolcraft, Mich. ''You really start to get a feel for why the pros use certain clubs and do certain things to manage their game according to the course they're playing.''
The experience is close enough to the real thing to make simulators an increasingly common way for golf instructors to teach students. But the biggest area of sales growth, according to Mr. Werbelow of Full Swing, comes from wealthy golf lovers who buy simulators for their homes and create a golf room for their virtual courses. The company says it has installed systems for top businessmen like Arthur Blank, a founder of Home Depot; Richard Marriott, chairman of Host Marriott; Walter Uilhein, chief executive of Acushnet, which makes Titleist golf equipment; and Donald Trump, whose simulator, which was recently installed on the 68th floor of Trump Tower, holds the distinction of being the highest such machine in existence.
But for every millionaire who plays virtual golf in the comfort of his own mansion, there are hundreds of average golfers who play at public facilities, renting simulators by the hour. (Machines generally rent for $25 to $35 an hour for anywhere from one to five golfers.) The majority are in the Midwest and Northeast, where winter weather makes the idea of simulated golf played indoors especially appealing. ''It's the opposite of a regular golf course,'' said Scott Nugent, who owns Golf Nutz, in Kearney, Neb., which has six simulators. ''It's 6 below zero right now, and our business definitely gets better when it gets colder.''
Year Round Golf has had simulators for six years, making it one of the older virtual-golf establishments. ''It's like a night-and-day experience,'' the owner, Mike Valk, said of the difference in simulators then from now. ''The old ones were like looking at a cartoon. With the new ones, when you look at the water in a pond, you actually see a reflection of the clouds moving overhead.''
Indeed, the realism of the new generation of simulators can be so convincing that you can find yourself gazing at the view of the Pacific from one of the many seaside holes at Pebble Beach while suffused with a sense of Zen-like tranquillity, as was recently the case at the Chelsea Piers Golf Academy in Manhattan. ''It's very easy to lose yourself in there and get caught up in the game,'' said Gil Boggs, director of academy, which has two machines. ''Once you mentally accept the concept that you're playing simulated golf, it does become very real.'' The holodeck calm was disturbed only by the anguish of two guests' hitting their balls over the cliff and onto the beach below, a predicament that took each of them an all too realistic seven shots to correct.
And while an actual round of golf might take four to five hours to play, a twosome on a simulator can complete 18 holes in about two and a half hours. That appeals to some, but not to others. Jay Vlosich, a golfer visiting from Baltimore, was at Chelsea Piers playing a simulator for the first time. ''It's not better than real golf, not even close,'' he said. ''I'd come back and try it again, but it is what it is.''
But Darbel Alcide, who works at Chelsea Piers and shoots in the modest mid-90's at his local course, Marine Park in Brooklyn, said he preferred the virtual variety of the game. ''You're playing golf, but after you hit your shot you can sit down on the couch, eat a burger, drink a beer,'' he said. ''I'd much rather play this.''
PLAYING  No Cart Needed On These Courses
A GROWING number of places around the country let golfers play virtually. Here are some spots where you can play a round without going outdoors:
CALIFORNIA -- Dave &amp; Buster's, 71 Fortune Drive, Irvine; (949) 727-0555.
There are 12 virtual courses, including ones based on Bay Hill in Orlando, Fla., and on Pebble Beach in California. Play is $20 an hour before 5 p.m. and $25 after.
MASSACHUSETTS -- City Golf Boston, 38 Bromfield Street, Boston; (617) 357-4653.
More than 30 courses, including ones based on the Belfry, in North Warwickshire, England, and Kapalua, on the Hawaiian island of Maui. Play is $40 an hour and lessons are available on virtual courses for $90 an hour.
MICHIGAN -- Year Round Golf, 12733 North Highway 131, Schoolcraft. (269) 679-2090.
The 40 courses available are based on places like Bay Hill; True North, in Phoenix; and Torrey Pines in La Jolla, Calif. $28 an hour.
NEBRASKA -- Golf Nutz, 224 West 42nd Street, Kearney; (308) 237-6889.
Of the 38 virtual courses, the most popular are based on St. Andrews in Scotland and on Pebble Beach. Eighteen holes are $10 to $20 on weekdays; $25 on weekends.
NEW YORK -- Chelsea Piers Golf Club, Pier 59, West 18th Street, Manhattan; (212) 336-6400.
There are 36 courses; again, the most popular are Pebble Beach and St. Andrews. Charges are by the hour: $35 for one hour and up to four golfers, $315 for a 10-hour package. Pros also offer lessons on virtual courses at the club's Golf Academy.
RITUALS
