The Winter Antiques Show is one of the great indoor sporting events of New York's post-holiday season. It is simultaneously a spectator and participatory attraction, like an art-oriented cross between the New York Marathon and a basketball game at Madison Square Garden. Its sumptuous displays require stamina, concentration and attention to detail. But they also provide unobstructed, close-up views of seasoned competitors battling it out in tiptop form.
By seasoned competitors I mean not the art dealers but the objects: art from around the world, across time and in every conceivable medium, fine and folk, functional and not, antique and ancient, American, European and Asian. And unlike most games, this event offers scores of winners in every category, snaggable by a tremendous range of checkbooks. And the 67th Regiment Armory isn't the only arena: this week's ad hoc antiques festival is taking place in at least a half-dozen spots around town.
This is the Winter Antiques Show's 50th anniversary, and everyone seems to have gone all out. The Metropolitan Museum of Art has mounted a succinct display of works from its superb holdings in American fine and decorative arts, including a case of Tiffany Favrile glass. Many of the show's longtime participants occupy their usual places of pride along the central aisle: Elinor Gordon, the doyenne of Chinese Export porcelain, and Barbara Israel, whose garden antiques have anchored the central axis for years, are present, as are Peter Tillou, Hirschl &amp; Adler, Ralph M. Chait, À la Vieille Russie and James Robinson.
Some of the show's most visually insistent objects include a grotto-esque ceramic fireplace in pale blue and green glazes by the great French Art Nouveau designer Hector Guimard, at Barry Friedman; and a pristine expanse of French scenic wallpaper, circa 1827, at Carolle Thibaut-Pomerantz. It depicts Napoleon's triumph at the 1805 Battle of Austerlitz in such profuse, radiantly colored detail that 2,000 wood blocks were needed to achieve it.
As usual, several booths have special concentrations. One instance of immersion is Les Enluminures, where illuminated manuscripts prevail and the sights include a double-sided illumination from the late 13th-century Burckhardt-Wildt Apocalypse, whose recto shows an angel with a red trumpet summoning the end of the world and a red comet. Another is Elle Shushan's tiny booth devoted to American and European painted miniatures; especially notable this year are portraits of a Vermont mother named Orilla Landon (1840), an unnamed Scotswoman (1745) and Louis XVI in heaven. At Cora Ginsburg, where textiles rule, one of the featured objects is a mid-17th-century English needlework box seen against a wall that holds a veritable seminar on the bas-relief effects of 17th-century raised needlework.
Antiquities, both Western and nonWestern, make an especially strong showing this year, both in terms of material and presentation. Safani's booth features a wall of ceramic and stone beasts of burden in stone and terra-cotta, including a fabulous camel from first-century Yemen. At Rupert Wace's beautiful booth, the standout is a Roman head from the second century A.D. whose pensive face is given further gravity by a beard and an airy ring of drilled curls.
I could spend most of the fair studying the display of African sculpture at Kevin Conru. Or the pre-Columbian material at Throckmorton. Or Roger Keverne's brief survey of Chinese visual culture, including exemplary bronzes, lacquers and textiles, with center stage dominated by two sets of matching blue and white vases, one whose ornate ormalu mounts may be Austrian. Booth décor runs the gamut from period-room authenticity to spare, modernist sleek. For authenticity don't miss the Associated Artists booth, where the company's floral wallpaper, oil studies by one of its founders, Lockwood de Forest, and a Herter Brothers japonisme parlor suite collude to resplendent effect. In contrast, Donald Ellis's blond-on-celadon presentation accents the fineness of his ancient objects, including two rare ceremonial Mayan flints that sprout hook-nosed profiles and an Okvik Eskimo carving of a female in ivory dated 200 B.C.
The white-on-white interior at Frank and Barbara Pollack's booth sets off one of the largest, most elegant pieces of pale speckled redware you are likely to see: a covered jar in mint condition. At Giampietro, black walls highlight four recently discovered cast mortar fence post heads that seem to depict African-American men.
Next door, at S. J. Shrubsole, it is all silver all the time, as usual. The cornerstone here is the Shippen tankard, from around 1730. It was recently exhumed from a family safe deposit box in Philadelphia, and is a wonder of world-class engraving, the first known signed work by Richard Meyrick, a London-trained Philadelphia engraver. At Geoffrey Diner you find unusual Arts and Crafts lamps and a rare Gustav Stickley tall-case clock, as well as another showstopper on the silver front: an enormous presentation bowl by Archibald Knox for Liberty &amp; Company. Studded with enameled knots and chunks of turquoise, it is inscribed ''To Cecel C. Blogg from some of his Friends at Lloyd's, December, 1910.''
Some of the show's many memorable outstanding moments in furniture include two George I bureau bookcases at Hyde Park, one of them extravagantly japanned and painted in green and gold. Historical Design has a breathtaking Art Nouveau lady's writing desk, also Japanese influenced, by Eugenio Quarti, Carlo Bugatti's son-in-law, in solid rosewood inlaid with silver, brass and mother-of-pearl. At Robert Young there is a straight-edged Directoire semainier (dresser) from about 1810, whose gray surface has mellowed to an extraordinarily beautiful patina.
ART REVIEW  Correction:  February 10, 2004, Tuesday  An art review in Weekend on Jan. 16 about the Winter Antiques Show misstated the name of the site. It was the Seventh Regiment Armory, on Park Avenue at 67th Street; there is no 67th Regiment Armory.
