When Carol Moseley Braun first came to Iowa in her long-shot run for the Democratic presidential nomination, only one voter braved the heavy snow to see her in Des Moines. On Thursday, Ms. Braun addressed the largest crowd she has seen this year, as she folded up her tent and joined the campaign of Howard Dean.
''I am here today to thank those Iowans who were prepared to stand for me in Monday's caucuses,'' she told several hundred people gathered in a high school gym, ''and ask that you stand instead for Howard Dean.''
With her campaign more than $100,000 in debt and unable to climb above the low single digits in polls in Iowa or anywhere else, Ms. Braun, by withdrawing, may have saved herself embarrassment once the voting begins. Friends said she began the longest of long-shot bids at least partly to rehabilitate a reputation marred by campaign scandals during her single term in the United States Senate. Stumping for one of her party's top contenders will allow her to continue that effort.
Associates say she imagines herself as secretary of education or health and human services in a Dean administration, though aides to both politicians said no promise was made for the backing. For now, Ms. Braun, who recently lent her campaign money to keep it afloat and never had more than 10 people on the payroll, will travel on the dime of Mr. Dean, the best-financed Democrat in the field.
Two of her signature issues, universal health care and affordable college education, mesh easily with Dr. Dean's message.
Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, said Ms. Braun would campaign in Iowa, New Hampshire, South Carolina and Michigan in the next 10 days. ''She can go to a union hall, she can go to an African-American church, she can do women's events,'' Mr. Trippi said. ''It's the first serious day-to-day surrogate that we have out there that can really reach a kind of broad cross section of Democrats.''
A sign of how few Iowa votes Ms. Braun might have to hand over came at the endorsement event when Iowa's senior senator, Tom Harkin, another Dean supporter, spoke for more than 10 minutes before yielding her the podium. But a hint at her potential helpfulness came minutes later, when scores of women in the crowd stood as she stepped forward, turning the polite applause into an ovation.
''When women run for office, when people of color run, we open up the possibility that women and people of color can win,'' Ms. Braun said, noting that she had qualified for the ballot in 21 states and the District of Columbia, more than any woman before. ''So to those of you who believed in this effort, I say, take heart. You can claim the nobility of moving our country forward, and of opening up possibilities for all our daughters.''
She attracted only 400 donors through September, compared with Dr. Dean's 200,000, but had been helped by the endorsement of the National Organization for Women. Her campaign struggled further when three leading aides resigned in November. A lone NBC reporter has followed her to events in recent weeks; on Thursday, nearly 100 journalists sat for her joint news conference with Dr. Dean.
Andi Pringle, who was Ms. Braun's campaign manager before joining Dr. Dean as a deputy campaign manager this year, said the two candidates developed a relationship through more than two dozen debates where, by an reason of the alphabet, they often stood side by side. Never considered a threat to Dr. Dean, Ms. Braun was the only candidate who never attacked him, and his aides always clapped when Ms. Braun spoke at such forums.
Indeed, Dr. Dean told her Thursday, ''I am going to miss you at those debates, stepping in and defending me from those outrageous things people say.''
Asked what advice she might give to the next woman taking the presidential path, Ms. Braun smiled wide and said, ''Wear comfortable shoes.'' Peeking out from her long skirt were black suede boots with pointy toes and spindly heels.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER SENATOR
