President Bush made a swing through the South on Thursday with an appeal to black voters, but encountered emotional protests when he stopped here to lay a wreath at the grave of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Mr. Bush was met by hundreds of demonstrators when he arrived at The King Center to mark the 75th anniversary of Dr. King's birth. He was shielded from their view by a row of transit-authority buses with police officers in riot gear atop them, according to the pool reporter who accompanied the president into the center.
But the chants and boos of the protesters were audible as Mr. Bush, accompanied by Dr. King's widow, Coretta Scott King, and his sister, Christine King Farris, approached the crypt, laid the wreath and paused briefly in prayer before leaving without making any public remarks.
Outside, the protesters chanted ''Bush go home'' and ''Peace, not war.''
Before Mr. Bush's arrival for the 15-minute stop, some of the protesters broke through barriers around the center. Two arrests were made, the Atlanta police said, and the incident prompted the authorities to place the buses between the demonstrators and the president.
The White House had arranged for Mr. Bush to stop at Dr. King's grave on a day when the president was scheduled to be in Atlanta for a fund-raiser. Sheriee Bowman, a spokeswoman for the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, said the group respected the president's right to pay tribute to Dr. King. But she suggested that the civil rights organization saw Mr. Bush's presence as politically motivated.
''We question the integrity of the timing of the move because last year at this time he took a stand against affirmative action, the Michigan case, which is part of Dr. King's legacy,'' Ms. Bowman said, referring to the Supreme Court case that considered the use of race in college admissions.
Scott McClellan, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said before Mr. Bush's arrival here that the visit was intended as a tribute to Dr. King.
''Dr. King had a tremendously positive influence in shaping the world we live in today for the better, and this is a way to honor a lifetime dedicated to fighting for opportunity and equal justice for all people,'' Mr. McClellan said.
The protests came during a one-day trip by Mr. Bush to Louisiana and Georgia. He also made an appearance at a predominantly black church in New Orleans and held two fund-raisers, one in New Orleans and one in Atlanta, which brought in $2.3 million for his re-election campaign.
Mr. Bush's effort to reach out to black voters reflected a belief among his political advisers that his electoral standing in the South was so strong among his conservative base that he had an opportunity to broaden his support.
To highlight the inroads he has already made, he arranged to be introduced at his fund-raiser here on Thursday evening by Senator Zell Miller of Georgia, a Democrat who called Mr. Bush a president with ''a good heart and a spine of steel.'' Also on hand to throw their support to the Bush-Cheney ticket were other prominent Georgia Democrats, including Griffin Bell, who was attorney general under President Jimmy Carter.
Black voters are among the Democratic Party's most loyal, and only about 8 percent of them voted for Mr. Bush in 2000. But Mr. Bush has made repeated efforts to build his support among African-Americans. Often, as he did at the Union Bethel African Methodist Episcopal Church in New Orleans on Thursday, he seeks to do so by appearing with black religious leaders and at black churches to promote his efforts to direct more federal money to religion-based social welfare programs.
''Dr. King understood that faith is power greater than all others,'' Mr. Bush said, noting that Dr. King had preached from the same pulpit in 1961.
Mr. Bush spoke about the power of faith to change lives in personal terms at the church. At a discussion with members of the church and community leaders, Mr. Bush recounted his decision to stop drinking. ''I wouldn't be sitting here if I didn't ask for Christ's help in my heart,'' he said.
Later, during his speech in the church, there were repeated murmurs and shouts of assent and approval from the largely black audience as Mr. Bush discussed harnessing the power of religion and the resources of churches, synagogues and mosques to help people in need.
''This country must not fear the influence of faith in the future of this country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We must welcome faith in order to make America a better place. ''
But Mr. Bush clearly has an uphill battle to win broad support among minority voters, especially with the economy still slow to create jobs and unemployment rates among black workers remaining much higher than among whites.
''Bush was not invited,'' said Lance Grimes, 55, a black social worker who lives in Decatur, Ga., and was part of the demonstration at The King Center. ''It is a desecration for him to lay a wreath at the tomb of Dr. King. He is diametrically opposed to everything Dr. King stood for. With all due respect, Coretta Scott King is making a tactical mistake.''
