On paper, the combination of J.P. Morgan Chase and Bank One makes a lot of sense, analysts said yesterday. But in the real world -- the one where egos and styles and cultures clash -- it could be a volatile mix.
The $58 billion merger, formally unveiled yesterday in Manhattan, brings together two of the most experienced deal makers in banking. And those men, James L. Dimon of Bank One and William B. Harrison of J.P. Morgan Chase, expressed confidence that they could make the deal work.
''We've already made management decisions three layers down,'' Mr. Harrison said in an interview.
Yet the differences between the men are deep, too. Mr. Harrison, 60, is low-key and genial, preferring to delegate responsibility to a team of managers, said analysts and executives who know him. Mr. Dimon, 47, is detail-oriented and sometimes painfully blunt, a management style he learned from his onetime mentor and now rival, Sanford I. Weill, chairman of Citigroup.
''Jamie is a tough kid from New York, and Bill is a gentleman from the South,'' said Michael Holland, chairman of Holland &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York, acknowledging Mr. Harrison's roots in Rocky Mount, N.C.
One executive involved in the merger said the men's ability to get along was ''the big question'' in the deal.
Many banking analysts said they hoped that, ultimately, Mr. Dimon's approach would dominate. If the deal is completed, he will become president of the combined bank and succeed Mr. Harrison as chief executive in 2006.
''Whether this succeeds depends upon whether they let Jamie do what Jamie does, which is to restructure and cut costs,'' said Nancy A. Bush, an independent research analyst in Annandale, N.J.
Mr. Dimon was already talking about cost cuts at a meeting with analysts yesterday. The combined bank is projecting $2.2 billion in savings before taxes over three years, but ''we hope to do better,'' he said. Job cuts, projected at 10,000 out of a combined total of 140,000 workers, would be achieved partly through attrition, he said.
Unlike the early days of the merger that turned the Travelers Group and Citicorp into Citigroup, when top officials clashed over their responsibilities, the two banks have neatly divided their turfs. Executives from J.P. Morgan Chase will largely assume responsibility for investment banking, while a team dominated by Bank One veterans will run the consumer business.
And rather than the awkward, and ultimately unworkable, arrangement in which Mr. Weill of Travelers and John S. Reed of Citicorp were Citigroup's co-chief executives, the terms of the J.P. Morgan-Bank One deal virtually guarantee that Mr. Dimon will succeed Mr. Harrison in two year. Three quarters of the merged bank's 16-member board--consisting of eight directors each from J.P. Morgan Chase and Bank One -- would have to vote against Mr. Dimon's promotion for it to be denied him, people briefed on the terms of the merger agreement said.
''The board of Bank One would have never approved this merger if there weren't elements in place that made it look like a merger of equals,'' said one person informed of the terms. ''They didn't get to keep the names, or their headquarters. They had to feel pretty comfortable that Jamie was going to get the top job.''
Mr. Dimon's reputation and the relatively low price J.P. Morgan is paying for Bank One helped keep J.P. Morgan's stock price steady yesterday. Frequently, traders bid up the shares of a takeover target and hedge their bets by selling the acquirer. But in this case, J.P. Morgan's shares fell just 30 cents, to $38.92, a sign that investors believe that the merger will pay off in the long term, analysts said. Bank One shares rose $5.20, or 11.5 percent, to $50.42.
Mr. Dimon knows firsthand the perils of bringing together two sharply different cultures. He left his last job, as president of Citigroup, in the wake of clashes between executives of Travelers and Citicorp.
But that blowup was the rare misstep for Mr. Dimon, who, working side by side with Mr. Weill, integrated a dizzying array of companies. Since joining Bank One in 2000, he has refrained from making many acquisitions and has been cutting costs and scaling back the bank's role in businesses that were a legacy of Bank One's own history of bad deals.
Some of the job cuts at the new J.P. Morgan Chase could come in the credit card business, where both banks have a sizable presence, analysts said, as well as at Bank One's investment banking operations in Chicago, which are dwarfed by J.P. Morgan's. Other cuts are planned in the management that oversees the consumer businesses, which will shift from New York to Chicago, Mr. Harrison told the analysts yesterday.
Mr. Dimon brings several colleagues who, like him, learned the art of making deals from Mr. Weill. They include Charles Scharf, who will be in charge of retail banking; Heidi Miller, who will run cash management and treasury services; and Jay Mandelbaum, who will oversee the overall strategy of the company.
Important deputies of Mr. Harrison who will get major jobs at the merged bank include James B. Lee, who will oversee investment banking, and Dina Dublon, the chief financial officer.
Mr. Harrison helped oversee a series of successful mergers that melded Manufacturers Hanover, Chemical and Chase. But deals he closed after becoming chief executive of Chase in June 1999 severely tarnished his reputation. Most notably, the $31 billion merger of Chase and J.P. Morgan, done near the stock market's peak, proved a disappointment, as earnings faltered and the bank's stock price plummeted.
The company's performance, and Mr. Harrison's standing, have only recently begun to recover; J.P. Morgan Chase shares have risen nearly 50 percent in the last 12 months. By keeping Mr. Dimon waiting two years for the top job, Mr. Harrison buys himself time for further vindication -- though analysts said he now will have to justify taking on the risks of a huge deal just as his bank's profits are improving.
But a longtime confidant, Richard Beattie, chairman of the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, which advises J.P. Morgan, said that Mr. Harrison has long been hungry for a deal that would bolster J.P. Morgan's consumer business.
''He had to wait for the stock price to come back,'' Mr. Beattie said.
BANKING GIANT: INTEGRATION
