City Council Speaker Gifford Miller reported yesterday that he had raised nearly $1 million in campaign contributions in the last six months, the clearest indication yet that he is seriously contemplating running against Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg next year.
With that $1 million, Mr. Miller increased his fund-raising for a possible 2005 campaign to about $2.5 million, placing him well above any other potential Democratic rival to Mr. Bloomberg, a Republican.
Yesterday's deadline for filing state and city campaign reports shows a crowded field of people interested in taking on Mr. Bloomberg in 2005. Numerous politicians around the state also have their eyes on the state attorney general's seat in 2006, on the assumption that the incumbent, Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat, would run for governor that year.
Assemblyman Michael N. Gianaris of Queens, for instance, said he had raised more than $1 million since March.
For his part, Mr. Spitzer has raised roughly $4.2 million this past year, with $2.4 million of that raised in the past six months. He has about $3.6 million on hand.
Among potential candidates for mayor, William C. Thompson, the city comptroller, reported raising more than $500,000 during the last six months, increasing his total to $1.53 million.
Aides to Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx Borough president and a former mayoral candidate, said he would report raising $745,000 in the same period. It is Mr. Ferrer's first filing for the 2005 election; two months ago, he formed an exploratory committee for a possible campaign for mayor.
Molly Watkins, a spokeswoman for the Campaign Finance Board, said that Mr. Ferrer's filing had not been received at the close of business yesterday, but that the campaign had until midnight.
Mr. Miller's fund-raising was aided by a last-minute push for contributions over the Internet. Aides to the speaker said Mr. Miller collected more than $200,000 last weekend from more than 500 donors through e-mail solicitations.
Though Mr. Miller has established a significant fund-raising advantage, Mr. Ferrer, who ran for mayor in 1997 and 2001, remains immensely popular in the city's Hispanic communities. Polls also have shown him to have significant name recognition.
Another possible mayoral contender, C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, filed her report, but Ms. Watkins said the computer disc submitted by Ms. Fields' campaign appeared to be damaged and the data would have to resubmitted. Calls to Ms. Fields' campaign treasurer were not returned yesterday.
None of the Democratic officials has officially announced an intention to run against Mr. Bloomberg next year. But with polls showing the mayor vulnerable, Mr. Miller and others have made no secret of their interest in his seat.
Unlike Ms. Fields and Mr. Miller, Mr. Thompson can run for re-election to his current position, and he has not decided whether to run for mayor.
While statewide elections are still about three years away, plenty of potential candidates are emerging. Besides Mr. Gianaris, Assemblymen Richard L. Brodsky of Westchester and Jeffrey Klein of the Bronx have signaled their intention to run for attorney general if Mr. Spitzer decides to move on.
Mr. Klein said he had raised just over $1.1 million and had about $1 million in the bank. ''Just for the primary, we probably need to raise $4 to $5 million,'' he said.
Mr. Brodsky formed a campaign committee just last month and raised $95,000. He has about $350,000 in the bank after transferring money from another account, an aide said.
The state filings also revealed another potential candidate for state office: Gov. George E. Pataki.
In his address to the State Legislature last week, Mr. Pataki made it clear that he had not ruled out running for re-election. His campaign filings bear that out. Mr. Pataki has raised roughly $1.3 million over the past six months, double the amount he raised over the same period four years ago. Mr. Pataki has $1.4 million in the bank.
The governor, who is also a possible challenger to Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, has not declared his intentions for 2006.
