'Jerry Springer,' Including Victims
Another daytime talk show host is moving to Broadway, but don't confuse him with the former Queen of Nice. Yesterday, when ''Jerry Springer: The Opera'' was nominated for eight Olivier Awards (London's equivalent of the Tonys), its producers, Avalon Promotions Ltd. and Allan McKeown, announced that this acclaimed West End show would arrive on Broadway in spring 2005.
''Jerry Springer,'' in which the infamous host is transported to hell and confronted with the ruined lives of his motley guests, opened at the Royal National Theater in London in April, receiving adoring reviews and the fixed attention of Broadway theater owners. When it moved to the West End, ticket sales fell short of expectations, and some industry insiders whispered that a foul-mouthed show about bisexual cross-dressers and overweight pole-dancers might not attract a Broadway audience. But the show, which is selling tickets through January 2005, started to regain momentum after winning the 2003 Evening Standard Award for best musical and the Olivier announcement. It tied with ''Pacific Overtures'' and ''Ragtime'' for most nominations.
Tony Speculations
More than four months before the Tony Awards, the race for best musical has already come into focus because of a season of few hits with the critics and a schedule weighted toward the fall. The picture became even clearer yesterday when the producers of ''Caroline, or Change'' announced that it was moving to the O'Neill Theater on Broadway. Previews are to begin on April 13, and the opening is May 2.
''Avenue Q,'' ''Wicked'' and ''Caroline, or Change'' have a lock on nominations. The final nomination will probably go to either ''The Boy From Oz'' or, more likely, ''Bombay Dreams,'' the spring's one new musical that hasn't yet played in New York.
Of course, there's always the chance of a midseason transfer from out of town, for example, Cy Coleman's ''Like Jazz'' from Los Angeles or Adam Guettel's ''Light in the Piazza'' from Chicago. Barring that, the rest of the field probably lacks much interest for potential voters.
''Never Gonna Dance'' has created little buzz, and judging by the box office, it will be surprising if it makes it to February. The producers of the short-lived ''Jackie Mason's Laughing Room Only'' didn't invite Tony voters, so it isn't eligible. And while Rosie O'Donnell, in her producer mode, predicted that ''Taboo,'' which is to close on Feb. 8, would win a Tony, nobody ever accused her of being a fortuneteller.
The smart money, most theater insiders say, is on ''Wicked,'' which has emerged as the season's biggest new box-office hit despite mixed reviews. In a dismal post-holiday week for Broadway, it took in more than $1 million for the seventh week in a row. Tony voters tend to be partial to blockbusters with potential to tour over boutique shows with a few rave reviews.
Several theater people predict a repeat of 2002, when the quirky meta-musical ''Urinetown'' won best direction, best book and score, but the old-fashioned Broadway entertainment ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' took best musical. Theater fans with longer memories might recall another instance of David losing to Goliath in 1992, when William Finn's charming and intimate ''Falsettos'' won book and score, but the Gershwin musical comedy ''Crazy for You'' took the top prize.
If this scenario plays out, the forgotten show may be the first new musical of the season, ''Avenue Q,'' which had been favored for book and score before Tony Kushner and Jeanine Tesori started throwing their weight around with ''Caroline.''
The acting awards are trickier to predict. The most hotly contested category is certainly best actress because it features four dynamic and raved-about stars: Idina Menzel and Kristin Chenoweth from ''Wicked,'' Donna Murphy from ''Wonderful Town'' and Tonya Pinkins from ''Caroline.'' Ms. Menzel and Ms. Chenoweth could well cancel each other out, and the other two dynamos, each with a Tony or two already, are in a dead heat. It's also a bit premature to pick best actor; while Hugh Jackman is the prohibitive favorite, raves for Alfred Molina in the big revival to come, ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' could lead to an upset.
The Play as a Sword
Tim Robbins sounds like an embattled man. ''People have been questioning my patriotism, and that gets your attention,'' Mr. Robbins, star of ''Bull Durham'' and ''The Shawshank Redemption,'' said by phone from Los Angeles. ''I grew up on the streets of New York, so I think in a survival mode. If you attack me, I'm going to respond.''
''Embedded'' is intended as a counterpunch of sorts. It is a collection of satirical Brechtian sketches written and directed by Mr. Robbins. Performances start on Feb. 24 at the Public Theater. In particular, Mr. Robbins is upset at Dale Petroskey, the president of the Baseball Hall of Fame. He canceled a 15th-anniversary celebration of ''Bull Durham'' because Mr. Robbins spoke out against the war in Iraq.
''Embedded,'' a sold-out hit in Los Angeles before filling the slot vacated when the ''The Visit'' dropped off the Public's lineup for lack of financing, imagines the United States at war with an oil-rich Middle Eastern country called Gomorrah. A cabal of neoconservative policy-makers with names like Woof, Rum-Rum and Pearly White deceive and manipulate the public into supporting the war with the help of embedded journalists, who provide no dissent. ''In the European press, many more questions were being raised than over here,'' said Mr. Robbins, who has written seven plays.
''Embedded'' is dedicated to Joe Strummer, the singer from the seminal English punk band the Clash. ''I believe we have the punk sensibility,'' Mr. Robbins said. ''I think satire has to be rude.''
Along the Way
*Reg Rogers, Charlotte d'Amboise and Michael Nouri are to join Patti LuPone in the Encores! production of Cole Porter's ''Can-Can,'' which begins its limited run at City Center on Feb. 12. Lonny Price directs.
*The Worth Street Theater has announced that Tristine Skyler's ''Moonlight Room'' is to move to the Beckett Theater on Theater Row starting Feb. 3.
On Stage and Off
