Here are some favorite Schumann recordings of the classical-music critics of The New York Times. Availability is hard to determine in the current state of the market. Most of the recordings here can be found on Amazon.com or in major record stores. CD's range in price from $12.99 for one CD to $21.99 for a two-CD set and $40.99 for four CD's. (An introduction appears on Page 1 of Weekend.)
''CARNAVAL,'' ''FANTASIESTÜCKE'' (OP. 12), PIANO WORKS. Arthur Rubinstein, pianist (RCA Victor Red Seal 09026-63020-2).
''DICHTERLIEBE,'' ''LIEDERKREIS'' (OP. 24), SONGS. Ian Bostridge, tenor; Julius Drake, pianist (EMI Classics 5 56575 2).
PIANO CONCERTO, PIANO QUINTET. Rudolf Serkin, pianist; Philadelphia Orchestra, conducted by Eugene Ormandy; Budapest String Quartet (Sony Classical MYK 37256).
STRING QUARTETS NOS. 1 AND 3. St. Lawrence String Quartet (EMI Classics 5 56797 2).
SYMPHONIES (4); ''MANFRED'' OVERTURE. Cleveland Orchestra, conducted by George Szell (Sony Classical MH2K 62349; two CD's).
WHETHER or not it was syphilis that drove Schumann mad, as musicologists have long argued, he was always a bit odd. He destroyed his career as a pianist by affixing weights to his fingers in hopes of strengthening them. He created fictional antagonists (Florestan and Eusebius) who carry on arguments in both his music and his essays. And his love life was a matter of intense fixations that led more than one father to put his daughter out of Schumann's way.
It is in his piano music that Schumann's peculiarities show up most vividly, and the work that offers the best view of his overheated imagination is ''Carnaval.'' Schumann was 24 when he began the work, and his infatuation with both Clara Wieck, his teacher's 13-year-old daughter (and eventually his wife), and Ernestine von Fricken, a 17-year-old fellow student, are documented in two of the work's movements. So are the poetic Eusebius and the fiery Florestan (who are fleshed out further in the ''Fantasiestücke''). Well-drawn tributes to Chopin and Paganini are included among the 21 vignettes, and the closing ''March of the Davidsbündler Against the Philistines'' is Schumann's argument for free-spirited originality in new music.
Rubinstein's monaural recordings from the late 1940's and early 50's have greater drive and directness than the stereo versions of the same works recorded in the 60's (available in Volume 51 of RCA's Rubinstein Edition), but you can't go far wrong with either. Rubinstein caught the almost cinematic drama of these pieces as well as the sheer beauty of their surfaces.
After the solo piano works, Schumann's songs offer the most direct window into his psyche, and the best are the ''Liederkreis'' and ''Dichterliebe'' cycles, settings of Heine poetry steeped in romantic yearning, outright rejection and other evocations of unrequited love. Sumptuous readings are plentiful, but Ian Bostridge's supple phrasing and careful coloration give the bitterness in these songs an almost visceral quality. Between the cycles, Mr. Bostridge offers seven more Heine songs as an attractive bonus.
Because the Piano Concerto is one of the great war horses, it can be difficult to hear fresh. But among the charms of Rudolf Serkin's account is the deftness with which he captures the music's grandeur and prevents it from sounding bombastic. Better still is the charged reading of the Piano Quintet, a collaboration with the Budapest String Quartet, recorded at the Marlboro Festival in Vermont in 1963.
Schumann's symphonies and string quartets are an acquired taste: in both cases, structural eccentricities suggest a lack of control rather than (as Beethoven's structural eccentricities do) willful iconoclasm. Yet in the right hands, they can sound like masterpieces. By finding the right balance between explosive tension and introspective warmth, the St. Lawrence players make the First and Third Quartets seem rational, even persuasive. George Szell does similarly for the symphonies, bringing to these bigger canvases the same quality of fully controlled, precise power that animates Serkin's reading of the concerto.
