This week's announcement that J. P. Morgan Chase will acquire Bank One, much like Bank of America's proposed merger with FleetBoston Financial, signifies the advent of nationwide commercial banks. It is a healthy, long overdue development.
For two centuries, in an idiosyncratic nod to Andrew Jackson's 19th-century populism and 18th-century quarrels between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton, banks were hindered from operating in more than one state. Under this senseless arrangement, businesses could not rely on one bank in various markets. Individuals were forced to find a new bank if they were moving across a state line, as if they had moved abroad.
Congress finally passed an interstate banking law in the mid-1990's that encouraged the current wave of consolidation. The combination of FleetBoston and Bank of America, announced last October, will create the first truly coast-to-coast retail bank. Now the merger with Bank One, which is based in Chicago, will greatly extend the reach of J. P. Morgan, which has been operating only in four states, even though it is the nation's second-largest bank. These two big mergers also signify a healthy return to basics. During the late-90's bubble, the frothy stock market and overheated dot-com hype led some big banks to rely too heavily on their investment-banking business. They were overly dismissive of consumer banking. Now J. P. Morgan wants to re-emphasize its consumer business, a steady source of profits.
Because these mergers largely bring together players from different regions, they don't lessen competition in a given market. Indeed, the consolidation is taking place at a time when smaller banks are flourishing by promoting their local roots.
That said, federal regulators will need to ensure that future bank mergers do not undermine competition. The Justice Department can reject or place conditions on plans to combine operations that overlap geographically. Congress ought to retain the limit it imposed on how large a bank can be created via merger (10 percent of nationwide deposits). And regulators must compel banks to continue to honor their statutory obligation to invest in underserved markets wherever they operate.
