The wrongful death allegations made by a wealthy real estate family this week against Westchester Medical Center come as the hospital is reeling from a financial crisis that has raised questions about its long-term solvency.
The hospital, the premier health-care provider in the Hudson Valley, has laid off hundreds of employees and struggled to address a ballooning deficit, now estimated at $100 million. Just this week, hospital administrators and state health officials met to discuss ways to avert fiscal disaster.
What the hospital, in Valhalla, N.Y., did not need at this moment, then, was news of a planned lawsuit by a high-profile family charging that the staff mishandled the pain medication and monitoring of a 12-year-old boy last January, resulting in his death. The boy, Michael T. Fisher, a seventh grader at Horace Mann School and a member of the Fisher Brothers real estate dynasty, died on the morning of Jan. 17.
But county officials said yesterday that while the development was tragic for the family and certainly unfortunate for the hospital, it would not affect the strategy to right its finances.
''It doesn't come at a great time,'' said Michael B. Kaplowitz, chairman of the budget and appropriations committee of the Westchester County Board of Legislators. ''But unfortunately over the course of a year there are going to be claims made against the hospital, given the size of the institution.''
He added that the publicity surrounding the case would not affect efforts to stabilize the medical center's finances. In 1998, the hospital spun off from the county government and became a public benefit corporation, but the county still guarantees a large amount of the hospital's debt.
''For those of us who are policy makers, this does not take our eye off the ball,'' said Mr. Kaplowitz, ''which is that we have to focus on the short- and long-term viability of the medical center.''
In a strange twist, the medical center argues that Michael Fisher's mother, Elissa Fisher, 40, of Armonk, who is a registered nurse, actually prevented the hospital staff from conducting routine tests and monitoring her son during his stay. The case is now under investigation by the New York State Department of Health.
In a statement issued Wednesday night, a lawyer for the hospital, John J. Corgan, referred to ''substantial, extraordinary parental interference that severely impeded the medical staff's ability to do their jobs.''
John Q. Kelly, a lawyer for the boy's estate, disputed that account, calling it ''absolutely outrageous.'' He said a device that measures oxygen levels in the blood, called a pulse oximeter, was ''never brought into the room'' and that the boy was ''never monitored.''
But yesterday, Mr. Corgan asserted that the oximeter ''was in the room, it was fully functional and it was in use to the extent that the family would permit.''
According to the New York State Department of Health, health-care providers are allowed to administer care to a minor without consent of a parent if the doctor determines that the condition is life threatening.
The hospital is no stranger to wrongful death charges. In 2000, a 6-year-old boy died after being hit in the head by an airborne metal oxygen tank during a magnetic resonance imaging test. But the hospital quickly admitted its error and was fined by the state. Last summer, an obese 27-year-old patient with multiple health problems died while waiting in the emergency room, and the state recently cited the hospital for several deficiencies in delaying his treatment.
But until the accusation by the Fisher family on Wednesday, the hospital's public relations staff had been responding to a drumbeat of bleak financial data. Last week, two credit-rating agencies downgraded one of the medical center's two bond ratings, to a level just above junk.
For its part, the hospital says that its quality of care has actually improved over the years. In December, the medical center received a score of 94, its highest ever, from the Joint Commission on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, which rates hospitals for overall quality of care and patient safety.
''Undoubtedly these are serious issues,'' said a medical center spokeswoman, Carin Grossman, of the fiscal problems and malpractice charge, ''but over the past decade we've established a reputation for high quality medical care in things like liver transplant and complex heart surgeries.''
She added that the medical center performed more kidney transplants than any other hospital in New York State and that it had one of the only burn centers between New York City and the Canadian border.
