The Spirit has moved.
All six metal wheels of the robotic rover Spirit rested on the reddish surface of Mars early yesterday after the successful drive off its landing platform.
Twelve days after its arrival on the planet, the rover rolled down a ramp and in 78 seconds moved at least 10 feet straight ahead, leaving two parallel tracks in the dust. When it stopped, as planned, the rear wheels were still no more than three feet from the foot of the ramp.
''This is a big relief,'' Rob Manning, manager of the landing part of the mission, said in a televised news conference. ''Our wheels are finally dirty.''
Dr. Charles Elachi, director of NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., the mission's control center, joked that the Spirit showed that ''we move awfully fast'' at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Only the day before, President Bush had called for a concerted effort to return astronauts to the Moon and prepare for eventual human travel to Mars.
''In less than 15 hours,'' Dr. Elachi said, ''we are doing our first step.''
Data radioed by the vehicle confirmed that the rollout occurred, as scheduled, at 3:41 a.m. Eastern time.
The first black-and-white photographs, which arrived soon after, showed the Spirit standing level and steady, facing west but looking back to the cocoon in which it came to a bouncing, rolling landing on Mars on Jan. 3.
The 5-foot-long 400-pound rover is a self-contained vehicle with its own solar-power system, computer and other controls, transmitters and antennas and a set of advanced cameras and instruments. It is designed to operate four to five hours a day on detailed instructions for each day's automated operations fed into its computer by scientists and engineers at the control center. There is no need for the rover to return to its landing base.
Only once before, in 1997, was Mars visited by a roving vehicle, the 22-pound Sojourner, which was delivered by the Pathfinder spacecraft. Peter Theisinger, manager of the rover project, said in a telephone interview that the Spirit appeared to be in excellent condition.
''We see no issues with the state of the vehicle,'' Mr. Theisinger said.
The first brief excursion was a mere toe in the water -- if such can be said of an arid world like Mars -- at the start of the Spirit's planned three months exploring the rocks and soil, craters and hills of Gusev Crater. Scientists theorize that the ancient crater is a dry lake bed and, thus, possibly revealing of warmer and wetter epochs when conditions could have been favorable for life.
Officials of the mission said that for the next three days the rover would remain parked where it is. Engineers will be checking the performance of its mechanical arm, and scientists want to calibrate their cameras and scientific instruments.
''We're still crawling, relative to walking or running,'' the deputy project manager, Richard Cook, said. ''We don't yet know for sure how the rover will behave on the Martian terrain.''
The Spirit has already been sent instructions for deploying the mechanical arm on Friday and using its microscopic camera to photograph a smooth patch of soil within easy reach. On Saturday, the plan is to test the vehicle's Mössbauer spectrometer, designed to determine the composition and abundance of iron-bearing minerals in soil and rocks.
Then on Sunday, Mr. Cook said in a telephone interview, the rover will be instructed to finish the testing and stow the arm. The next move, scientists said, will probably be a short run to one of two nearby rocks for detailed investigations of their chemistry and mineralogy. One rock, with a rectangular shape, has been called Sashimi. The other, shaped roughly like a pyramid, is Adirondack. Each is 15 feet from the landing base and almost directly in front of the rover.
The Spirit's scientific examination of one of the rocks is expected to take several days. By then, Mr. Theisinger said, the Spirit will be put on standby operations while flight controllers and scientists deal with its twin, the Opportunity. The companion rover is scheduled to land on the opposite side of Mars on Jan. 24.
After the interruption, Mr. Theisinger said, two separate teams of scientists and controllers are to keep watch over each rover in the $800 million mission.
Scientists have their eyes on several more distant destinations for the Spirit. A shallow depression known as Sleepy Hollow is not far away, in the direction that the rover is already pointing. More intriguing as ultimate objectives are a deeper crater 825 feet away and even more distant hills on the horizon.
The rovers are expected to be able to travel several dozen feet a day, perhaps 1,000 to 2,000 feet in a three-month operating lifetime. The Sojourner managed about 300 feet and could never wander far from its landing craft.
