The state Democratic Party convention was conceived months ago as a victory celebration for a party that was dominating California's electoral politics as it had not since the late 19th century.
But when the convention opens here on Friday there will be considerably more gloom than glory, as Democrats from across the state meet for the first time since Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, became governor two months ago.
Being a Democrat in Mr. Schwarzenegger's California is taking some getting used to, and there is growing consternation about how the party can distinguish itself in the celebrity glare of the new governor. A poll released Thursday by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California showed Mr. Schwarzenegger with a 59 percent approval rating, while the Democratic-controlled Legislature received just 36 percent.
Even as the Democratic convention opens here, Mr. Schwarzenegger is likely to steal the political limelight by endorsing Bill Jones, a former California secretary of state, who is running in the Republican primary for the United States Senate seat occupied by Barbara Boxer, a Democrat.
''After every defeat there is always a struggle within the losing party,'' said former Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat, who was removed from office in an October recall election. ''When you lose an election, it is time for introspection and to redefine the goals of the party. That process clearly will begin at this convention.''
A Republican official in the Schwarzenegger administration suggested that the state's Democrats were in a particular quandary because a past strategy of vilifying Republican governors as right-wing extremists, as happened with Gov. Pete Wilson in the 1990's, would not work this time.
''He is the perfect California moderate,'' the official said of Mr. Schwarzenegger. ''He has a bipartisan administration, his wife comes from a Democratic iconoclastic family, and he has developed relationships with Democratic leaders already.''
John J. Pitney, a professor of government at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif., who previously worked for the Republican National Committee, said Mr. Schwarzenegger had delivered ''a very strong punch to the face'' of the state Democratic Party, which ''is still trying to find its legs.''
''This is the new model of the Terminator, and they are not quite sure how to fight it,'' Professor Pitney said.
Democratic spirits have been further dampened by a Field poll released this week showing President Bush's popularity growing in California. Mr. Bush's 52 percent job approval rating was his best showing in the Field survey since shortly after Sept. 11, 2001.
There will also be a conspicuous absence of star attractions. Dennis J. Kucinich and the Rev. Al Sharpton are the only presidential candidates scheduled to appear. Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, the chairman of the Democratic National Convention, was supposed to speak here but backed out, citing a conflict.
That Mr. Davis will have a role in the three-day session is one indication that the party remains conflicted about the meaning of Mr. Schwarzenegger's victory and its aftermath.
Mr. Davis said that his main purpose would be to thank the party rank and file for their support during his 30 years in state politics, but that he would also offer some thoughts about the road ahead. Since leaving office two months ago, Mr. Davis has been exploring writing a book about his governorship but has not taken up other work.
''I believe the Democratic Party is a big-tent party and should speak to the aspirations of everyone under the tent, from the poor to the middle class,'' Mr. Davis said in a telephone interview from Los Angeles. ''We need to be a party of hope and upward mobility.''
Professor Bruce E. Cain, director of the Institute of Governmental Studies at the University of California, Berkeley, predicted that the convention would kick-start a struggle for the party's soul between moderates, who have some inclination to work with Mr. Schwarzenegger, and more liberal constituencies, including some labor unions, which perceive Mr. Davis's defeat as a signal that the party had veered too far toward the center.
Professor Cain said the split mirrored one within the Democratic Party at the national level, with the added complication of assessing the significance of Mr. Schwarzenegger, namely whether his victory was the quirky outcome of a once-in-a-lifetime recall election or symptomatic of a larger problem within the Democratic Party.
''It brings back a lot of issues the Democrats had to deal with in the late 1980's when Ronald Reagan was president,'' Professor Cain said. ''It was a very frustrating period when the Democratic Party couldn't find the right formula.''
Art Pulaski, the executive secretary-treasurer of the California Labor Federation, said unions would be pushing the party ''back to basics.''
Mr. Pulaski said that Mr. Davis's removal from office, and Mr. Schwarzenegger's defeat of Lt. Gov. Cruz M. Bustamante, a Democrat, in the contest to succeed Mr. Davis, were a reminder ''that we have to stick to the issues and values that are important to our members and their families.'' He mentioned affordable health care, better schools, cheaper energy and more jobs.
''I think a lot of politicians now are thinking, 'I just have to poll and go down the middle of the road,' '' Mr. Pulaski said. ''That didn't work for Gray Davis. Extreme caution doesn't work with the electorate.''
The convention will also mark the beginning of a generational shift in party leadership, with some of the state's most powerful Democrats, like State Senator John Burton and the former mayor of San Francisco, Willie L. Brown Jr., stepping aside because of term limits.
Many eyes will be focused on people like the state treasurer, Phil Angelides, who has been vocal in his criticism of Mr. Schwarzenegger and is expected to run for governor in 2006, and Gavin Newsom, the new mayor of San Francisco, a millionaire businessman who at 36 is regarded by many as one of the state's most promising Democrats.
Mr. Newsom said in an interview that the party needed to move fast in restaking its claim to California, or risk being permanently defined in the ''negative light'' of the recall defeat.
''We have to recognize the new realities and once again recapture people's imagination,'' he said.
