Francisco Costa has the prestige of the Calvin Klein name behind him, though it will matter little if Phillips-Van Heusen, the company's corporate parent, doesn't recognize the value of a designer-driven label. Zac Posen had to scrounge for sponsors to help pay for his show on Thursday night, but he has the creative freedom that impoverishment sometimes affords.
In fashion, they say that the runway never lies. If a designer is having trouble in the back of the house, in the workrooms or the factory, no amount of public relations mumbo jumbo will obscure those problems on the runway. By the same token, if a designer is happy and surrounded by support, those qualities will show in the clothes and the company will prosper.
To anyone but the uninitiated, it was apparent on Thursday from the unevenness of the Calvin Klein show that Mr. Costa does not have the full support of Phillips-Van Heusen. This is not because he isn't talented or dedicated. In fact, in the days before the show, which had to be delayed 48 hours, Mr. Costa took responsibility for correcting mistakes apparently made by the company's Italian licensing partner, sewing and finishing some of the clothes himself. But the real mistakes were of a different kind: Phillips-Van Heusen, it seems, does not fully understand what goes into a couture business or, indeed, the reason for having one in the first place.
Corporate types love to talk, especially since the shake-up at Gucci, about how a brand is bigger than a designer. But ask Lawrence Stroll, who owns Michael Kors, or Sidney Toledano, the chief executive of Dior, and they will tell you differently. A designer is the creative engine of a house, whether he is a locomotive like John Galliano or a determined little caboose like Mr. Posen. ''The biggest mistake the owner of Gucci could have made was to let Tom Ford go,'' Mr. Stroll said recently. ''I think you'll see that it is a textbook case of a catastrophic mistake to be studied for years to come in business schools.''
The main note of Mr. Costa's collection was a chemise or shirtwaist dress in washed silk that fell loosely over the body, a style that looks marvelously sexy on young, long-limbed women without doubts (or much need for underwear) but presents challenges to just about everybody else. Mr. Costa offset his skimmy dresses and pajama silks -- a style that brought to mind both Lauren Hutton in the 1970's and women of the 1920's lounging prettily in their couture slips -- with structured coats in black felt or navy shearling, and somewhat chunky, black lace-up shoes. The effect was undeniably enchanting and sophisticated, a bit in the vein of Mr. Ford's most recent collection for Saint Laurent, but also unlike anything seen this week on the New York runways.
Although the collection lacked the variety of Mr. Costa's first solo show, in September 2003, he is right to want to imagine a woman who is nothing like the Prada type in her bourgeois cashmeres and croaky fur tippets or even the Ford type. His vision is a modern ideal for Calvin Klein that he can build on. Plainly, Mr. Costa is committed to this. The larger question is whether Phillips-Van Heusen executives understand what comes first, the engine or the train of products. Whatever caused the show to be delayed, they should never have let the problems reach that point. Because they have to realize that, at this level of the game, every weakness shows.
What came down Mr. Posen's runway was strong. Not only was this his most accomplished collection to date, it was also one of the best of the fall season. Mr. Posen set a sophisticated tone from the outset, with a reversible mink vest over a silk blouse and pair of gold linen knickers. The models had riding hats made from spotted deerskin and court shoes in colored suede with straps. Each of the 34 looks perfectly expressed the spirit of the show's title, ''Blixen,'' a take on the German word for lightning. That could mean a sudden jolt of color, like a teal wool coat tossed over the shoulders of a model in an evening dress of teal charmeuse with a splashy train of beige chiffon, or a simple pin-tucked dress, or one made of pieced strips of green, blue and beige chiffon whipping over the body.
The clothes had much going for them: youth, wit, technical finesse but, above all, real sophistication. ''Everything I've been trying to do the last few years came out in this collection,'' Mr. Posen said around midnight on Thursday at a postshow party. ''This is me.''
Cynthia Rowley's show, set up like an afternoon tea party, with waitresses offering trays of finger sandwiches, captured her girlish sense of humor. She sent out a blue fur stole sashed around the shoulders of a dress in a china-plate print; her version of the fleece snow boot (now in a floral pattern); and slinky, bejeweled halter dresses that revealed no less of the models' bodies than Mr. Costa's pale jersey slips did, but did not come close to his sophistication.
