With the exception of the police commissioner, the heads of city agencies tend to be virtually invisible to the public, trotted out for the occasional news conference with the mayor while doing most of their business behind closed doors.
But Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, the city's health commissioner, has turned out to be an active policy advocate among the city's department heads, the outspoken architect of some of the Bloomberg administration's more controversial policies.
Although Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is more closely associated with a law that bans smoking citywide, the legislation was actually developed by Dr. Frieden, who was also given responsibility for helping to push it through the City Council.
Since Dr. Frieden was appointed in 2002, the Bloomberg administration has also changed the city's restaurant inspection process and increased the fines, infuriating the industry so much that its trade group sued the city.
He has assumed responsibility of the city's health program for jail inmates and is pressing a case for needle exchange programs in various neighborhoods, a controversial H.I.V. prevention effort.
Last week, when the City Council overrode Mayor Bloomberg's veto of a bill that tightens rules on the removal of lead paint in apartment buildings, Dr. Frieden fired off an angry response, calling the Council vote ''misguided and dangerous.'' The law was so complicated as to be meaningless, Dr. Frieden said.
The next day, Dr. Frieden criticized the Council only somewhat more gently for overriding another veto involving electronic applications for death certificates. Among other things, Dr. Frieden said there was not enough time to properly implement the new method.
Even Mayor Bloomberg's partnership with Snapple to sell juice in vending machines in schools has not gone without his notice.
''I would have preferred water,'' he admitted, although he added that he liked the money that the agreement will raise.
He is almost certainly the only city agency head who keeps a bowl of condoms in the reception area of his office.
In some ways, Dr. Frieden, who is 43 and is married with one child, is inheriting a tradition of active health commissioners that retreated during the Giuliani administration, when public health was a back-burner issue.
''The city health department has a long history of activist health commissioners going back to the turn of the century,'' said Dr. Mark Chassin, the chairman for the department of health policy at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Although Mayor Bloomberg has taken both the credit and the grief for the ban on smoking, the restaurant fines, and the opposition to a bill on lead paint hazards, insiders on each issue know that the health commissioner is the one who developed these policies.
And while Dr. Frieden is highly respected among Mr. Bloomberg's senior staff members, many of them also grumble that his policies have come at a political cost to the mayor. ''The smoking ban would never have happened without him,'' said one administration official.
Dr. Frieden offered no apologies for his eager enforcement of the law. ''It has been said that public health programs are inherently unpopular because they improve the health of a large number of people, but many of them disturb a small number of very vocal people,'' he said. ''We have done a terrific thing, by improving the way we inspect restaurants. We now have cleaner food, but the restaurants that are getting fined are angry.''
About the smoking law, he said: ''In public health there is no pro-TB or pro-Ebola lobby, but there is a pro-tobacco lobby. And they spend $2 billion on marketing and promotion. Everyone knows that secondhand smoke kills. It would be a pretty sorry case if a health commissioner didn't support this law. The surprise is that the mayor supports it. But I would be happy to be attacked for it.''
Dr. Frieden's résumé is as eclectic as it is impressive. Mr. Bloomberg lured him back into public service in New York from India, where he worked for five years assisting the government in its efforts to control tuberculosis.
But Dr. Frieden already knew the city department well. He began his career in New York in 1990 as a epidemiologist, and his success in documenting the spread of resistant tuberculosis led to his appointment as director of the City Bureau of Tuberculosis Control, where he served from 1992 to 1996. The program Dr. Frieden created, which included staff members searching under bridges for homeless people to get them into treatment, greatly reduced tuberculosis in the city and is considered a national model.
Dr. Frieden's health goals have expanded greatly in his current role, with interests as varied as racial disparities in health care, colon cancer, and helping new mothers care for their infants. His pet cause, though, is ending tobacco use, a goal he repeats in interviews, in his letter to New Yorkers on the health department's Web site, and in conversations with doctors. ''In terms of tobacco control, we're not done,'' he said. ''Seven out of 10 people want to quit. What we know is the health care system doesn't do as good a job as it could in helping them.''
Last week, Dr. Frieden stepped into the public eye when he e-mailed a message to council members berating their override of the mayor's veto on the lead paint bill.
''This is about the worst piece of public policy I have seen in 20 years in public health,'' he said in an interview this week. ''I felt really it was my duty to state that clearly. It is the law and we are planning to implement it, but it's not going to be preventing lead poisoning.''
Dr. Frieden, who is an obsessive consumer of data, also decided that the city's restaurant inspections were not focusing on the things that actually cause people to get sick. So he changed the category of many violations and increased fines substantially; the minimum fine doubled to $200. Inspection failure rates doubled last year, although they are ticking down again.
Doug Griebel, the president of the New York City chapter of the New York State Restaurant Association, said of Dr. Frieden's changes: ''There are too many inconsistencies in the inspections, and fines have quadrupled, which serves no purpose other than to raise money.'' Mr. Griebel, who owns four Manhattan restaurants, complained, as have other owners, that violations that could be addressed on the spot before now automatically result in fines.
Dr. Frieden still enjoys dining out on sushi, and said he was just fulfilling a mission. ''Public health has one underlying philosophy, and one underlying methodology,'' he said. ''The underlying philosophy is social justice, and methodology is using data to improve decisions.''
Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Saturday about New York City's health commissioner, Dr. Thomas R. Frieden, an advocate of some of the Bloomberg administration's controversial policies, misstated the sum he said the tobacco industry spent on marketing and promotion in 2001. It was $11.2 billion, not $2 billion.
