Using a wheelchair since a gunshot wound 34 years ago, Wilfredo Graulau admits that most mornings he sinks into a funk and would undoubtedly remain there if not for Margarita's arrival.
Around 11 each morning, Margarita Pillot arrives at his cluttered South Bronx apartment and makes him coffee, prepares his lunch, checks his blood pressure and chats with him about city politics, the bitter winter, whatever. Slowly, her warmth and conversation pull him out of his rut.
''By 10:30, 11 each day, I'm feeling depressed, thinking that I should be out somewhere, and that's when she starts talking to me, and I start feeling better,'' said Mr. Graulau, a retired computer instructor at the Fashion Institute of Technology.
As a home health aide, Ms. Pillot has one of the nation's most invisible jobs, a low-wage position caring for the ill and infirm inside their homes. Her job, which involves cooking, cleaning and doing simple medical tests, has its ups and downs. She complained, for instance, that one home care agency where she worked gave her little training, did not pay her when she was out sick and did not provide health insurance.
''There were no benefits, no nothing,'' Ms. Pillot said. ''They didn't care about you, and if you had a family problem, like my son having asthma, you had to take care of it yourself.''
But she is far happier since she landed a job with one of the nation's most successful worker-owned companies, a home health agency in the South Bronx that has won widespread acclaim for how it treats its 780 employees. Her agency, Cooperative Home Care Associates, is unusual not just because it is employee-owned -- workers can buy one share of the company -- but also because many management analysts and health care professionals are studying it as a model for other low-wage workers.
''The worker is at the center of everything we do,'' said Michael Elsas, Cooperative's president. ''Everything else revolves around that.''
Cooperative generally pays its workers 20 percent more than other New York home care agencies do. Its workers get $6.80 to $9.50 per hour, with the average at $8.60. It gives aides comprehensive health insurance and what is considered the best training program in the business, providing at least four weeks of training (most agencies provide two weeks).
Many home care agencies charge new employees $300 for training, while Cooperative provides it free, an important sweetener considering that two-thirds of its aides used to be on welfare.
Cooperative subsidizes its employees if they want to take college courses to become nurses. It guarantees aides at least 30 hours of work a week, while many other agencies give their aides only 15 or 20 hours, far too little for them to live on.
If Cooperative's workers arrive late to their home care cases because of child-care problems, the agency's counselors help employees track down child care. When workers have a complaint, they can easily arrange a one-on-one meeting with Cooperative's president.
''I worked at other agencies where you didn't feel any sense of unity, where you felt like just an employee, where you got your paycheck and just went to your cases,'' said Sabrina Horry, a Cooperative employee for four years. ''Here it's more like family. They have things that make you feel good about yourself. You always have someone to talk to if there's a problem. You feel if you have a problem, you don't go home and you're by yourself.''
One sign of Cooperative's success is that it has doubled in size in four years. State and federally financed home care providers like assigning cases to the agency because only 22 percent of its workers leave each year compared with 60 percent at many other agencies -- meaning that Cooperative's caregivers provide more experience and continuity to patients.
Cooperative, which primarily serves patients in the Bronx, is so respected that a Brooklyn home care agency with 175 health aides recently announced plans to ally itself with it. That agency, Care at Home Diocese of Brooklyn, will copy Cooperative's training program and may also convert to employee ownership.
''This industry can be very close to a sweatshop industry and degenerates into it in more instances than people are aware of,'' said Thomas A. O'Brien, the founder of Care at Home. ''We thought it made sense to form an alliance with Cooperative because we have a similar mission in terms of treating home-care workers with respect and trying to do the right thing for them economically.''
Cooperative's managers say they are able to pay higher wages than other agencies because other agencies pay so much in profits to a handful of owners, and because Cooperative's management salaries are lower than at other agencies. In addition, Cooperative's lower turnover rate means it does not have to spend as much to train a constant stream of new workers. In addition, foundations finance much of Cooperative's training efforts.
All is not perfect at Cooperative, however. Workers frequently complain that the board members they elect are too tight-fisted about raises and bonuses. The health aides elect eight of the agency's 12 board members, and this worker-controlled board sets wages, benefits, end-of-year bonuses and dividends and the annual contribution to the workers' 401(k) plans.
''We'd definitely like a better salary,'' said Ms. Pillot, who earns $7.25 an hour. ''It's really hard when you have to pay $700 rent for your apartment.''
Workers on the board say they have learned that they cannot pay as much as employees might like because federal and state reimbursement rates for home care are limited. In addition, board members say that devoting too much of Cooperative's $17 million in annual revenues to wages and bonuses could jeopardize its finances and future.
Over one five-year stretch, the board voted no raises because Albany and Washington were tightening home care reimbursements. During this period, workers often lambasted the board members, but they recognized that the worker-owners on the board were not receiving raises either.
''Worker ownership gives you a voice in the company,'' said Joann Poue, a longtime board member who mentors younger aides. ''When you're a worker-owner you have to understand what it means to be a worker and owner. You share in the good, and you share in the not so good.''
Rick Surpin, the board's chairman, praised the workers' occasional willingness to put aside their desire for raises and bonuses.
''The economic literature says workers are inherently stupid and selfish, but that has not played out here,'' he said. ''They've consistently made decisions that they care about the longevity of the company and its long-term ability to pay better wages and benefits.''
Mr. Surpin founded Cooperative in 1985 after writing his thesis about alternatives to nursing homes. He said it made sense to create a worker-owned home care cooperative, rather than a traditional profit-making or nonprofit company.
''I realized that nonprofits and for-profits treated their workers equally badly,'' he said. ''For-profits did it because it was the way to make money, while nonprofits did it because for them their workers didn't count and their patients and professional staff counted a lot more.''
In a twist, Cooperative's workers opted last year to join 1199/SEIU, the state's largest health care union, largely because they were impressed by the union's success in lobbying Albany for more home care dollars.
So now the union representing health workers is supposed to bargain with the company owned by health workers. That makes management uneasy, and not only because Cooperative already provides better wages and benefits than most other agencies. Mr. Surpin warns that it might be hard for Cooperative to adhere to multiyear pacts and to match percentage raises given by agencies that pay less.
''We present a problem for the union, and the union presents a problem for us,'' Mr. Surpin said. ''But the union has come to see that we're dead serious about doing what's best for the workers.''
Officials at 1199 agree that it can be an awkward pas de deux.
Celeste Garcia feels blessed that she works for Cooperative, having left her secretarial job to become a health aide. ''I wanted something with a humanitarian theme,'' she said, adding that she was also pleased to find a job that provided health insurance, sick days and paid vacations.
She praised Cooperative's training program, which she said taught her not only how to identify many diseases but also what to do if a patient has a heart attack, stroke or seizure. For three years, she has taken care of Marilyn McDowell, a 44-year-old former nurse who suffered a stroke that paralyzed her right side. Ms. McDowell also has diabetes, high blood pressure and seizures.
On a typical day, Ms. Garcia cooks and cleans, and she feeds Ms. McDowell's cat. She sometimes bakes with Ms. McDowell and often takes her to doctors' appointments. She has learned to interpret Ms. McDowell's gestures when she has a seizure.
''She knows exactly what to say to the doctor if I can't speak for myself,'' Ms. McDowell said. ''Celeste takes care of me very well and she's a great friend. She's a godsend.''
