Addressing what the country's president has described as a risk-laden financial system, China announced a series of halting steps toward reform throughout the week.
Economic officials in China concluded three days of talks on Friday that brought together mostly government officials in charge of banks, insurers and the stock market and signaled a faster tempo of action in these areas, China watchers said. The measures that officials endorsed included accelerating bank reorganization; slowing the growth of money supply and lending; easing restrictions on the outflow of money; and later, possibly altering China's exchange rate controls, according to official Chinese news reports.
It may be months before the specifics of the plans are determined, but several economists interviewed said this week's announcements seemed to signal the beginning of a new, deeper round of financial changes.
''Now policy is running against a deadline and there seems to be a feeling of urgency among policy makers,'' Huang Yiping, an economist with Citigroup in Hong Kong, said. ''In the past, gradual change was preferred. But we also need to see what material difference these decisions will make.''
Maintaining China's vigorous economic growth -- 9.9 percent last year -- while defusing the risks inherent in its debt-heavy banks and immature insurance and equity markets will be a tough juggling act, he and other experts said. And it will be complicated by international pressure on China to loosen its peg to the dollar. An American delegation is due in Beijing later this month for talks on China's exchange rate policies.
Government officials expressed their concerns about the imbalances in China's economy as the conference began.
''Under China's present system, if things are badly handled, financial risks may spark government fiscal risks,'' President Hu Jintao said before the talks. ''Guarding against financial risk must be taken up as a major issue for national security,'' he added. His comments appeared on Friday in a mainland-controlled Hong Kong newspaper, Wen Hui Pao.
''Money and credit have been growing too fast,'' Wen Jiabao, the prime minister, told the meeting in a blunt opening address on Wednesday. ''The structure of credit is irrational and the financial system carries many problems and perilous risks.''
The new push to shape up China's banks and financial institutions is in part a response to World Trade Organization rules requiring China to open its banking and insurance markets to foreign investors by 2007. The more immediate catalyst was growing fear that overheated investment and loose credit would smother China's banks and its government under a new pile of failed investments and unrecoverable loans.
The government this week announced plans to stanch new investment in industries like iron and steel, aluminum and concrete. Last year, investments in fixed assets like factories and real estate soared 26 percent to $662 billion, and bank loans jumped 21 percent. The government has ordered inspection teams to examine bank loans in potentially overheated sectors.
The meeting this week also announced a series of other measures intended to slow bank credit and investment this year. The president of China's central bank, Zhou Xiaochuan, said the broad money supply would grow 17 percent this year, slightly less than last year, and new loans would be kept to $527 billion, 13 percent less than last year.
The financial conference also discussed measures to improve the performance of banks and insurance companies. The chairman of the bank supervisory authority, Liu Minkang, said on Thursday that these plans included ''fully promoting an overall reform of the commercial state-owned banks'' and supervising these banks more closely.
Analysts said they took his words to mean that the four major government-banks would be prepared for equity offerings over the next few years, starting with the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank. These two banks recently received cash injections of $22.5 billion each, money that will be used to clean up their balance sheets before a stock offering. Mr. Liu also said that entry requirements for foreign banks would be simplified.
China's chief central banker, Zhou Xiaochuan, also promised a series of reforms to subject Chinese banks to closer monitoring, encourage the use of bank debit cards instead of cash and establish a nationwide network for checking the creditworthiness of borrowers.
''I think we're seeing the beginning of a big bang reform in banking,'' Mr. Huang, the Citigroup economist, said. ''It's a good sign the listing of the banks will happen sooner rather than later.''
He and other analysts noted, however, that officials shied from airing radical ideas about the most internationally contentious of China's financial policies -- its exchange rate, which is tied to the United States dollar.
Mr. Zhou, the central bank chief, repeated that the government would work to ''improve the exchange rate mechanism.'' China's State Bureau of Foreign Exchange Control on Friday issued an announcement from the meeting saying that it would seek to ease upward pressure on China's currency by loosening controls on Chinese investment and spending abroad.
''There was nothing that deviated from the party line,'' said Terrance Hui, China treasurer of the Hong Kong Shanghai Banking Corporation in Shanghai. ''I don't see much chance of any change in the exchange rate before the end of the year.''
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
