Theirs were names to grow into, big-man names, Victor Flores and Juan Angel Estrada. When they were buried yesterday, mourners filled a Brooklyn church, large families and small ones, entire classrooms of children from a nearby school. Their coffins were six feet long, polished white boxes with golden trim and ornate carvings, each one pushed, not carried, by six men.
But the dead were eulogized simply, the first as a lover of books and the second a lover of baseball, with single-faceted descriptions of lives too compact to engender complication and nuance.
Five days ago, these boys, 11-year-old Victor and 10-year-old Juanito, were crushed under the wheels of a truck while walking home from school in Park Slope. Their deaths seemed to touch a deep chord in a city where danger often lurks in everyday places.
Their shared funeral at St. Thomas Aquinas Roman Catholic Church drew out a broad swath of the neighborhood, as well as the boys' principal from Public School 124, a diocesan representative and community affairs officers of the Police Department. Parts of the Mass preceding their burial were said or sung in English and Spanish to accommodate the diverse crowd, though the mourners wore expressions and carried symbols that transcended translation.
Their deaths have also elicited accusations that the city has done too little to make street crossings around Downtown Brooklyn safe. The intersection where the boys died Monday afternoon, on Third Avenue and Ninth Street, was identified as dangerous in a study last year by city consultants, said John Kaehny, executive director of Transportation Alternatives, an advocacy group for pedestrians. The consultants recommended extensions to the sidewalk and a reprogramming of the traffic lights, he said, but the work has not been done.
The boys stepped into the street as the truck was turning to head north on Third Avenue, the police said. A reprogramming of the traffic lights would have given the boys a walk sign before the truck driver got a green light, Mr. Kaehny said.
''The odds are very good that they wouldn't have gotten killed,'' he said.
Tom Cocola, a spokesman for the city's Department of Transportation, called the deaths tragic and said, ''We pledge to continue to work with the Brooklyn community on traffic initiatives.''
The truck driver, John Olson, was issued summonses for equipment violations, but no other charges are expected, a police spokesman said. No one responded to a knock on the door at his Long Island home yesterday. His lawyer did not return a telephone call, and a woman who came to the door at his Long Island landscaping business declined to say much beyond a description of Mr. Olson's emotional state: ''not good.''
On the western edge of Park Slope, in the Mexican immigrant enclave that was the boys' home, grief was shared and manifest. At the intersection where the boys were killed, a young woman clutched the hand of a small boy, tugging him back once and then again from the curbside as buses and trucks rumbled past.
The light changed, and they crossed to the northeast corner, where piles of this and that memorialized the boys. There were candles and flowers, baseball balloons and heart balloons, , toy bears, rosaries and military tags.
There, too, was the mark of the confusion that comes after sudden death. One handwritten sign told of bank routing numbers for donations to the boys' families. Another bore a complete transcription of the funeral home's business card, including the year that it was founded.
A poem affixed to the fence, written in Spanish, spoke of inconsolable mourning and of great hope.
Up the hill at Fourth Avenue, a crossing guard stood watch outside the church. Under vaulted ceilings and Stations of the Cross in stark white bas-relief, hundreds of people sat in wooden pews: crossing guards in uniform, all three fifth-grade classes of P.S. 124 and several squirming babies.
An organ droned a simple melody in a minor key. Heads turned to the back of the church. The mourners were dressed simply, and they left their heavy coats on.
The music swelled, and the coffin bearers moved into the aisle, to be met halfway to the altar by clergymen bearing incense. Bishop Rene Valero, who wore a wristwatch with a depiction of a dove, blessed the boys and sprinkled their coffins with water. He sprinkled some on the pallbearers too, and they crossed themselves.
The boys' families took their places, bearing more flowers and balloons.
''Palabras, no hay,'' Bishop Valero said. ''There are no words.''
The mourners stood to offer prayers for all those suffering in the world, and someone lost hold of a ''We'll Miss You'' balloon.
It bobbed softly on the weight of its own string as it floated up over the shiny white coffins, the schoolchildren and crossing guards, past the chandeliers and their chains, past the carved pillars, ascending into the curves of the vaulted ceiling, out of sight.
A woman near the back of the church coughed and sniffled and rubbed her nose. Babies made baby noises. Muffled horns sounded from the traffic on Fourth Avenue.
''These parents return to you the children you gave them,'' Bishop Valero said, talking to God. He spoke of a love that conquers all things, that even destroys death, and then the organ played once more.
