Joining a growing chorus, federal advisers on Friday urged the government to increase testing for mad cow disease greatly to better gauge if the United States has a problem, and if so, how widespread it is.
The panelists said that without that data, there was no way to minimize the risk to humans who might be exposed by eating meat, or through drugs, vaccines, cosmetics and dietary supplements that contain raw materials from cattle.
''We have to know what the risk is, and whether we could contain it or whether we could stop it,'' said Dr. Stephen DeArmond, a member of the Food and Drug Administration panel, which met here on Thursday and Friday. Dr. DeArmond is a mad cow disease expert at the University of California, San Francisco.
A consultant to the panel, Dr. George Nemo of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute agreed. ''We want to know what the magnitude of the problem is,'' Dr, Nemo said.
But he and other panelists debated how much testing would be enough. The Agriculture Department said it planned to test 40,000 cows this year, out of 35 million to be slaughtered, focusing on animals at high risk of disease.
The panelists considered whether agency rules and recent proposals were sufficient to protect the blood supply, food, cosmetics, dietary supplements and drugs in light of the discovery of an infected cow in Washington State in December and the recent death of a British man presumed to have been infected through a blood transfusion.
Panelists said blood donor rules were fine, for now. ''We don't know that blood transfusion increases the risk at all,'' said Dr. Richard Johnson of Johns Hopkins University. ''There's only one case, and that's in England.''
But that case has caused alarm. Animal studies have shown that the misfolded proteins, called prions, thought to cause mad cow disease are in blood and can cause illness through transfusions.
But most scientists had thought those studies did not accurately predict what would happen in humans, especially because the human form of mad cow had never been transmitted through blood. A related disease, sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob, has never been transmitted by transfusion either.
''It was quite a shock,''' Dr. Robert Rowher of the V.A. Medical Center in Baltimore told the panel.
Dr. Rowher has shown in animals that mad-cow-like disease can be caused by transfusion, but said he was still surprised, given the lack of human cases.
Dr. Jay Epstein, director of the F.D.A.'s office of blood research and review, said the British death ''is telling us the animal models may be applicable to man.'' Dr. Epstein added, ''Up to this time, we've had a theoretical concern.''
Because of that theoretical risk, British and American authorities had already taken steps to prevent bloodborne transmission. White cells are thought to harbor more prions. So in 1999, Britain ordered those cells removed from all donated blood. A majority of blood in the United States has white cells taken out also, said a Red Cross spokesman.
Since 2002, the F.D.A. has barred blood donations by people who spent three or more months in Britain from 1980 to 1996, after which the mad cow epidemic was brought under control, Dr. Epstein said.
Michael Fitzpatrick, chief of policy of America's Blood Centers, said there had been an 8 to 10 percent drop in donors and urged against more restrictions. ''A single purported transmission in the U.K. is just that -- a single purported case,'' Mr. Fitzpatrick said.
But there could be more, said Dr. Robert Will, of the National C.J.D. Surveillance Unit in Edinburgh, Scotland. The 69-year-old British man who died was one of 48 people who received blood from 15 donors infected with the human form of mad cow disease. Most recipients died quickly of other causes, but 17 are still alive and have been told they might develop the disease.
Dr. Will warned that more Britons and Europeans were at risk through transfusions.
''We cannot say that one out of 48 is the final figure,'' he said.
Until that one, the 156 cases of human disease came from eating infected meat.
With infected cows found in the United States and Canada, Americans are at risk of exposure from beef or through materials like blood, bone, organs, tallow, and amino acids used in drugs, vaccines and supplements. Most materials now come from those two countries, which had been thought to be free of mad cow. F.D.A. officials estimated the risk of getting sick from beef at one in one million to one in 35 million. The agency gave similar estimates for other products that use cow material, but panelists were doubtful.
''There are too many unknowns in the risk assessments,'' said Dr. John Bailar of the University of Chicago, a panelist who urged the agency to take a harder look.
Dr. Pierluigi Gambetti, a panelist from the National Prion Disease Surveillance Center in Cleveland, said the F.D.A. should require manufacturers to get raw material only from countries that regularly test most cattle.
