Fumihiko Maki, a Japanese architect known for classical modern designs executed with a craftsman-like approach to technology, has won the competition to design an additional building for the United Nations.
His selection was reported Tuesday by The New York Sun. Officials at the United Nations Development Corporation, which develops and manages the organization's office space, said a formal announcement is not expected until late this month.
Mr. Maki said by phone yesterday that he admired the slender silhouette of the United Nations Secretariat building. ''The thin slab is something quite unique because in America office buildings tend to be large and squarish,'' said Mr. Maki, who has also been chosen to design the new office buildings at the World Trade Center site.
Construction of the United Nations building, on First Avenue between 41st and 42nd Streets, will allow the current complex, just north of the site, to be expanded and renovated.
The proposed design is ''glassy, white and sheer but elegant,'' said Edward Rubin, a member of the selection jury and chairman of the land-use committee of Community Board 6, which represents the neighborhood that includes the United Nations complex. Mr. Maki and his firm, Maki &amp; Associates, will be working in partnership with Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill on the 35-story building, which is expected to cost about $330 million and be completed by 2008.
The United Nations complex, completed in 1952, now needs both expansion and renovation, including the removal of asbestos and lead paint. Once the new, 900,000-square-foot building is completed, it will be used by the General Assembly, the Secretariat and their staffs. They will move back when the renovation is complete; the new building will then house United Nations employees now working at other Midtown locations.
The Robert Moses Playground and a ventilation shaft for the Queens-Midtown Tunnel are now located on the development site. Community Board 6 supports the development as long as the United Nations replaces parts of the 1.3-acre playground that will be lost, Mr. Rubin said. At risk are a soccer field and a blacktopped surface where a roller hockey league has played for more than 20 years.
The United Nations has agreed to pay for a $100,000 esplanade on the East River, said Michael Sherman, a spokesman for the development corporation.
But paths for strolling are not the same as playing fields, said Mr. Rubin. ''We take our active space very seriously,'' he said. ''We want a suitable replacement and we want it as close to the existing Robert Moses park as possible.''
The competition was open only to winners of the Pritzker Architecture Prize, the highest honor in the profession. The other contestants were Kevin Roche of Hamden, Conn., and Lord Norman Foster of London. Richard Meier, a New York architect, withdrew from the competition last summer. ''I told them it's the wrong site,'' he said. ''All the requirements for size, traffic, security, access -- everything cannot be met on that site.''
The selection of Mr. Maki suggests an effort to honor the original building's reputation as an icon of International Style modernism. Mr. Maki's approach to building combines subdued refinements with technological flourishes, as seen in the swooping steel roof of the Fujisawa Municipal Gymnasium in suburban Tokyo, which suggests both an ancient warrior helmet and a hovering spaceship.
Mr. Maki said, ''The U.N. reminded us that whatever we did we had to respect the existing building and not make an addition that is too aggressive or too iconographic, but rather friendly and quiet.''
Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  An article on Saturday about the selection of an architect for an addition to the United Nations complex misstated the expected cost of an esplanade that the organization plans to finance in return for taking over the Robert Moses Playground. The United Nations has committed millions of dollars, not $100,000. (The esplanade is to be 100,000 square feet.)
