One of the growing subspecies in Washington's ever-flourishing influence industry consists of the relatives of members of Congress. They register as lobbyists free to work the Hill -- if not necessarily from within the family hearth, then near enough to count. A tally by The Los Angeles Times finds at least 17 senators and 11 House members with relatives who are paid lobbyists or consultants in government relations.
This is a totally unregulated field, where some kin work on issues and bills that fall well within the portfolios of their elected family members. Senator Orrin Hatch's son works for a firm that has made more than a million dollars lobbying for the diet supplements industry, which the senator has long championed. ''I would expect him to have clients that are interested in what I do,'' said Senator Hatch, a Utah Republican.
Lawmakers try to treat the subject as unremarkable in a bipartisan sort of way. Senator Harry Reid, a Nevada Democrat, has had three sons and a son-in-law involved in firms that lobby the government or litigate for industries seeking government benefits. Hundreds of thousands of dollars have been paid for their services. This has made Mr. Reid, as co-chairman of the ethics committee, the focal point for the critics demanding that efforts be made to regulate such cozy practices. While insisting that he is above impropriety, Senator Reid has just sent an unexpected jolt through the Capitol's lobbyists by calling for a ''Senate-wide review of policies that relate to lobbying practices.''
We salute the idea, even if the senator is only reacting to re-election-year pressures, and even if there is pitifully small resolve in Congress to control lobbying properly. The industry, in truth, is in fat city, with veteran Hill staff members who worked on the new Medicare prescription law busily switching to careers in the pharmaceutical lobbying industry.
Historically, reports of lobbying date to the very first Congress: Continental Army veterans hired someone to buttonhole solons for benefits, while New York merchants employed ''treats, dinners, attentions'' to delay a tariff bill. Who's to say what's good or bad about lobbying Congress? Only Congress itself, if it can ever muster the courage.
