Judging by his comments, Gov. George E. Pataki returned from his two-day tour of Iraq more convinced than ever that the United States' invasion there is an extension of the fight against terrorists that began when Islamic extremists slammed hijacked airplanes into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon 2 1/2 years ago.
The Republican governor also seems convinced that the American forces in Iraq have become a magnet for terrorists throughout the world, drawing them away from targets in the United States, his aides said.
Speaking at a news conference Friday morning in Washington after visiting the White House, Governor Pataki said Iraq had become a critical battlefield on which Americans can decisively defeat their Islamic extremist foes.
''Al Qaeda has to be there, the terrorists have to be in Iraq, because if we win in Iraq, and we're going to win in Iraq, then we will have broken the back of terrorism,'' he said. He had just left a meeting with President Bush; Vice President Dick Cheney; Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser; and Andrew H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff.
Later, at a news conference in New York City, the governor repeatedly said the war in Iraq had started with the terrorist attacks in the United States on Sept. 11, 2001, even though President Bush himself has acknowledged that there is s no evidence that the Iraqi dictator, Saddam Hussein, had a hand in the attacks.
''What they are really doing for us is fighting the war on terrorism,'' the governor said of the soldiers he met in Iraq.
The governor traveled to Iraq this week with five other governors: his fellow Republicans Linda Lingle of Hawaii, Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota and Dirk Kempthorne of Idaho, and Kathleen Blanco of Louisiana and Ted Kulongoski of Oregon, both Democrats.
The trip was billed as a fact-finding mission and an attempt to raise the morale of National Guard troops, but Governor Pataki also used the tour as a way to promote the Bush administration's view of the war. He appeared on national news programs to say conditions were improving in Iraq for most people, despite the steady toll of terrorist bombings. He also repeatedly sounded the theme that the fight in Iraq was a fight for freedom and against terrorism.
Speaking to Wolf Blitzer of CNN on Tuesday night, the governor said, ''I did talk to ordinary Iraqis on the streets of Baghdad, troops, our soldiers who have been here for a year or more in some cases, and universally they say that the situation's getting better.''I think we all had a sense that the Iraqi people are tasting freedom and they had this overwhelming desire to keep that freedom, and that gives me enormous optimism about the future of Iraq,'' he went on. ''But an Al Qaeda memo was released a couple of days ago that points out that Al Qaeda believes that they are failing and that they have to ratchet up the efforts to engage in violence to pit Iraqis against Iraqis to prevent us from succeeding here, and I think you'll see them try to do that.''
Later, in an interview on Fox News, the governor said the troops he had met understand ''that they're fighting, yes, for Iraqi freedom, but also for American freedom.''
''And we've seen the consequences when we don't have the resolve,'' he added. ''We've seen it in New York and understand how important winning this fight is.''
It echoed the theme Mr. Pataki has been sounding for several months: that it is better to fight a war abroad with U.S. soldiers and marines than in the streets of New York with firefighters and police officers.
His comments in Iraq and upon his homecoming suggested that the trip had hardened that belief. ''He thinks the war in Iraq is part of the war on terror,'' said his chief spokeswoman, Lisa Dewald Stoll.
