As the possible takeover of the Walt Disney Company by the Comcast Corporation dominates the headlines, Hollywood producers and consumer advocates are again sounding the alarm that media consolidation will narrow the creative outlets for independent producers and upstart cable channels and ultimately reduce choice for the viewing public.
The combination of a powerful company like Disney, which owns movie studios, television networks like ABC and cable channels like ESPN, with the biggest cable operator in the country in Comcast, they said, will only increase the financial pressures already squeezing independent producers struggling to stay afloat in a consolidated industry.
''In the long term, everything's bad for independent producers,'' said Lynda Obst, who made ''How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days'' and whose independent production company is now based at Paramount, a unit of Viacom. ''It's a very, very tough survival rate for independent producers. Only the biggest ones survive.''
Though it is impossible to prove a causal link between the growing pace of media consolidation and the decline of diversity and experimentation in mass media entertainment, among the Hollywood creative community, it is conventional wisdom.
In television, independent producers have virtually disappeared in the last decade, with a handful of exceptions. In film, independent producers struggle for financing and a logistical toehold, as studios have opted away from making those deals. Even longtime producers like Lili Fini Zanuck and Gale Anne Hurd, responsible for films like ''Muholland Falls'' and the ''Terminator'' series, found their deals were not renewed recently at Paramount.
Industry analysts say that Comcast, whose 21.5 million cable subscribers far outstrip its next largest competitor in Time Warner, can be expected to promote Disney channels on its cable networks. And, they added, Disney can be expected to continue to favor programs and movies that are made by its own production studios.
That combination could prove lethal not only for independent producers but for smaller cable channels struggling to hang on to an appealing spot on the crowded cable dial. Independent cable networks, like the women-oriented Oxygen, may find themselves squeezed off the dial, or relegated to the digital tier where they would be available to far fewer viewers, say producers and advocates.
''Networks not affiliated with the Comcast-Disney combination will be exiled to cable Siberia,'' said John Rintels, a screenwriter who founded the Virginia-based Center for Creative Voices in Media. ''They're going to try to push Disney channels onto the basic tiers, because that's synergy. The net effect of all this is that there won't be room for small, independent networks.''
Similarly, the merger may make it more difficult for new cable networks to be established. Comcast, with its access to so many cable subscribers, already is able to get better terms for its investments in new channels than other investors. A combined company, some producers and consumer advocates worry, would only enhance that clout. A spokesman for Comcast disagreed that the proposed merger would reduce independent voices.
''Comcast is committed to diversity of programming and to expanding the number of voices on the air,'' said the spokesman. ''When you marry content to distribution it doesn't have the effect of squeezing the independent producer, the same way you could if you were marrying more distribution.''
And other executives at the biggest media companies have proudly pointed out that there are more viewing options and more production than ever before, thanks to cable networks like HBO, MTV, Nickelodeon, TNT and Showtime.
The decline in the power of independent producers can be traced in large part to the end of the so-called ''fin-syn'' -- financial interest and syndication -- rules in 1995. Hollywood studios had argued that abolishing those rules, which restricted movie and television studios from fully owning their own production entities, would not harm variety and creativity because they were plenty of other viewing choices.
Thus, they argued, even if broadcast networks like ABC and Fox began to produce their own shows -- as has become overwhelmingly the case -- independent producers could always find an outlet on any one of dozens of cable channels.
Mr. Rintels said that with the prospect of a Disney-Comcast merger, that argument had collapsed. ''Cable was thought to be the great safety valve, a great outlet,'' he said. ''That just changed, completely. The 500 voices on cable just became Comcast-Disney. The whole underpinning of the argument -- that it's O.K. to let broadcast networks produce all their own shows, that there is cable out there -- just went away.''
The question in the case of the potential merger, said Ms. Obst, is: ''Do we have fewer buyers or more buyers? Do we have the opportunity to be more creative, have more choices, or be more conservative? If we have fewer buyers we have to be more conservative.''
Comcast's unsolicited bid for Disney comes in the midst of a debate over the benefits and costs of the flurry of media conglomeration over the last decade. Just this week some broadcasters and public interest groups urged a Philadelphia federal appeals court to order the Federal Communications Commission to restore federal restrictions on the size of media conglomerates, saying the new rules would reduce competition and diversity of views on the airwaves.
Andrew Schwartzman, of the public interest group Media Access Project, attended the hearing, and said the Comcast-Disney merger cast a pall over the day.
''Vertical integration has been the core of the problem we've been complaining about, and it's the major problem posed by this deal in terms of quality, in terms of choice, in terms of rates, in terms of customer service,'' he said. ''The public is going to suffer for all those things, and the free flow of information and ideas is going to suffer.''
