A leading promoter of the use of offshore bank accounts to escape taxes, Jerome Schneider of Vancouver, British Columbia, has pleaded guilty to one felony tax charge and can reduce his prison sentence by cooperating in the prosecution of his clients.
Mr. Schneider entered his guilty plea, to one count of conspiring to defraud the government, in Federal District Court in San Francisco on Wednesday. Under a plea agreement with prosecutors, he faces up to 24 months in prison and potentially far less if he helps in the prosecution of his clients. He remained free on $100,000 bail. The plea was reported on Wednesday by Stockwatch.com.
Mr. Schneider, who bought ads in newspapers and magazine promoting tax evasion, was indicted in December 2002 along with an associate, Eric Whitmeyer, a lawyer in Los Angeles. Mr. Whitmeyer pleaded guilty to one count of the indictment a year ago. He was fined $100,000 and put on probation.
Court records show that Mr. Schneider is suspected of helping wealthy Americans hide more than $100 million from the Internal Revenue Service.
In another criminal tax case, a New Hampshire man who prepared more than 200 tax returns showing zero income and seeking $1 million in refunds was convicted Thursday by a federal jury in Concord, N.H., on all 18 charges against him for preparing false returns and obstructing administration of the income tax laws.
Steven Swan, 51, of Manchester, N.H., was an acolyte of Irwin Schiff, a Las Vegas man who advises people that by filing returns showing zero income they can legally avoid paying income taxes.
At his trial, Mr. Swan said he sincerely believed he was not required to pay taxes, citing as his authority books by Mr. Schiff including ''The Federal Mafia: How the Federal Government Illegally Imposes and Unlawfully Collects Federal Income Taxes.'' Mr. Schiff, who twice in the past served time in prison for tax crimes, has not been indicted, though he has said he helped prepare thousands of such returns for clients.
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San Francisco held a hearing on Tuesday on whether Mr. Schiff and two associates can be prevented from selling his book on the grounds that it incites people to lawlessness and defrauds those who act on its advice.
Mr. Swan broke with Mr. Schiff two years ago, after I.R.S. agents raided his home. He will be sentenced on May 19.
