LET'S clear this up: Only a smattering of knuckleheads was chanting ''O-sa-ma! O-sa-ma!'' at the American soccer players last Tuesday in Guadalajara, Mexico.
Most green-clad Mexican fans were quite content with hooting during the American anthem and vilifying the American players, normal soccer antics from a nation that still remembers Gen. Winfield Scott's incursions during the 1840's.
''To quote my host, 'We are the small guys and you are the big guys,' '' said Dr. Robert Contiguglia, the president of the United States Soccer Federation.
Doctor Bob, a kidney specialist, wants everybody to consider the healing reality that ''we actually have very friendly relationships between federations,'' no matter how bad it sounds when the United States plays Mexico in one of those great Mexican cities like Guadalajara or Chicago.
The United States wound up losing Tuesday's game, 4-0, in the semifinals of a regional under-23 tournament that served as a qualifying round for the Summer Games. This means that the American soccer lads will not hear the chant of ''O-sa-ma'' in Athens, mainly because they will not be there.
Another aspect of that loss is fascinating some American friends who are not exactly soccer buffs: the Yanks could have avoided Mexico had they lost to Honduras in the third game of the first round. They would have played Costa Rica, which is never easy, but at least they would not have been playing an entire nation.
''There are tactical things in soccer,'' Contiguglia conceded yesterday, talking about tournaments in which placement can be crucial.
As a nation, we can invade Iraq while most of the world whistles derisively, but as a soccer nation we are like Holly Martins, the naïve American in the classic film ''The Third Man,'' who cannot believe that his old pal Harry Lime would sell bad penicillin in postwar Vienna.
American soccer teams cannot waltz the way West Germany and Austria did in a cynical 1-0 West German victory that allowed both nations to qualify for the second round of the 1982 World Cup, and eliminated gallant little Algeria.
Now Americans want to know: why didn't we go into the tank against Honduras? ''The thing we said to our players is that we really know how to play one way, and that's to win,'' Glenn Myernick, the American coach, who is also known as Mooch, said before that game.
''We knew that with a draw we were still going to play Mexico, so why not be the only team that got 9 points and scored the most goals?'' Myernick added. ''There's nothing wrong with that.''
Asked which team he preferred to meet in the semifinals, the Honduras coach, Edwin Pavon, told The Associated Press, ''I am not going to tell you the name, but imagine a full Jalisco Stadium while facing Mexico, with all the stands dressed in green.''
True, both Honduras and the Yanks rested key starters to save them for the semifinals, but Honduras proved better than the United States at hunkering down. When Honduras startled itself by coming back to a 4-3 deficit late in the game, it promptly went into a defensive position.
(Let us quickly note that Honduras does not lack moxie when it counts. It took over R.F.K. Stadium in Washington on Sept. 1, 2001, and totally thumped the Americans.)
''There are rivalries,'' Contiguglia said. ''People tell me Mexico-Honduras is even more intense than Mexico-U.S. I went to an Ajax-PSV game in Amsterdam once. The bands were playing and people were singing. It sounded great. Then my host explained that the words were about the other team's mothers' sleeping with goats.''
Such sentiments are often expressed to American players in Latin America. ''It's better than throwing things at us, which also happens,'' Contiguglia said. ''We know fans will make noise all game with horns and boom boxes, so we buy our players earplugs.''
Traditionally, American teams have not encountered the same viciousness in Western Europe, but that could change.
A few weeks after Sept. 11, 2001, Claudio Reyna, the American captain, was taking a corner kick for Rangers against their bitter Glasgow opponent, Celtic, when a fan imitated an airplane flying into a tower.
The ''32-year-old jobless lout,'' as the Scottish papers called him, was permanently barred from games, and even his parents criticized him. The crude gesture may have stemmed from the rivalry between Protestant Rangers and Roman Catholic Celtic. (There were five stabbings in Glasgow after that game.)
There are more like him out there. Right after 9/11, the soccer club AEK of Athens staged a moment of silence for victims of the attacks. A few people in the stands burned American and Israeli flags and performed the ''O-sa-ma!'' chant.
Greek citizens apologized, but anti-American sentiments around the world have only grown stronger since the invasion of Iraq. It would not be surprising if some locals or visitors taunted Uncle Sam during the Summer Games in Athens.
Full-of-themselves Yanks get away with bully tactics, like Charles Barkley in 1992, whacking Angolans on the court and telling chattering Catalan Olympic volunteers to ''shut your blankety foreign mouths.''
Dream Teams can quiet the mob. The United States men's soccer team has not exactly reached that stage. Until it does, pack the earplugs.
Sports of The Times
