Manhattan College keeps a low profile with high expectations. It has been that way for nearly three years, even though the Jaspers have been the area's most consistent team with a 61-21 record over that span.
Manhattan presented its success in microcosm last night before a green-wearing, sign-waving sellout crowd of 2,500 at Draddy Gymnasium.
Guard Luis Flores scored a lot (27 points), the Jaspers gave up relatively little, and they trampled Iona, 88-69, avenging their only defeat in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference. Iona was a 79-62 winner on Jan. 25, when Manhattan shot 28.9 percent.
A 65 percent clip in the first 13 minutes last night vaulted the first-place Jaspers (18-4, 13-1 MAAC) to a 40-14 lead.
''We came out with great focus and great energy,'' Manhattan Coach Bobby Gonzalez said.
Iona (7-15, 5-8) played without its leading scorer, DeShaun Williams, who was suspended for missing practice and for academic reasons.
Dave Holmes provided a soft touch and bruising support inside, collecting 16 points, 9 rebounds and 5 blocks for Manhattan, which won its fifth straight. Steve Burtt led Iona with 17.
Flores had his 70th double-digit game in 72 games within the first 12 minutes 30 seconds. With 2:24 left in the game, Gonzalez took him out of the game and hugged him. Flores made 11 of 20 shots from the field, and Manhattan shot 57 percent as a team.
''If you break the film down, you'll see a lot of shots uncontested,'' said Iona Coach Jeff Ruland, who has been frustrated by his team's defense all season. The Gaels entered the game allowing an average of more than 75 points a game.
An 11-0 run by Iona late in the first half was not enough to keep pace with Manhattan.
Peter Mulligan raced for two layups to put Manhattan up by 46-26 at halftime, and the Jaspers increased their lead to 26 three times in the second half.
''I'm surprised it wasn't worse than it was,'' Ruland said.
As Manhattan's fortunes have improved in the last three years -- the Jaspers are two victories from their third straight season of 20 or more victories -- Iona has fallen on hard times. The Gaels lost their third straight and appear headed for their second losing season in three years.
Williams, a 6-foot-3 senior who was a third-team all-Big East Conference selection for Syracuse in 2002, was expected to give the program a lift. He will be out until further notice, the college said in a terse statement.
Manhattan plays host to Siena tomorrow. The Jaspers won both the MAAC regular-season and tournament titles last season. They may collect enough victories to impress the N.C.A.A. tournament selection committee even if they lose in the league tournament, although keeping their rating high is always a struggle because of their strength of schedule.
Gonzalez said of his team's sustained success in the conference, ''I'm hoping that means something to somebody.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
