When Funny Cide won last year's Kentucky Derby, the trainer Rick Violette Jr. took it all in stride, although that was not exactly an easy task. Violette was close to buying Funny Cide as a 2-year-old on behalf of an owner, but the deal fell through when his client decided $75,000 was too much to spend for a New York-bred gelding.
For someone who has been in the business since 1978 and has never had a Kentucky Derby starter, Violette might have felt robbed of his only chance to win the race. Funny Cide won the Kentucky Derby and the Preakness and earned $1,963,200, or $205,231 more than Violette's entire stable did last year.
But Violette never bemoaned his rotten luck. And now, less than a year later, he is training one of the hottest Kentucky Derby prospects in the country in Read the Footnotes, who will make his 3-year-old debut today in the Fountain of Youth Stakes at Gulfstream Park in Hallandale Beach, Fla.
The Fountain of Youth is considered the East's first major prep race for the Kentucky Derby, and it has attracted several leading 3-year-olds, including the undefeated Sir Oscar, the Holy Bull winner Second of June and the Hopeful winner Silver Wagon.
Like Funny Cide, Read the Footnotes is New York bred. But the comparisons end there. This is not the sweet story of an underdog horse coming out of nowhere to make good for a bunch of small-time owners. Read the Footnotes cost $320,000 at a 2-year-old sale and is owned by Seth Klarman, the wealthy president of a Boston-area investment firm. Violette will not say who the unlucky soul is who passed on Funny Cide, but he did confirm that it was not Klarman.
Read the Footnotes will not sneak up on anybody after an impressive three-and-three-quarters-length victory last fall in the mile-and-an-eighth Remsen Stakes at Aqueduct. That victory gained added significance when Master David, second in the Remsen, defeated the 2-year-old champion Action This Day last Sunday in the Sham Stakes at Santa Anita.
''He's just a good racehorse, period,'' Violette said of Read the Footnotes.
That was evident last year when he won four of five starts, with his only defeat coming in the Champagne Stakes, when he was bothered by a breathing problem. Perhaps his only visible flaw is his pedigree. Read the Footnotes is a son of Smoke Glacken, a freakishly fast horse who was named the champion sprinter of 1997 but never won beyond a mile. That worries pedigree experts, who believe Read the Footnotes's limitations could show up in the mile-and-a-quarter Kentucky Derby.
''Once you get them in the barn, you're training an athlete, not a pedigree,'' Violette said. ''Sometimes we get very hung up on the sire, the names, the statistics, and overlook the dam of the horse. We've got plenty of stamina on the mare's side of his pedigree. His best race was a mile and an eighth in the Remsen, so there's nothing out there that shows he has distance limitations.''
Still, Read the Footnotes needs a good effort in the mile-and-a-sixteenth Fountain of Youth to show there was nothing fluky about his 2-year-old success. With quality horses in the lineup, it will be a good test.
The horse to beat may be Second of June, who was named for the day he was born. With most horses foaled in February, March and April, Second of June should be well behind his rivals in terms of physical and mental maturity, but he has won four of six starts.
''A lot of people tend to shy away from a late foal; basically he's way behind the rest of them,'' said the trainer Bill Cesare, a former N.F.L. defensive back who shares the June 2 birthday with his horse, a reason the superstitious trainer purchased the colt. ''Hopefully, things are going to look a lot better down the road when he catches up to them in age.''
The top finishers from the Fountain of Youth will advance to the Florida Derby on March 13 at Gulfstream, where they may meet one of three top colts in the Nick Zito barn. Zito, a two-time Kentucky Derby winner, has struggled in recent years to find a quality Derby candidate, but seems loaded this time with the stakes winners Eurosilver, Birdstone and The Cliff's Edge. Eurosilver was an easy allowance winner last week at Gulfstream and is being pointed for the Swale Stakes on March 14 at Gulfstream. Birdstone will make his 3-year-old debut today in an allowance at Gulfstream.
Lion Heart, Minister Eric, Action This Day and St. Averil are among the leaders of the West Coast contingent of 3-year-olds, but they may yet be overshadowed by the filly Halfbridled. She was undefeated last year in four starts, including a spectacular victory in the Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies, and the trainer Richard Mandella is giving serious thought to starting her in the Derby.
She will miss tomorrow's Las Virgenes, expected to be her 2004 debut, after a coughing bout, but Mandella says she has plenty of time to regroup.
''If she's as dominant as she was last year, we'll have to give it a lot of thought,'' Mandella said of the Derby.
The Laurel Futurity winner Tapit, slowed by a shin problem, will miss a planned start in tomorrow's Risen Star Stakes at the Fair Grounds, but remains a top Kentucky Derby candidate. The trainer Michael Dickinson said his star might return in the Florida Derby or the Louisiana Derby.
HORSE RACING
