The hard-luck towns in the desolate reaches of western South Dakota have been banking on plans to build a physics laboratory in an abandoned, flooded gold mine called Homestake as their path to economic rebirth.
But a letter from Washington under the letterhead of the National Science Foundation has rained pessimism on all those efforts, which were spelled out at great length by Gov. Mike Rounds in his recent State of the State address.
In the letter, Michael Turner, the foundation's assistant director for mathematical and physical sciences, told scientists proposing the laboratory that they needed to start over. All proposals to create an underground laboratory were being ''returned without prejudice,'' Dr. Turner wrote, so the foundation could clearly define the scientific need for creating one. The letter was sent on Feb. 6 and has begun appearing on physicists' Web sites.
The decision by the foundation came just as legislation pushed through by Mr. Rounds created an agency with the authority to issue some $100 million in bonds to develop the site. The governor, and many residents, say the laboratory could serve as the centerpiece of a high-tech revitalization plan for the western part of the state.
Asked about the letter in a telephone interview yesterday, Mr. Rounds, a Republican, replied, ''It would be extremely ironic if the only thing stopping this project from moving forward at this time is the bureaucracy of N.S.F.''
The letter cited the decision last year by the mine's owner, the Barrick Gold Corporation of Canada, to stop pumping water from the abandoned mine, citing cost pressures.
South Dakota officials, and some outside physicists, said the flooding did not impair the mine's ability to function as a laboratory in the long term. But Dr. Turner said in his letter that the flooding had ''uncertain ramifications for the viability of the site for science.''
In an interview, Dr. Turner elaborated on those concerns. ''I don't think anyone can tell how that has changed the value of the site,'' he said of the flooding. ''But I can tell you this: it hasn't improved the site.''
South Dakota's campaign to snare the underground laboratory has included paying one prestigious physicist -- Dr. Jordan Goodman, chairman of the physics department at the University of Maryland -- as a consultant. In interviews on Thursday and Friday, Dr. Goodman criticized the letter and said the focus on the water was misguided.
''I think there's been a lot of panic generated about the water, for the most part by people with competing proposals,'' Dr. Goodman said. ''I believe this is going to stall things.''
He said the water could simply be pumped out again, without extensive damage to the mine.
That view has found support from several other scientists, including Marvin Marshak, a physicist at the University of Minnesota, who has a long history of working on underground projects.
Dr. Marshak called Dr. Turner's commitment to creating an underground laboratory extremely positive, but added of the letter, ''I don't agree with the statements that it makes about the water in Homestake.''
''I've been working on underground science for 25 years,'' Dr. Marshak said, ''so I believe I know something about this.''
The decision also met with skepticism from Barrick. ''I think that's a convenient new twist,'' said Vincent Borg, a company spokesman. ''That's not in accord with what they've told us previously. Before that and after that, that was not a stated concern. I think something else is going on.''
Several other influential physicists, including Barry Barish of the California Institute of Technology and John Bahcall of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, said that by distancing the project from its complicated history and starting fresh, the state could actually increase its chances of winning the project.
''For people with something on the table, in a sense, it might look like discouragement,'' Dr. Barish said. ''I think it's good.''
Using the mine, which is 8,000 feet deep, would save more than $100 million on the cost of a laboratory deep underground, Dr. Marshak said.
In round numbers, such a laboratory is expected to cost some $300 million over all.
Dr. Turner, a noted cosmologist, also returned proposals from competing sites in Minnesota and California. None of the proposals had been solicited by the National Science Foundation. Partly for that reason, some scientists have said that the state and the federal agency have been talking at cross purposes, a situation Dr. Turner said he would like to bring to an end.
Energetic particles from space called cosmic rays interfere with certain physics experiments that explore rare processes, and a laboratory deep underground would insulate those experiments from cosmic ray showers. For example, physicists would like to set up detectors underground to search for elusive particles that may make up cosmic dark matter, which is believed to account for most of the mass of the universe but has never been seen directly.
Homestake was once the largest underground gold mine in the Western Hemisphere, and Lead, where it is located, was once among the largest cities in South Dakota. As gold mining wound down at Homestake, Lead (pronounced leed) declined, too. Its population dropped to 3,027 residents in 2000 from 3,632 in 1990. The mine laid off 600 of its 850 employees in 1998, and it closed at the end of 2001.
In the late 1960's, Dr. Raymond Davis Jr., then a scientist at Brookhaven National Laboratory, set up a vat of cleaning liquid and water in Homestake that counted ghostly particles known as neutrinos coming from the sun. That work won Dr. Davis the Nobel Prize in Physics in 2002.
''It's a very good site,'' Dr. Turner said, ''and it has a good history of doing science.''
When the plans to close the mine were announced, scientists envisioned converting its 300 miles of tunnels into a vast scientific laboratory. South Dakota politicians saw the laboratory as means for revitalizing the Black Hills region.
On Wednesday, Governor Rounds signed five bills intended to help Barrick in donating the mine to the state.
