Half a century ago nearly all the top American players used virtually identical bidding methods.
Charles Goren, Helen Sobel, B. Jay Becker, John Crawford, Howard Schenken, George Rapée and Sidney Silodor, who were the crème de la crème in the New York and Philadelphia bridge world, could change partners with little loss of efficiency.
This flexibility began to fade when specialized systems such as Roth-Stone and Kaplan-Sheinwold were introduced. Today most experts are reluctant to play seriously with a new partner on short notice for want of hours of essential discussion about bidding details. Today the game is far more complex.
That is why the Betty Kaplan Teams, staged in Manhattan a week ago by the Greater New York Bridge Association, is a refreshing change. It is a triathlon: teams must consist of exactly four players, and they are required to rotate partnerships, thus demonstrating flexibility. The winners were Brian Glubok, Michael Kamil, Martin Fleisher and Joe Grue.
Glubok and Kamil sat North-South on the diagramed deal and solved the problem of bidding to a grand slam. Looking at the layout, it is easy to see that seven no-trump is virtually certain to succeed. But that is not easy to judge at the table.
The first three bids were automatic, with the three-diamond rebid showing enough values for game. North's three spades indicated great strength in that suit, and four diamonds similarly emphasized that department. Four no-trump was the modern version of Blackwood, and five clubs showed three keycards, two aces plus the diamond king.
Glubok now had to consider which grand slam to select. Seven no-trump? Seven spades? Seven hearts? Or seven diamonds? All these came into consideration. In a national championship he could have obtained more information about the South hand, for the partnership would have discussed the ramifications following Blackwood. Here, not surprisingly, they had not.
Glubok inferred from the four-diamond bid that his partner must have great strength in that suit. He was concerned that his partner might have a hand such as this:
In that case the best contract would be seven diamonds, permitting a third-round heart ruff in the North hand. Glubok therefore plunged into seven diamonds.
Kamil had a hypothetical problem in the play. He had to worry about all the trumps being in one hand. After winning the first trick with the club ace, he tabled the diamond king. If East had shown out, declarer would have been able to finesse dummy's nine. If West had shown out, South would have had a chance of trapping East in a coup position. But as it was, everything was easy.
In the replay, the opponents did not solve the bidding problem. They rested in six no-trump and the Glubok team gained 9 imps en route to victory.
BRIDGE
