While the Walt Disney Company has been a lightning rod for corporate governance critics, the Comcast Corporation's governance has rarely generated investor anger -- even though some activists say that Comcast flunks their tests.
Like many media companies, though not Disney, Comcast is dominated by its founding family, the Robertses, through supervoting shares that each carry the weight of 15 regular shares. The 9.4 million Class B shares owned by the chief executive, Brian L. Roberts, give him 33 percent of Comcast's vote. The Roberts family also owns roughly 19 million Class A shares, which carry one vote each.
That voting structure, and the ties linking some outside directors to the company, earned Comcast an ''F'' the last time that the Corporate Library, a governance research group, graded the company, in 2002. Even so, big investors have seemed quite comfortable with the Roberts family's clout. Though Comcast shares have fallen almost 12 percent since the company announced its hostile bid for Disney on Wednesday, its strong performance over the last 20 years has kept more shareholders loyal.
''Shareholders who care are living in a fantasy where they think shareholders can legitimately run or operate companies,'' said Thomas E. Dooley, a partner at DND Capital Partners, a Manhattan investment firm, and the former deputy chairman of Viacom Inc.
''Management has to be responsible for running or operating the company,'' said Mr. Dooley, who owns shares in both Disney and Comcast. ''I can never recall an instance of shareholders who have had a complaint or concerns about the governance of Comcast. Investors have done very well.''
A spokesman for Comcast said yesterday that the company ''has always been driven by a culture of ethics and duty to our shareholders, who have seen its shares outperform the S.&amp;P. 500 by a margin of more than 2 to 1 since Comcast went public in 1972.''
Not everyone believes that in a Comcast acquisition of Disney -- which would be the biggest media deal in the post-Enron era of tighter scrutiny of corporate governance -- Mr. Roberts and his family could avoid some crimping of their dominance. Comcast's bid is structured to ensure that Mr. Roberts keeps his 33 percent vote, even as other shareholdings are diluted.
''To get this deal done, Comcast is going to have to make -- and this is in bold print, underlined three times -- very significant changes in its governance structure,'' said Pat McGunn, special counsel to Institutional Shareholder Services, which advises big shareholders on proxy votes.
While Disney, under pressure from shareholder activists, has recently improved its board structure, Mr. McGunn said, ''Comcast on the other hand has not.'' He added, ''This is going to be a gut check for the Robertses, if they are willing to give up the last remnants of their family ownership structure.''
Paul Hodgson, senior research associate at the Corporate Library, added, ''Disney investors are likely to be skeptical of supervoting shares because there is no such structure at that company.''
Mr. Hodgson has long been critical of both boards, though he agreed that Disney had improved significantly in recent years. Like Comcast, Disney earned an ''F'' from the Corporate Library in 2002, for the long tenure of many directors, among other criticisms. Since then, several of those directors have left the board, although the departures included Roy E. Disney and Stanley P. Gold, who complained that they were marginalized for criticizing the chief executive, Michael D. Eisner.
Fans of Comcast contrast its performance, whatever its governance shortcomings, with the lackluster results at Disney.
''The Walt Disney Company has rushed to adapt state-of-the-art governance policies in recent years,'' one institutional shareholder said, ''but many would argue that it has still not delivered for shareholders, particularly because Mr. Eisner has remained in power despite Disney's poor performance in recent years.''
At a meeting with analysts in Orlando, Fla., this week, Mr. Eisner and George J. Mitchell, the former senator who is Disney's lead director, spoke proudly of both the company's governance advances and its improving financial performance and share price.
One thing that Mr. Roberts and Mr. Eisner have in common is a hefty pay package. Graef Crystal, an independent compensation expert, noted that each earned about $1 million in 2002 and got about $6 million in bonuses, as well as stock options. He described the two men's pay as fairly typical of the media business, where executives tend to earn more than in other industries.
Mr. Eisner still carries the taint of 1996, when he received a grant of 24 million options, Mr. Crystal said. ''There was no question then that he was in a neck-and-neck race as the most highly paid executive in America, but he has not taken anything since then,'' Mr. Crystal said. Today, he added, neither man would make the list of highest-paid chief executives.
