Poor Ben Michaelson. He could make almost any Olympic swimming team in the world with one possible exception: the one for his country, the United States.
Only two Americans have swum the 100-meter butterfly faster than Michaelson, whose best time is 52.76 seconds: Ian Crocker, who holds the world record of 50.98, and Michael Phelps, who held the record before Crocker, at 51.10. Last year, Crocker and Phelps ranked first and second in the world. Michaelson was 11th.
At the United States Olympic trials, which will be in July, only the first two finishers in each event qualify for the Olympic team. Crocker and Phelps are expected to be there in the 100 butterfly, so Michaelson looks to be the odd man out.
In an interview here at the United States spring national championships, Michaelson described his situation as ''more destiny than anything.''
''The fact is that in the Olympic trials I'll have to race the world-record holder and Michael Phelps, the two fastest swimmers in the history of the event,'' Michaelson said, ''but I feel I'm up to the challenge.
''I've been training real well all year, and when I shave and taper for one swim, when it comes down to one race in the Olympic trials, I'm confident I'll be there. Basically, that race is eight guys swimming for two slots, so you race as hard as you can and see what happens.''
Crocker, a senior at the University of Texas, is training for next month's N.C.A.A. championships and is not at this meet. Phelps is, and on Friday night he won the 100 butterfly in 51.84 seconds. The title was his fourth in three nights.
Michaelson finished fourth, three and a half meters behind Phelps, in 53.67.
The 22-year-old Michaelson is 6 feet tall and 175 pounds. He comes from Seymour, Conn., and expects to earn a degree in computer science next year at Southern Connecticut State, which has a Division II swimming program. He trains with Tim Quill, his college coach.
By now, Michaelson is accustomed to being an afterthought.
''It's the luck of the draw,'' he said. ''I've always fought uphill battles. Everyone said I was too small and too slow. They wondered how could I succeed coming from a Division II college. But there's a No. 3 guy in every Olympic event, 13 No. 3's. They're all licking their chops waiting to get their hands on No. 1 and No. 2 in July.''
Michaelson chose a Division II college for one compelling reason: he said no Division I teams pursued him except Connecticut, and no scholarship was offered there.
He developed so well that he won two gold medals last year in the Pan American Games, in the 100 butterfly and as part of the 400 medley relay.
Now people keep asking Michaelson if he will make the Olympic team.
''They've been asking me since I was 10,'' he said. ''All I tell them is that I'm ranked No. 3 in the country and they take only the top two in the trials.''
There are cash bonuses from the United States Olympic Committee and USA Swimming for Olympic medalists. At 18, Phelps is already a professional earning a six-figure income from Speedo and Visa.
Meanwhile, Michaelson drives a 1991 Chevrolet Cavalier that he says has 122,000 miles.
''It goes real well,'' he said.
And if he makes the Olympic team and collects some of the bonuses?
''I'll probably still keep the car,'' Michaelson said. ''I haven't thought that far ahead.''
SPLASHES
In the men's 100-meter backstroke Friday night at the Y.M.C.A. Aquatic Center, RANDAL BALL beat LENNY KRAYZELBURG, the Olympic champion, by about half a meter, 54.78 seconds to 55.04. CHAD CARVIN won the 400 freestyle in 3 minutes 48.92 seconds and VLADISLAV POLYAKOV of Kazakhstan the 100 breaststroke in 1:01.98. The women's winners were AMANDA BEARD in the 100 breaststroke (1:08.28), HALEY COPE in the 100 backstroke (1:01.92), MARTINA MORAVCOVA of Slovakia in the 100 butterfly (58.76 seconds) and SACHIKO YAMADA of Japan in the 400 freestyle (4:09.37).
SWIMMING
