As four men pleaded not guilty yesterday in San Francisco to federal charges of supplying performance-enhancing drugs, one vital question remained unanswered: Exactly who are the dozens of football, baseball and track and field athletes who are accused of taking these illicit substances?
No athletes were specifically named in indictments handed down Thursday by the Department of Justice. Thus, as spring training and the Summer Olympics in Athens approach, suspected or admitted cheaters may soon be setting baseball records or winning gold medals.
Without knowing the names of the offenders, observers will have no way of judging the legitimacy of the performances they witness. And until the cheaters are identified, all baseball, football and track athletes risk being tarred with the same brush of suspicion.
''I have a feeling the people involved in this understand that question clearly,'' Dr. Donald H. Catlin, director of the Olympic drug-testing lab at U.C.L.A. and the scientist who first identified the steroid THG at the center of this billowing scandal, said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''The United States doesn't want to be embarrassed in Athens. There is time to repair those things. It's clear in Washington that this is not over.''
Yesterday in San Francisco, pleas of not guilty were entered by the four defendants at the center of the drug scandal: Victor Conte Jr., founder of the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, or Balco; the lab's vice president, James Valente; Greg Anderson, the personal trainer for the slugger Barry Bonds; and Remi Korchemny, coach of a track club affiliated with Balco.
In an affidavit that accompanied Thursday's indictments, numerous references were made to ''current N.F.L. player'' and to track and field athletes described as elite, a world-record holder and an Olympic gold medalist. The names were not revealed. ''It's certainly in everybody's interest that, with the Olympics coming up and pro sports seasons starting up, those who are implicated are identified, so whatever action needs to be taken by sports bodies can be taken,'' said Dick Pound, a Montreal lawyer who is chairman of the World Anti-Doping Agency.
As he announced Thursday's indictments in Washington, Attorney General John Ashcroft said, ''We do not want to signal in any way that we are closing the book.''
Dr. Charles Yesalis, a Penn State professor and a steroid expert, said he doubted that President Bush would have mentioned performance-enhancing drugs in the State of the Union address last month or that Ashcroft would have announced the indictments himself if legal action was planned only against ''four guys nobody ever heard of or cares about.''
''My take on this is that in some way, shape or form, some big fish are going down,'' said Yesalis, who is a consultant to the Drug Enforcement Administration.
A number of athletes have testified before a grand jury investigating Balco, including Bonds, the sprinters Marion Jones and Tim Montgomery and the boxer Shane Mosley. At least some athletes were granted limited immunity for their testimony, according to news reports.
None of the grand jury testimony has been made public. But it is possible, perhaps even likely, that some athletes admitted using performance-enhancing drugs or were implicated by others. And it is clear from an accompanying affidavit to Thursday's indictments that the Internal Revenue Service is aware of the names of alleged cheaters from e-mail messages and from bank records.
Five track and field athletes -- Regina Jacobs, Kevin Toth, Melissa Price, John McEwen and Dwain Chambers -- have been named in news media accounts as having tested positive for THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone. So have four players from the Oakland Raiders: Bill Romanowski, Barret Robbins, Dana Stubblefield and Chris Cooper.
The names of others who might have used or supplied THG, human-growth hormone or the blood-boosting agent EPO are not known publicly.
If the four defendants go to trial, more names could be made public. If the defendants strike a plea bargain, the grand jury testimony would probably remain sealed, lawyers and other officials involved in the Balco case have said.
The United States Anti-Doping Agency, which oversees drug testing for Olympic sports, suggested on Thursday that it would hold more athletes and others accountable. Its bylaws state that the anti-doping agency can punish not only those who test positive for performance-enhancing drugs, but those who admit to using prohibited substances or traffic in such substances.
The anti-doping agency could seek action against track and field athletes and coaches who have admitted drug use to authorities, or who have been implicated by documents or other testimony. To do so, the agency would first have to surmount the legal hurdle of limited immunity, lawyers said.
On Thursday, the anti-doping agency's chief executive, Terry Madden, said in a statement, ''We fully expect that developments in the U.S. Attorney's proceedings (in San Francisco) and our ongoing investigation will lead to the initiation of more doping cases against athletes and others.''
Thursday's indictments demonstrated, as did the Tour de France drug scandal in 1998, that government intervention into doping has proved far more effective than policing by sports organizations that lack subpoena power, deep resources and, often, the necessary willpower.
The indictment of Korchemny, the track coach, was also a clear signal that those believed to supply and facilitate drug use by American athletes will now be targets.
''This is a landmark,'' Catlin said. ''We haven't been in the forefront of this.''
But the significance of Thursday's indictments is not yet fully understood, because no athletes have been identified.
A senior official of the United States Olympic Committee, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he believed that because steroids had received such prominent government attention, ''anything that needs to be expedited in terms of the judicial process is probably going to be expedited.''
Even if athletes are named, drug use in sports will hardly be eradicated. Catlin said he felt bittersweet about the indictments, welcoming government involvement but still uncertain about whether this will lead to increased funding for drug-testers and an enhanced ability to detect sophisticated steroids.
''How long has this been going on?'' Catlin asked about the current scandal. ''How much did they get away with?''
The game of pharmacological cat-and-mouse will surely intensify before the Summer Games in Athens. The government released an e-mail message Thursday reportedly sent by Conte. In the message, with names of athletes withheld, Conte reportedly wrote, ''We might also want to somehow get this information to the coach for the Greek athletes (redacted) and (redacted) so that nobody tests positive.''
A test to detect human-growth hormone might be ready for Athens, Olympic officials have said, but Catlin said it was an indirect test and still faced rigorous review before it could be implemented.
At the least, the Balco indictments may increase fear among cheaters, Pound said.
''Every person who cheated or helped someone cheat, I'd like them to be on a constant diet of Rolaids,'' Pound said.
DRUG TESTING
