The death of an unarmed United Nations military observer in an ambush on his convoy on Thursday was an eerie replay of the troubles that beset the United Nations peacekeeping mission here just under a year ago.
The convoy, made up of military observers and a civilian United Nations representative, had gone to investigate reports of fighting between rival militia groups in the town of Katoto, about 14 miles north of here. The convoy of four United Nations off-road vehicles, sandwiched between armored personnel carriers, had just left Katoto and was on its way back to the mission headquarters here, when gunmen began firing from the forested banks of the dirt road.
The gunmen waited until the first armored personnel carrier had crossed their path, choosing instead to fire at the unarmed observers. The driver of the second car in the convoy, Maj. Peter Wachaye, took a fatal bullet in the head.
Beatriz Baygin, a human rights investigator who was driving the next car, saw Major Wachaye's vehicle swerve to the left and crash into a tree. She kept driving. The armored personnel carriers at the back of the convoy returned fire, but it was apparently too late.
Major Wachaye's body was flown back to his country, Kenya, on a United Nations plane Friday morning. None of the gunmen were captured.
''It was an organized ambush -- that's my feeling,'' Ms. Baygin said. ''They were waiting for us.''
The killing of the military observer has sent a chill through the United Nations mission here and raised new questions about the adequacy of the roughly 5,000 peacekeepers stationed here in Ituri Province, the sprawling eastern swath of Congo thick with gold -- and rival gunmen all too willing to fight for it.
Last May, the United Nations mission headquarters came under fire from the latest ethnic militia to seize control of this town.
Around the same time, the bodies of two unarmed military observers, stationed in a gold mining area called Mongbwalu, north of here, were found. They had been murdered. A third was killed by a land mine.
The incidents highlighted the peacekeeping mission's inability to stop the bloodshed. Across Ituri, massacres followed massacres. The streets of Bunia were littered with mutilated bodies.
The United Nations Security Council authorized additional troops, raising the total number of peacekeepers to 10,000 in a country larger than Western Europe.
In June, a French-led intervention force took control of Bunia for three months, effectively sweeping gunmen off the streets and bringing at least a semblance of security to the town.
But this year, provocations against United Nations peacekeepers resumed. A team investigating reports of a massacre near Lake Albert were fired on earlier this month.
Meanwhile, Major Wachaye, who had been stationed in Nizi, north of here, told his superiors that he feared for his safety and requested protection.
His request was denied, according to one United Nations official, and he returned to headquarters in Bunia, venturing out only on reconnaissance missions like the one on Thursday.
Also fearing for their safety, the peacekeepers who were killed in Mongbwalu last May had asked to be pulled out. Their requests went unheeded.
