They are not what you would call immortal lyrics. ''I like Offenbach, you do not/So what, so what, so what?'' The words were written by no less a master than Cole Porter, for a ballad called ''Live and Let Live.'' But there are reasons you probably haven't heard them before, even if you live over a piano bar.
Yet for anyone who attends the Encores! concert production of Porter's ''Can-Can'' at City Center, ''Live and Let Live'' will be remembered as a red-letter song. That's because that once-and-future star Patti LuPone determindedly turns the number into a giant illuminated calling card, announcing that she is back as a force to reckon with in musicals.
Up to that point Ms. LuPone had seemed to be having a swell time playing La Mome Pistache, a mercenary Parisian cafe proprietor, in this amiable staging of a less than evergreen Porter show. She had already done a gleefully torchy version of ''C'est Magnifique,'' wallowing in every ''Oo-la, lala.''
But it was toward the end of the first act, when Pistache sings ''Live and Let Live'' to the prig of a man she loves, that the magic took full effect. Using her golden megaphone of a voice to express both wounded desire and contemptuous pride, Ms. LuPone transformed a cartoon character with a hokey French accent into a real woman of vulnerable flesh and hot blood. And a minor Porter song, for one enchanted instant, became major.
It's been a quarter of a century since the young Patti LuPone became a star in the title role of ''Evita,'' the rock opera about Eva Peron by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice. At that point, with her rafter-shaking alto and steamroller presence, she seemed destined to become the Ethel Merman of her generation, and it was fitting when she took the Merman part in a 1987 revival of ''Anything Goes.'' But Merman herself would have had a hard time finding work in the musical theater of the late 20th century.
And after winning and then losing the role of Norma Desmond in Mr. Lloyd Webber's ''Sunset Boulevard'' in 1993, amid bruising publicity, Ms. LuPone found her Broadway appearances limited to one-woman shows and the occasional nonsinging part (''Noises Off,'' David Mamet's ''Old Neighborhood'').
Actresses like Donna Murphy, Audra MacDonald and Kristen Chenoweth scooped up the laurels for musical performances.
Now Ms. LuPone has turned ''Can-Can,'' which runs through tomorrow, into a pointed reminder of what we've been missing. Her once strident voice has a newly burnished suppleness and her comedy has acquired a refreshing delicacy. And by the way -- for those of you know the mush-mouthed LuPone parody from the ''Forbidden Broadway'' revue -- her diction is impeccable.
There is, of course, more to this ''Can-Can'' than Ms. LuPone, and it's all perfectly pleasant, as the Encores! series invariably is. But as directed by Lonny Price, the production doesn't make much of a case for this smirky tribute to Gallic sex appeal from 1953. Though it became one of Porter's longest-running hits, topped only by ''Kiss Me Kate,'' critics were generally cool to this story of dirty dancing in Montmartre when it opened. (It was later made into a tepid movie starring Frank Sinatra and Shirley MacLaine.)
A tale of sex and censorship in the belle époque, in which the performance of the can-can in Pistache's club sparks a furious legal battle, the musical can pretty much be summed up by this line of dialogue: ''You can't tell a woman how high she can lift her skirt.''
Now as then, this premise allows vivacious female dancers to lift their skirts over their heads whenever possible, with lots of elbow-in-the-ribs innuendos via Abe Burrows's mossy script and Porter's lyrics. And there is the inevitable chortling sendup of goofy, free-living Bohemian writers, artists and their naked models.
Thanks to John Lee Beatty (the scenic consultant) and Kenneth Posner (lighting), this is an especially handsome concert production, with flavorful Art Nouveau accents. As usual, the orchestra, directed by Michael Kosarin, sounds delicious. And while Melinda Roy's choreography lacks sharpness, it keeps the show's comely chorus hopping, leaping and, most importantly, flashing its bloomers.
The cast happily features the ever-delectable Charlotte d'Amboise as everybody's favorite can-canner (the part that made Gwen Verdon a star), an endearingly demented Reg Rogers as her jealous Bulgarian boyfriend and the wonderful Eli Wallach, who appears all too fleetingly as a worldly old judge. Michael Nouri, best known for the movie ''Flashdance,'' is handsome, virile and wooden as the censorious judge who falls for Ms. LuPone's Pistache. Unfortunately, he and the orchestra seem to have different notions of tempo.
It is Ms. LuPone, in snug red taffeta and acres of cleavage, who makes ''Can-Can'' an Encores! to savor. When in the second act, she wraps her voice like a sable stole around ''I Love Paris,'' the show's most famous song, she's not just selling a familiar ballad; she's defining a character who is experiencing very mixed feelings. Suddenly an old song sounds new.
Thursday, on opening night, Ms. LuPone sank into the oceanic applause that followed that number as if it were a bubble bath. And there was no doubt that a love affair between a star and her audience had been blissfully reignited.
CAN-CAN
Music and lyrics by Cole Porter; book by Abe Burrows; directed by Lonny Price; sets by John Lee Beatty; sound by Scott Lehrer; costumes by Toni-Leslie James; lighting by Kenneth Posner; concert adaptation by David Lee; original orchestrations by Philip J. Lang; musical coordinator, Seymour Red Press; production stage manager, Jeffrey M. Markowitz; fight director, Rick Sordelet; choreography by Melinda Roy; additional musical staging by Casey Nicholaw; musical accompaniment by the Encores! Orchestra, Michael Kosarin, guest musical director. A City Center Encores! production, artistic director, Jack Viertel; musical director, Rob Fisher; director-in-residence, Kathleen Marshall. Presented by City Center; Arlene Shuler, president and chief executive; Mark Litvin, senior vice president and managing director. At City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
WITH: Patti LuPone (La Mome Pistache), Michael Nouri (Judge Aristide Forestier), Reg Rogers (Boris Adzinidzinadze), Charlotte d'Amboise (Claudine), Paul Schoeffler (Hilaire Jussac), Caitlin Carter (Celestine), David Costabile (Theophile), Michael Goldstrom (Etienne), David Hibbard (Hercule), Mary Ann Lamb (Marie), Solange Sandy (Gabrielle), Robert Wersinger (Apache dancer) and Eli Wallach (Judge Paul Barriere).
THEATER REVIEW
