State legislators lashed out at Con Edison during a hearing in Manhattan yesterday, accusing the utility of increasing its spending on new equipment while decreasing its spending on maintenance.
Legislators also complained that within the past year the utility changed the interval between manhole inspections from one year to three, did not use proper equipment or procedures for inspections and ignored warnings from a union and the Department of Transportation about hazards in New York City's wiring.
The hearing before the State Assembly's energy committee came nearly a month after Jodie S. Lane was killed by stepping on an electrified plate in the street while walking her dogs in the East Village.
Legislators faulted Con Ed for unsafe reductions to its work force. They also said Con Ed did not enter appropriate field data into its central computer daily, and did not report it to state regulators at the Public Service Commission.
Assemblymen Paul D. Tonko, a Democrat from Westchester and chairman of the Assembly's corporations committee, said that since 1993, the utility has steadily decreased its spending on maintenance but increased its capital spending, which goes toward building new facilities and extending service.
He cited a 1999 report by the Public Service Commission, after a blackout in Washington Heights, that levied a similar criticism.
Mr. Tonko charged that the reason for the spending differences was that the utility earned profit on its capital investment but not on its maintenance expenditures. Kevin Burke, president of Con Ed, said that Mr. Tonko's assessment was incorrect and that maintenance spending only seemed to decrease because the utility had recently sold several plants.
Mr. Burke said the Assembly's characterization of Con Ed's problems as ''lasting and systemwide'' was unfair. Mr. Burke said that the utility was constantly researching new and safer equipment, and emphasized that it would begin conducting annual inspections for stray voltage in New York City.
Manny Hellen, president of the Utility Workers Union of America's Local 1-2, testified for stronger protections for whistle-blowers and a 24-hour hot line under city auspices for tracking public complaints.
Ryan S. Karben, an assemblyman from Rockland County, asked whether Mr. Burke could promise that the utility would not pass to customers any costs of possible litigation connected with Ms. Lane's death. Mr. Burke said yes.
But when Mr. Karben asked if the company had faced any lawsuits for shock victims, Mr. Burke said he did not believe so. On Thursday, Mr. Burke spoke at a City Council hearing on public safety. Later at that hearing, Philip Vanaria, a former New York City public-school teacher, testified. In September 2000, Mr. Vanaria settled a $1.8 million lawsuit with Con Ed, after having been severely shocked at an electrified public telephone. Mr. Burke became president of Con Ed in the same month that the lawsuit was settled.
During yesterday's Assembly hearing, Richard L. Brodsky, a Democrat from Westchester, released a Department of Transportation report from 2000 criticizing the utility for its dependence on temporary repairs, called shunts. The report also said Con Ed had failed to provide an accurate count of locations with temporary wiring. Mr. Burke said that all the issues raised in that report have been addressed by Con Ed.
The Assembly hearing came a day after City Council members criticized the utility for not reporting hundreds of electric shock complaints from the public to regulators. Council members also complained that the Public Service Commission relied mostly on data from Con Ed in its oversight of the utility.
Con Ed must prove to the Public Service Commission within 30 days that it was in full compliance with state regulations at the time of Ms. Lane's death. Otherwise, the utility would be required to pay $250,000 in penalties per violation, or $100,000 for each day of the offense.
