Lawyers for Martha Stewart scored a victory yesterday when the judge in Ms. Stewart's criminal trial said she would not allow the jury to hear testimony from Wall Street analysts and other experts about whether public statements she made influenced investors in her company.
The ruling by United States Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum is helpful to Ms. Stewart's defense on the charge of securities fraud she faces. A person involved in Ms. Stewart's defense said the ruling ''renders the securities fraud charge dead on arrival,'' although other material might be introduced by prosecutors themselves.
The motion made by Ms. Stewart's lawyers, which came in the form of a letter delivered to the judge on Thursday, was not made available. Ms. Stewart is accused of misleading investors when she made public statements about her sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems, calling it ''entirely lawful'' and saying it took place because of an agreement with her broker to sell if the share price fell below $60.
The securities fraud charge has been called ''unusual'' or ''novel'' by various legal experts, including Judge Cedarbaum, and it may be difficult to persuade jurors of Ms. Stewart's guilt because her name is so closely linked to that of her company. Defense lawyers also questioned an F.B.I. agent, Catherine Farmer, about her interviews with Ms. Stewart, pointing out to the jury that Ms. Farmer did not tape record the interviews and relied solely on her own notes and her memory when she wrote up a report on what Ms. Stewart told her.
The prosecution announced that it would rest next Thursday.
Meanwhile, the company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, sustained a public-relations blow with the revelation that Kmart, its longtime partner in selling a line of Martha Stewart sheets, towels and other merchandise, is suing it in a federal bankruptcy court.
The lawsuit was filed Wednesday but announced yesterday by Ms. Stewart's company, which said that Kmart was seeking to pay Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia less than it was owed under a contract signed in 2001.
At issue are royalty payments that Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia says it is owed but that Kmart contends are not part of the contract. Ms. Stewart's company is guaranteed a minimum payment even if sales in Kmart stores fall short, and her company has said that it expected only the minimum for last year.
In a statement, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia said that its contract with Kmart required two types of royalty payments. One is based on total sales of all licensed products in Kmart stores, and the other based on sales in individual product categories, such as housewares. The payments are calculated on a quarterly basis but paid once a year, at the end of Kmart's fiscal year, which ends at the end of January.
''Kmart now seeks to reinterpret the agreement'' in a way that would make payments only based on total sales, the statement from Ms. Stewart's company said. ''As a result, Kmart specifically seeks to reduce the total guarantees,'' from about $52 million to $47.5 million.
That $4.5 million drop in revenue would be felt keenly at Ms. Stewart's company, which is struggling in large part because of its founder's legal troubles. Ad sales have posted double-digit declines, television viewership has waned, the company's flagship shows have lost their scheduling slots on CBS affiliates, and in October the company reduced the guaranteed circulation of its main publication, Martha Stewart Living. Executives of the company have been sitting in court this week as spectators and supporters of Ms. Stewart, as has Jeffrey Ubben, the investor who succeeded her as chairman after her indictment last June.
Merchandise sold through Kmart accounts for most of products sold by Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, and merchandising supplied about 17 percent of the company's total revenues last year. Sales have flagged as Kmart closed nearly 600 stores as part of its reorganization, although the Martha Stewart Everyday brand, which is exclusive to Kmart, is said to remain popular.
It was not immediately clear why the lawsuit was filed in bankruptcy court. Kmart declared bankruptcy in January 2002, but emerged under new management last year. Throughout its troubles, it retained the contract with Ms. Stewart's company, and Kmart executives referred to her as an important partner in the company's restructuring and turnaround.
A spokesman for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia said he could not comment on the lawsuit. But the announcement from the company set off a second feud with Kmart, which issued a statement yesterday that accused Ms. Stewart's company of misrepresenting the dispute.
''Kmart is not, at this time, seeking to reduce the total guarantees or the required advertising levels, but rather it is M.S.O. which is seeking to force Kmart to make payments in excess of the contractual requirement,'' Kmart executives said in a statement, adding that such payments ''would represent an impermissible double-counting.''
Kmart also disclosed that the two companies have been battling over the contract since last fall.
The retailer said in its statement that the next royalty payment to Ms. Stewart's company was due Feb. 28, and added that it sued because it felt it had no choice.
