Friends of Yellowstone National Park were thrilled when a federal district judge in Washington ruled last December in favor of a Clinton administration plan that would have gradually eliminated snowmobiles from the park and against a Bush proposal that would have kept them there. Now another federal judge, in a separate case in Wyoming, has muddied the judicial waters by declaring the Clinton plan illegal and, in effect, ordering the National Park Service managers in Yellowstone to end the phaseout. The number of machines entering the park, which had been declining, promptly jumped to more than 700 a day from 490.
It is hard to say which is more disheartening, the irrational ruling by the judge in Wyoming, Clarence Brimmer, or the administration's disingenuous response. By deciding in favor of the industry, the judge ignored not only the damage the machines can cause but also fundamental federal law protecting parks and wildlife. The administration expressed satisfaction that Judge Brimmer had chosen to defer to National Park Service ''experts.'' But this implies that the Park Service enthusiastically embraces snowmobiling. It does not. Left to its instincts, the service would have banned snowmobiling. It signed on to the Bush plan under pressure, its science and better instincts overwhelmed by the administration's political objectives.
The real mystery is what those objectives actually are, and what the White House hopes to achieve by defending an unpopular position. The number of jobs involved is tiny, and there are thousands of miles of trails for snowmobilers outside the park. One possible answer is that the White House sees a payoff among voters who resent restrictions on private use of the public domain. Another is that this is a way of testing the limits of public patience when it comes to park protection.
In any case, the two competing rulings argue for a Congressional resolution. Last year, a legislative effort to ban snowmobiles lost on a tie vote in the House. The matter deserves reconsideration.
