It was democracy in disarray.
Some lawmakers stormed out of the chamber in the Massachusetts Statehouse, angry because colleagues were debating instead of voting. Others filibustered up to a midnight deadline, even reading a newspaper column from the rostrum. There was horse-trading and histrionics and political ambush.
And at the end of a two-day constitutional convention, the 199 members of the Massachusetts legislature had not come close to resolving what they had been meeting to discuss: whether to counteract a court ruling authorizing gay marriage.
Ultimately, with lawmakers deadlocked over an amendment that would have banned gay marriage but allowed same-sex couples to form civil unions, they decided to stop and resume the convention on March 11.
That means the next four weeks will probably be full of feverish maneuvering as each group tries to come up with a winning proposal or at least enough legislative muscle to defeat the other proposals.
''This is going to narrow down to probably a dozen people whose votes everybody will want,'' said Lou DiNatale, a political analyst at the University of Massachusetts in Boston, ''and everybody will be squeezing them like a tomato.''
Any amendment must also be passed by a second convention in the next two years, then approved in a public referendum to be held no earlier than November 2006.
In the meantime, under the decision by the state's Supreme Judicial Court last week, gays can begin to marry this May. Lawmakers will thus try to anticipate what effect those marriages might have on public opinion, and what should happen to those marriages if an amendment is ultimately adopted.
The convention did make a few things clearer. The 160 House members and 39 senators essentially break down into three groups.
The smallest is made up of about 40 strong supporters of gay marriage, who want to defeat any constitutional amendment opposing it. Too small to set the agenda, but large enough to impede it, these legislators spoke ardently Thursday night to forestall a vote.
Next is a group of 60 or 70 conservatives, many of them Roman Catholic and Democrats, whose goal is to ban gay marriage.
Of the remaining 90 or so lawmakers, most want to define marriage as a heterosexual union but also to confer rights and benefits for same-sex couples. For this group, which is critical to reaching the 101 votes needed to pass any measure, nuances are pivotal. Should civil unions be required or merely permitted? Should the benefits be identical to those of marriage or left unspecified?
''Finding 101 positive votes on something is going to be very difficult,'' a legislative aide said.
Gay-marriage supporters must decide if they want to keep trying to block any amendment, or to accept a civil-union compromise. Conservatives have to decide whether to accept civil unions, if that is the price for a gay-marriage ban.
During the convention, three proposals were narrowly defeated. Two would have banned gay marriage and allowed, but not required, the legislature to create civil unions. The third would have banned gay marriage, but required civil unions with the rights and benefits of marriage.
A fourth proposal, which never got to a vote, closely resembled the third. It was thought to have a strong chance because it was backed by the two leading lawmakers, including the House speaker, Thomas M. Finneran, who had opposed civil unions.
But late Thursday it became clear that the compromise amendment would lose. Several legislators said it appeared Mr. Finneran had decided to support a new amendment instead, one with less specific language about civil unions and no requirement for equal benefits.
Representative Paul J. P. Loscocco, author of that new amendment, said it had enough votes to win. Thus, he contended, some Finneran lieutenants wanted the Finneran amendment to lose a vote so that the Loscocco amendment might pass.
Gay-marriage supporters filibustered; neither proposal came to a vote. Backers of the Loscocco amendment walked out yelling.
Political Memo
