Speaking to reporters outside an airport here last week, Gov. John G. Rowland said earnestly, ''Any time you go through a crisis or calamity, people, especially family members, can really come together in support.''
He was talking about the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. But it was impossible for some listeners not to hear a sly echo of the governor's own calamity and crisis.
In recent weeks, Mr. Rowland has struggled to steer the subject away from his own difficulties, which began in December when he admitted to having lied about receiving gifts and free work at his lakeside cottage from people doing business with the state. He appears several times a week at schools and community centers throughout the state, delivering upbeat messages about new grants and programs. He talks about the budget. He struggles, in short, to impersonate his old self.
But with Mr. Rowland's political fate hanging in the balance, even his most mundane comments can sound like a series of winking double entendres, at least to the pack of reporters who follow him everywhere he goes.
Often the echoes are just coincidence. At other times Mr. Rowland seems to play along, inserting phrases that hint at his difficulties. And once in a while, the governor's words suggest a headlong Freudian stumble into the very topic he is so desperate to avoid.
During last week's State of the State address, for instance, the governor said nothing about the topic that was on everyone's mind, sticking instead to a cheerful script about economic recovery and neatly trimmed budgets. One Democratic legislator scowled throughout, as if to tell Mr. Rowland he was not fooled. Others refused to clap or stand up during the applause lines.
It wasn't until the end of the speech that Mr. Rowland began speaking suggestively about the ''difficult times'' the state had been through. He was referring to the bad economy of recent years, but the words raised a few eyebrows.
''Adversity can beat you down or it can make you stronger,'' the governor said, just before concluding. At that point his wife, Patricia Rowland, smiled for the first time since the speech had begun.
No sooner had the speech ended than reporters and legislators began talking about what the governor meant, and how he expected to be heard.
''I thought that line was absolutely about his personal situation,'' said Representative Michael P. Lawlor, a Democrat who is a member of the House impeachment panel. ''I think he's clearly wearing his emotions on his sleeve these days.''
Sometimes reporters are the only ones who hear anything amiss in the governor's language. Two weeks ago, at a community center in Waterbury - the governor's hometown -- he told a gathering, ''You've got to raise expectations for children and for ourselves.'' The line was about higher educational standards, but it drew snickers from the press.
On at least one occasion, though, the governor virtually dared his listeners not to see a double significance in what he was saying. Last month at a conference on adolescent substance abuse, Mr. Rowland told a group of social workers that ''humiliation and rejection'' were far too prominent in current television programs and newspaper stories.
As it happened, many of that day's newspaper stories were about the governor's plummeting public support and a public call for his resignation by Representative Christopher Shays, a fellow Republican and friend.
''Humiliation and rejection is becoming the core of our society,'' Mr. Rowland said as the reporters stared in amazement.
A few minutes later, the governor remarked that people of his generation had difficulty talking with their children about their own drug use.
''Patty was honest with the kids one day,'' he said. ''I was not.''
Given that lying is what got the governor in trouble, that, too, was an odd thing to say.
But perhaps strangest of all was Mr. Rowland's insistence on reading a series of inspirational mantras that an admirer had e-mailed to him, titled ''Anyway.''
''Give the world the best you have, and you'll get kicked in the teeth,'' the governor read, in one of several similar verses. ''Give the world the best you have anyway.''
Under the circumstances, the lines were bound to be seen -- by some people -- as a self-pitying statement about the governor's own condition rather than as a self-help message for teenagers.
In a bizarre coda, one of the governor's aides later e-mailed reporters the full text of the message, which revealed that Mr. Rowland had left out two lines.
''Honesty and frankness make you vulnerable,'' the lines read. ''Be honest and frank anyway.''
