MEET your average single guy in Queens. Average in looks, average in interests and average in age, although the persistent gray hairs at the temples betray that he remembers a groovier time. He is average, too, in his sharing of the common human desire for companionship.
Let's call him Bob, given that Bob is his name. And Bob is set in his ways.
''I pretty much like all food,'' he says. ''Except Indian.''
Several weeks ago the editors at The Queens Tribune, a weekly newspaper, took a stand. They did not want to cede the ground of contrived reality to those cheesy shows that now dominate television, shows like ''Average Joe.'' Surely, they thought, The Tribune could find one man in their borough of 2.3 million who was utterly average, and then set him up on a few dates that would be chaperoned by a reporter and a photographer.
You never know. With just the right admixture of perfume, cologne and ink, maybe The Tribune could concoct a little magic in Queens. But first it needed to find a sufficiently unremarkable man, a man who was neither Antonio Banderas nor Don Knotts.
''Basically, we wanted to find Mr. Average Joe Queens,'' says Angela Montefinise, managing editor of The Tribune. ''And I came up with Bob.''
To reveal how The Tribune discovered Bob might defuse the romantic aura surrounding the newspaper's endeavor. Suffice it to say that Ms. Montefinise was searching for someone with strong Queens roots, a 9-to-5 job and a taste for, say, sports. Someone at the paper mentioned some guy named Bob, an interview was set up, and, she says, it just clicked.
''It's hard to explain,'' she says. ''He fit.''
Last week the newspaper began its ''Find a Woman for Bob'' feature, which included a photograph of an average-looking Bob and a few tantalizing details about him. Women were invited to fill out an application for a date with Bob that asked their name, age, occupation, likes and dislikes, and ''past marital status.''
In a few weeks he will sort through the responses and pick four women to take on dates in places around Queens. ''He hasn't ruled out anything -- except bowling,'' Ms. Montefinise says. ''He says he's got some sort of trick back that he doesn't want to hurt.''
Bob will be asked to pick one of the four, after which The Tribune will leave the couple to explore the world of romantic possibility. Of course, if it leads to a marriage proposal, then the newspaper has a scoop.
As if to maintain an air of mystery, Bob agreed to speak about his very public midlife risk, with the condition that his last name and true age not be revealed. He is a longtime Queens resident, the financial officer for a company in Queens, and a man who embraces a kind of selective candor.
He says that he is Jewish but prefers to date non-Jewish women (not a mother thing, he says). He says that he is old enough to remember the Beatles, but does not want to reveal how old he is because ''I lie about my age to women.'' He says that he was a ''hunk'' when he was younger, but quickly adds, ''I'm not younger anymore.''
Bob's decade-long marriage broke up about 20 years ago. In the years that followed, he had his share of relationships, and spent his share of nights at the clubs and singles bars of New York. Of Tavern on the Green, he says, ''I did very well there.''
BUT when a long-term relationship broke up about 18 months ago, he discovered that he had no desire to return to that singles scene. ''It got to be boring,'' he says. ''Boring and maybe a little depressing. Time marches on, and you see some of these women that were there 10 years ago, and they're there now, and they're 10 years older.''
Ah, but Bob, aren't you also 10 years older?
''Absolutely,'' he says. ''But you don't want to admit that to yourself.''
So when The Tribune called with its proposal, Bob -- who has never placed a personal ad -- decided to take a shot. Maybe he will find someone who shares his interest in the Yankees; who also believes that John F. Kennedy's assassination was part of a conspiracy; who likes to take bicycle rides in Alley Pond Park; who will persuade him to give marriage another try. You never know.
The answer will have to wait until the newspaper contest ends. In the meantime, he has no Valentine's date today, but he does have plans.
''I have a beauty parlor appointment,'' he says. ''To get my hair dyed.''
About New York
