The drug companies, Sanofi-Synthélabo and Aventis, are shifting away from the bluster and innuendo that has characterized their battle over Sanofi's hostile bid for Aventis in favor of a more hard-nosed approach.
On Monday, Sanofi will present annual results tailored to emphasize why it is a logical buyer of its much larger rival. Sanofi is expected to emphasize the strength of its research and development arm, including data from late stage trials for Rimonabant, an antismoking, anti-obesity drug. Sanofi has said that, if its bid is successful, it plans to leverage Aventis's much larger sales force in the United States, where Rimonabant is expected to have wide appeal.
But Aventis was digging in its heels on Friday. The company said that it would go to the French court system to try to invalidate the approval of Sanofi's $60 billion hostile bid by France's financial markets authority.
''Aventis believes it has strong grounds to obtain the relief sought,'' the company said in a statement on Friday. The announcement starts a 15-day period for Aventis to file an argument against the deal. Analysts said Aventis would most likely emphasize weaknesses of its rival, like a pending lawsuit and a small presence in the United States, as well as job losses in France.
No matter what regulators ultimately decide, the appeal buys Aventis some time. Generally, the French court of appeals takes two to three months to rule on such cases, and no deal can close without the regulators' blessing -- regardless of whether shareholders have approved the acquisition.
Aventis denied that Friday's announcement was a way to slow the process. The company has no interest in extending the timetable for the deal, an Aventis spokesman, Tony Roddam, said.
''Hostile bids are destructive,'' he said. ''What we're interested in is protecting shareholder value.''
One thing that is not likely Monday is a sweetened bid from Sanofi, even though investors on both sides have predicted one.
''We have no such intention,'' an executive close to Sanofi said. Instead, he said, Sanofi is content to wait to see if Aventis attracts a so-called white knight bid from a third pharmaceutical company. ''It's perfectly legitimate for an investor to ask for more,'' the executive said, ''but that does not mean that they will get it.''
Aventis investors are hopeful that, if Sanofi ultimately buys the company, it will pay a higher cash component than it offered in its original deal on Jan. 26. Then, Sanofi offered five of its shares and 69 euros in cash for every six shares of Aventis.
An increase in cash could help offset the risk of owning Sanofi stock. Sales of Sanofi's biggest drug, the stroke prevention medication Plavix, are under pressure from a lawsuit brought by a generic drug company in Canada, Apotex, which claims that Sanofi's patents are invalid.
The chief executive of Aventis, Igor Landau, called Sanofi shares a ''big risk'' at an earnings presentation earlier this month. There will be ''downward pressure on the stock,'' he told investors in attendance.
Sanofi shareholders agreed. ''I'd like an update on their pipeline,'' said June Scott, a fund manager with Sagitta Asset Management, in London, hoping the company would address the issue at its news conference on Monday. But ''the big thing is the Plavix patent,'' she added.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
