The composer Pierre Boulez made his American professional debut as an orchestra conductor with the Cleveland Orchestra in 1965. He has been a regular guest with the acclaimed orchestra ever since, always drawing the best from the players, even as the personnel went through enormous changes under the tenures of four quite different music directors from then to now.
Mr. Boulez, who will be 79 next month, brought the orchestra to Carnegie Hall for much-anticipated programs on Wednesday and Thursday nights. Once again he elicited lucid, acutely detailed and tellingly colored performances from a roster of top-flight musicians who clearly revere him. Yet for whatever reasons, he seemed in a subdued mode, especially on Thursday, when he conducted the Adagio from Mahler's 10th Symphony and a concert performance of Act II of Wagner's ''Parsifal.'' In the earlier years of Mr. Boulez's conducting career, some felt his work was imbued with the agenda of the brainy modernist composer he is. In his quest for maximum clarity and austere integrity, he disdained attention-grabbing effects and romantic sweep. He was somewhat back in that mindset on this occasion. Still these probing performances will stay with me for some time.
On Wednesday he began with a riveting account of an alluring work in its New York premiere: ''Concertate il Suono'' by a young French composer, Marc-André Dalbavie (born in 1961). Mr. Boulez conducted the world premiere of this 25-minute score, commissioned by the orchestra, in Cleveland in 2000. Evoking the tradition of the Baroque concerto grosso, which juxtaposed smaller and larger groups of instruments, Mr. Dalbavie contrasts a main orchestra group dominated by a wild variety of percussion instruments with smaller soloistic groups, some onstage, some in the balconies. The spatiality of the sound was effective, but the content of the music was what mattered. Mr. Dalvabie has an ear for astringent modern harmony. Prolonged pedal tones bleed into pungent, atonal chords that grab you, then disappear. When the pace picks up, rhythmic riffs and squiggly motifs leap into motion, then spin out of control. The long, hard-driving final episode turns almost barbaric, though within the confines of a refined French sensibility.
Next came an awesomely brilliant account of Messiaen's ''Oiseaux Exotiques,'' scored for a reedy, steely combination of winds, brass and percussion and a hypercharged solo piano part. The soloist was Mitsuko Uchida, both an uncompromisingly intelligent artist and colorful personality. On this night Ms. Uchida wore a black pantsuit with a lacy, flowing, sequined layering, rather like an elegant, tasteful version of an ''I Dream of Jeannie'' outfit. Dashing off Messiaen's evocations of bird calls with incisive articulation, she exuded intensity and daring. Actually Messiaen incorporated 48 varieties of bird calls in this compact 16-minute work, and at times when the players flailed away. it seemed all 48 were happening simultaneously, which made the instrumental transparency Mr. Boulez elicited all the more remarkable.
Ms. Uchida returned after intermission as soloist in Ravel's Piano Concerto in G, a cool and sleek performance in which she and Mr. Boulez let the Gerswhinesque flair of the music take care of itself while they concentrated on its spiky harmonies and meter-smashing rhythms. The program ended with an organic, unprettified account of Bartok's grim and relentless ''Miraculous Mandarin.''
In his approach to the Mahler Adagio the next night, Mr. Boulez seemed determined to link this 1910 work to the pathbreaking era in which it was written. Rather than milk the autumnal elements of the score, he made the most of every twitching dissonance, every moment when two melodic lines collided on neighboring pitches and refused to back down. I have heard more emotional performances, but none that made the music sound so important.
In Act II of ''Parsifal'' Mr. Boulez seemed determined to avoid theatricality. Tempos were fleet; textures were clear. The tenor Thomas Moser was an honorable though not vocally heroic Parsifal. The baritone Eike Wilm Schulte made a menacing, whiny and robust-voiced Klingsor. The mezzo-soprano Michelle DeYoung brought dusky tone, gleaming power and scrupulous musicianship to the role of Kundry. With their eyes on Mr. Boulez, though, the singers seemed so attentive to his interpretive concept that they sacrificed spontaneity. Mr. Boulez's performance was like a guided tour through the score by one of the world's most insightful musicians. At times you wanted some of that attention-grabbing, operatic fervor. Yet Mr. Boulez is never less than fascinating, especially when he conducts the mighty Cleveland Orchestra.
MUSIC REVIEW
