From his first game as Nets coach through his ninth, all victories, Lawrence Frank has greeted each result by saying that it has had little to do with him. He has also insisted that his record-tying run to start an N.B.A. coaching career means very little.
Kurt Rambis, the last N.B.A. coach to accomplish the feat, agrees.
''I didn't do anything whenever I got the record,'' Rambis said Thursday from his home in Los Angeles. ''And I guarantee I won't be doing anything when Lawrence breaks it.''
Frank can set an N.B.A. record with a victory at home against Atlanta on Wednesday, eclipsing Rambis and Buddy Jeannette, who also won nine in a row in his introduction to the N.B.A.
For Frank, 33, who is still an interim coach, it has been a phenomenal story. But at some point, he will return to reality, as did Rambis and Jeannette.
Rambis took over the Los Angeles Lakers 13 games into the 1999 season and found himself with a talented team that had struggled through a 7-6 start under Del Harris and Bill Bertka, who coached one game between Harris's departure and Rambis's arrival.
Rambis, a hard-nosed player as a Laker, led the Lakers to a 9-0 start and ultimately to a 24-13 record (it was a lockout-shortened 50-game season; the Lakers finished 31-19 over all). He then took the Lakers to the Western Conference playoff semifinals, where they fell to the eventual league champions, the San Antonio Spurs.
Then Rambis was gone, pushed into the front office as Phil Jackson was brought in to take charge. For the 2001-02 season, Rambis returned to the bench as an assistant under Jackson. ''When I tied the record, somebody brought it up and asked me if I was aware,'' Rambis said. ''They mentioned Buddy. I didn't know who he was. That's what will happen to Lawrence and myself a couple of decades from now.
''I wanted to keep coaching. Obviously, I did not want to be judged by my coaching ability by that lockout-shortened year. We made trades before the season, in the middle of the season, brought in Dennis Rodman, all things that were against my better basketball judgment. It was just a crazy year. . . . Actually, I guess it was pretty normal.''
Jeannette, a Hall of Fame player with four Most Valuable Player awards during his professional run from 1938 to 1948, took over as a player-coach of the Baltimore Bullets in the 1946-47 season, when the team was in the American Basketball League. The team then moved into the Basketball Association of America, the predecessor of the N.B.A., for the 1947-48 season. He began the season by winning nine straight games, then led the team to the league championship.
The N.B.A., which began using that name in 1949, counts the several Basketball Association of America years as part of league history, so Jeannette has had a longtime presence in the N.B.A. record book.
Jeannette, who died in 1998, stayed for two more years with Baltimore and later went to Georgetown University, where he coached for four seasons. He returned to the N.B.A. for one season in 1964, again heading the Baltimore Bullets.
Frank took over the Nets on Jan. 26. They were not playing up to their talent for Byron Scott, for whom Frank worked as an assistant. Now the team is surging, and Frank is doing his best to keep it in perspective.
Rambis said: ''If Lawrence Frank had -- pick any bad team in the league -- went on a Western Conference swing and won nine in a row, people would go, 'Whoa.' '' He's got a good team and that tempers it. In my situation, we had a good team.
''What that team is doing is what they're capable of doing,'' Rambis said of the Nets. ''You have to have someone guiding the ship. He's got players playing hard, that's the No. 1 objective. They're playing freer and you've got to get them a playing style that best suits their game. He's done a lot of good things.''
But as for that record that Lawrence is on the verge of breaking, ''it really is meaningless,'' Rambis said.
''How would it be publicized if Lawrence lost his first three and then won 12 in a row?'' Rambis said. ''He'd still be doing a good job, but he wouldn't be in the record book. I think it's meaningless.''
PRO BASKETBALL
