Had his ashes  combined at his request with those of his beloved cat, Sydney -- not been scattered over the Pacific three years ago, Bill Daniels would probably be turning over in his grave.
The $937 million Daniels Fund, which became the Rocky Mountain region's largest foundation on Mr. Daniels's death, is a mess, rocked by an aggressive cost-cutting plan and accusations of questionable governance by board members, all of whom were his close friends or business associates.
''I feel strongly that what has happened is outside the bounds of what Bill Daniels wanted,'' said Diane D. Denish, the lieutenant governor of New Mexico and a board member. ''There's a difference between bean counting and philanthropy.''
Ms. Denish, Mr. Daniels's niece, said some other board members ambushed her at a meeting in November, presenting plans to reduce spending sharply by closing fund offices in Wyoming, New Mexico and Utah and laying off one-third of its grant-making staff.
''I was taken completely by surprise,'' said Ms. Denish, who contends that closing the offices will diminish the quality of the fund's grants for scholarships, school voucher programs and issues of homelessness. ''I don't think someone coming in from Denver for three or five days can know anything about New Mexico and its needs.''
Two senior executives of the fund resigned after the move, which was approved by seven of nine board members over the objections of Ms. Denish and Phillip J. Hogue, whom Mr. Daniels hand-picked to build his philanthropic legacy. The governors of Wyoming and New Mexico have also voiced concern about it.
Critics of the cuts question their timing, announced the day after the fund gave a reception to celebrate the opening of its $14.5 million headquarters in the chic Cherry Hills Village suburb of Denver.
''The way it was handled was just a nightmare,'' said Richard Male, a nonprofit consultant who has become a leading critic of the cuts. ''Eight hours after they have the opening of this multimillion-dollar building attended by 500 people, including the governor and the mayor, where they're boasting about how well they're doing in Wyoming and the other states, they lay off 22 people and say they're closing shop in those states.''
The controversy threatens to overshadow signs of success at the fund's college prep and scholarship program, which escaped the cutbacks.
Hank Brown, a former United States senator who runs the fund, was sanguine about the uproar.
''The phenomenon of a downsizing is a traumatic event,'' Mr. Brown said in an interview here. ''It's even more so in a field like philanthropy, which is normally pretty stable.''
Mr. Brown said research showed that the fund was spending three to four times as much as comparable foundations to administer grants outside the scholarship program, which accounts for 30 percent of its giving.
''What we did will result in $2.6 million in savings a year,'' Mr. Brown said. ''All of that is transferred into new grants and scholarships.''
That message has yet to sway critics of the cuts, who note that board members could have found the money to cover the administrative costs of two of the closed state offices by simply forgoing the fees they receive and the $50,000 they each have to make discretionary grants.
Instead, The Rocky Mountain News in Denver reported five days after the cuts were announced that the board had increased Mr. Brown's salary in June by roughly 8 percent, to $400,000 a year.
John V. Saeman II, a prominent Denver businessman who once ran Mr. Daniels's business empire, which was based on cable television, and is the board chairman, said he had declined an offer by Mr. Brown to take a pay cut. Ms. Denish said she had never heard of the offer.
Mr. Brown said he had not received a raise.
''I had been receiving a salary, board fees and a bonus, and what the board did was increase my base salary, eliminate the board fees I got and reduce the bonus,'' he said.
The controversy has attracted greater scrutiny of the fund's governance and its investments, like a $10 million loan it made to a real estate company owned by Mr. Saeman and a Denver developer, Bill Pauls. Mr. Saeman owned enough of the company to have run afoul of Internal Revenue Service rules on self-dealing, which subject foundations to fines if they invest in entities in which a trustee has a stake of at least 35 percent.
But Mr. Saeman used a complex transaction to reduce his stake in the company to 34 percent so the fund could make the loan, he said in a telephone interview, taking a financial hit even though the Pauls company could simply have gotten a bank loan.
Advisers and confidants of Mr. Daniels said he would never have approved the investment because he did not like one of Mr. Pauls's former business partners.
Mr. Saeman acknowledged that Mr. Pauls and Mr. Daniels were not close, even though they both belonged to the same country club.
''They were not friends, they were not enemies,'' Mr. Saeman said. ''They just didn't know each other.''
Last year, at Mr. Saeman's urging, the fund took a 9.62 percent stake in Aloha Partners, a limited partnership. Mr. Saeman held a 2.99 percent stake in the partnership.
Both investments won board approval, Mr. Saeman said, and adhered to the fund's conflict-of-interest policy.
Asked if it would have been simpler for the fund to invest in entities with no links to its board members, he said, ''The obvious answer to that question is yes, but we got clear guidance from Bill that while he recognized that conflicts were part of the world we lived in, he trusted the people he appointed to the board to deal adequately with them.''
The fund has also paid to use a jet in which Mr. Saeman holds an interest to ferry board members and advisers to meetings two or three times a year. Last December, for instance, it paid roughly $20,000, including the cost of the plane, for an overnight trip to New York by members of its investment committee.
Mr. Saeman said the fund had paid market rates or somewhat less to use the plane.
Mr. Male and other critics also question the appointment of a Colorado Springs developer, Stephen M. Schuck, to the board. Mr. Schuck and Brian Deevy, chairman and chief executive of Daniels &amp; Associates, were elected to the board only in the same meeting at which the cutbacks were approved and yet voted for them.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Schuck said he had seen research before his vote that showed that the fund's costs were excessive.
''The second reason for my vote was my confidence in the judgment of others who had been around before Brian and I joined the board,'' he said.
Mr. Schuck indirectly owes the Daniels estate about $2 million, money that will eventually flow to the fund, the estate's advisers say. He said he planned to pay off the debt, which has been outstanding several years, in March.
Lawyers who specialize in nonprofit law said the only issue that clearly involved self-dealing was the use of Mr. Saeman's plane.
''They've gone right up to the edge of the law, except perhaps in the case of the plane,'' said Bruce R. Hopkins, a lawyer in Kansas City, Mo.
Marcus S. Owens, a lawyer who formerly headed the I.R.S. division overseeing nonprofit groups, agreed but said some of the transactions under scrutiny could raise issues under state nonprofit laws.
''For instance,'' Mr. Owens said, ''when the board approved investments in companies in which some of its members also had interests, it's conceivable that the directors weren't acting in the best interests of the foundation.''
Fund insiders are fighting back, hinting that Ms. Denish is seeking only to further her political ambitions and criticizing her use of state stationery and postage meters for letters related to fund business as an abuse of state money.
Ms. Denish said the fund's activities affected her state and were therefore a state issue.
''The decision cost four well-paying jobs in New Mexico, and while that may not sound like a lot, in New Mexico it means something,'' she said. ''I have a responsibility both as a board member and an elected official to point this out.''
She estimated that her correspondence had cost the state $35.
Correction:  February 21, 2004, Saturday  An article on Sunday about turmoil over cost cutting at the Rocky Mountain region's largest foundation, the Daniels Fund, referred incorrectly to the election of Stephen M. Schuck and Brian Deevy to the board. It occurred in August 2003, not during the November meeting at which they voted for the cuts.
The article misstated the location of the fund's headquarters, and a picture was published in error. The headquarters is in the Cherry Creek neighborhood of Denver, not the suburb named Cherry Hills Village. The picture showed the office of Daniels &amp; Associates, the business of the fund's creator, the late Bill Daniels.
