An interim judge awaiting final confirmation to the bench told the state's Judiciary Committee on Friday that Gov. John G. Rowland, who nominated him for the post, owed his firm $100,000 in legal fees.
The testimony came at one of two hearings on Friday that lawmakers say should weigh heavily on the impeachment inquiry by the investigating House committee. At the other hearing, the State Ethics Commission said that public officials in Connecticut cannot accept expensive gifts from public employees or contractors, though the panel did not refer specifically to Mr. Rowland.
But the hearing of the Judiciary Committee drew the most attention. At the hearing, the judge, James K. Robertson Jr., said he and his firm had provided 600 additional hours of free legal work for Mr. Rowland, dating from before he took office in 1994.
In detailing Mr. Rowland's debt of $100,000 to the firm, Carmody &amp; Torrance, Judge Robertson said the firm expected payment. But Judge Robertson acknowledged that when the fees were arranged, Mr. Rowland's financial prospects were different. ''At the time, it was thought Governor Rowland had a very bright future following his years of public service,'' Judge Robertson said.
Judge Robertson described himself as a Democrat who came to know Mr. Rowland, a Republican, because of a shared interest in urban politics and urban renewal.
The testimony of Judge Robertson and that of another interim judge, Joseph A. Mengacci, who described being host to Vermont ski weekends for the governor and his family, is the latest episode that raises questions about benefits Mr. Rowland has received since he became governor.
Mr. Rowland and his wife have already been ordered to release documents that showed they received thousands of dollars of free work on their vacation home from people at the center of a federal investigation into corruption in the awarding of state contracts.
In his testimony, Judge Robertson, a Yale graduate with degrees in theology, said he volunteered free or reduced rate legal services for Mr. Rowland for the first time in 1994, when a local newspaper sought to have a police record involving the governor unsealed.
Later, Judge Robertson said he and his firm charged and provided free legal advice on everything from Mr. Rowland's ethics violation for accepting concert tickets to ''stories that arose in the newspaper involving the governor in some way.''
Judge Robertson did not dispute news reports that his former firm received $5 million in state work in the nine years Mr. Rowland has been in office. The firm did not seek state work, he said, until the 1980's. It was not until Mr. Rowland took office that the firm started to receive state work, Gail K. Hamm, a committee member, noted during a break.
At one point, Ms. Hamm asked about Mr. Rowland's reaction to the free work. ''He didn't ask you, 'Why have I never gotten a bill?''' Ms. Hamm asked.
''No,'' Judge Robertson said. ''I told him I'd serve as litigation counsel once he was elected.'' Judge Robertson later explained that he offered to serve on a voluntary basis.
The judge who testified about the ski trips, Judge Mengacci, whose wife works in the governor's office, described a long friendship with Mr. Rowland that includes shared gifts and vacations.
''Nothing was ever given to John Rowland at any time that was any different from any other friend because he was governor of the state of Connecticut,'' Judge Mengacci said.
At its hearing earlier in the day, the State Ethics Commission unanimously approved the release of an amended opinion by its director on gifts to public officials. Representative James A. Amann, a Democrat who has been harshly critical of Mr. Rowland, sought the opinion in December, after Mr. Rowland admitted he lied about receiving gifts and free work on his Litchfield cottage.
The amended position will not include any direct reference to Mr. Rowland but will include a provision that public officials cannot receive gifts from anyone seeking to do business with the state, regardless of whether the contract passes through the official's office.
