After labor unions have skirmished for months over which Democratic candidate to support for president, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive board will vote next Thursday to endorse Senator John Kerry, several union leaders said Friday.
This will give Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, the backing of a federation that has 13 million members and what is often called the nation's most effective get-out-the-vote operation.
Several union leaders said John J. Sweeney, the federation's president, decided to call Thursday's meeting as soon as he saw that a labor consensus was forming behind Mr. Kerry.
''Everyone is ready to be unified around a candidate that they are confident can defeat President Bush,'' said Karen Ackerman, the federation's political director.
Mr. Sweeney's letter inviting union leaders to the meeting said he was recommending they endorse Mr. Kerry. Mr. Sweeney wrote in bold letters that Mr. Kerry would speak to the board at the end of the vote. This, several union leaders said, signaled that the endorsement was a done deal. Federation officials said Mr. Sweeney was not available for comment.
The 19 blue-collar unions that had backed Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who has withdrawn from the race, announced their endorsement of Mr. Kerry on Wednesday. Mr. Kerry also has the backing of most building trade unions, the American Federation of Teachers, the Communications Workers of America and the United Food and Commercial Workers. Together, these unions represent nearly two-thirds of the federation's membership; two-thirds backing is needed for a formal endorsement.
''I don't think President Sweeney would have called a general board meeting unless he was confident there was a strong consensus for an endorsement,'' said Harold Schaitberger, president of the International Association of Fire Fighters, the first major union to back Mr. Kerry. ''It will be a tremendous boost for Kerry's campaign to have the full A.F.L.-C.I.O. behind it.''
Last summer, Mr. Sweeney refused to call a board meeting when several union presidents urged him to endorse Mr. Gephardt. Mr. Sweeney's aides said he was convinced that Mr. Gephardt did not have a two-thirds consensus behind him.
Several union leaders said the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, which has backed Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, would vote to endorse Mr. Kerry on Thursday. That union's president, Gerald McEntee, heads the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s political committee, and several union officials said Mr. Sweeney would not have called Thursday's meeting without Mr. McEntee's blessing.
Terence O'Sullivan, president of the Laborers' International Union of North America, said his union and the other pro-Gephardt unions backed Mr. Kerry over Senator John Edwards of North Carolina because ''we decided that based on the issues and based on the strength of the candidates, Kerry is the one we should support.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: LABOR
