Marveling at the $28 million Superior Middle School, complete with wind tunnel and rock-climbing wall, Howard Dean told his tour guide that his own children attended seventh grade in a building from around 1900 ''named after the last guy to run for president from Vermont.''
The assistant principal at Superior, Pat Flynn, apologized for his knowledge gap in historical arcana.
''George Edmunds,'' Dr. Dean supplied. ''No reason for you to know who it is.''
Just a little offhand chitchat as Dr. Dean sought fresh footage for the local news, yet a poignant reminder of the conundrum hanging over him and his campaign: how to give up a serious bid for the White House without devolving into a trivia question.
Although Mr. Edmunds, a Republican, sought his party's presidential nomination in 1880 and 1884 before being relegated to obscurity, Dr. Dean has already had significant effects on the election this year. He helped revolutionize the use of the Internet to raise money and organize supporters, galvanized the antiwar movement into electoral politics, inspired young people to join the process and gave voice to Democrats' anger at the incumbent.
But to travel with Dr. Dean over the last week through Wisconsin, whose primary on Tuesday he maintains is a must-win, even as he promises to continue campaigning regardless of its outcome, is to live in a kind of alternative political reality where victories and losses, and even delegate counts, do not seem to matter.
''I have no doubt that at some point in the relatively near future both the Dean organization and most people will want to support the nominee,'' a top Dean official said. ''I suspect that Howard himself will also find a way to do that. But inevitably you have to go through a transition, you have to go through a psychological journey to get to that point.
''It's a journey that has had immensely conflicting elements to it. There are very few people who have been as high and as low.''
The changes in Dr. Dean and his campaign are subtle, yet telling.
He uses ''if'' rather than ''when'' to introduce the phrase ''I become president.'' He claims a progressive mantle after months of trying to escape the liberal label, rarely mentioning the conservative stance on gun control that he used to say would help him in a general election. He speaks wistfully of his days of dominance in the campaign and thanks supporters for their loyalty in standing by him despite his defeats.
After months with just rallies and forums making up Dr. Dean's public schedule, he now spends much of his time touring health clinics or sampling hot chocolate -- with whipped-cream mustache -- at earthy cafes. He is more relaxed and playful, whether discussing the relative bacteria counts of water from a toilet or a river, challenging a teenager to Ping Pong or grabbing a video camera for a little role reversal with reporters. Visiting a dairy farm on Friday, he shared the story of how he accidentally stepped in a manure trench while wearing loafers.
There is an echo-chamber air in audiences, mainly filled with college students, who anticipate the applause lines they know so well. Campaign officials who used to joke about which position they wanted in the White House are researching vacation spots -- and pondering how long they will stay aboard a sinking ship.
A month ago, Dr. Dean upstaged the endorsement of Senator John Kerry by Iowa's attorney general with the nod of the state's senior senator, Tom Harkin. On Friday, a picture of Mr. Kerry and his latest big-name backer, Gen. Wesley K. Clark, was on the cover of Dr. Dean's handout of daily news clips.
In the office of the new campaign manager, Roy Neel, in Burlington, Vt., the calendar scribbled on a white board runs up to Feb. 17. Mr. Neel said on Thursday that he might soon have to head home to Washington, even as he joked about Dr. Dean's going to the party's national convention even on a bus.
Yet Dr. Dean ambles on, spinning his stump standards between bookends about the need for Wisconsin to stop Mr. Kerry's steamroller.
''I think it's a little early to be writing the postmortems yet,'' Dr. Dean said on Friday. ''You know, you've just got to put one thing in front of the other every single day. That's all it is.''
He acknowledged he had no clue what a post-Wisconsin campaign would look like if he lost on Tuesday.
''That's what it was when I was the front-runner,'' he said, ''and now that I'm not, I've still got to do the same thing.''
Buoyed by a band of 60 supporters on Sunday night at the airport in Madison, Dr. Dean snapped his own picture by holding the camera in front of the supporters' faces.
As he hopscotched among college towns, including tiny Cleveland, site of a technical college, he said, ''It seems everywhere I go there's a University of Wisconsin campus.''
He was surrounded by new signs, many homemade, reading, ''I am Howard Dean's Special Interest,'' to emphasize his anti-Washington crusade.
He was also surrounded by suggestions of denouement, a radio host who referred to the ''final days'' of his campaign and reporters asking him to sign their foam ''cheeseheads'' for posterity.
Here in Cleveland, Dr. Dean spoke in a medium-size college auditorium. Around the corner, a video screen showed his address to a cafeteria empty of the expected overflow. At a $100-a-head fund-raiser on Thursday in Minneapolis, there were far too few feet to cover the triangles of the carpet.
''Now we're just more determined -- and a lot smaller,'' said Scott Graham, a real estate agent who attended, noting that his monthly Dean meetup at a local bar drew 7 people, down from 30.
The fervent still follow the hopeful everywhere. One was Ellan Meyer of Minneapolis, who one morning wrote 40 letters to Wisconsin voters, urging them to vote for Dr. Dean to influence the party platform, if not make him the nominee.
Mat Hollinshead of St. Paul, who has given $350 and plans to send $50 a month, said: ''I am paying Howard Dean to tell the truth. I think my investment is still worth it.''
Campaign events now feel like minireunions, with supporters wearing T-shirts from past trips.
''Seeing a lot of the same faces,'' one volunteer said to another as the seatss of the Irish Heritage and Cultural Center in Milwaukee filled slowly on Tuesday for a rally.
''That's good and bad,'' the second said. ''We need some new faces.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
