America's sugar growers may not be competitive in the global marketplace, but they know how to play in Washington. The sugar lobby has managed to exempt its product from a free trade deal with Australia, a triumph that comes at the expense of American consumers and the nation's broader trade agenda, not to mention the world's poor.
The agreement was reached last weekend, after Australia gave up on its demands that its farmers be given unfettered access to American beef, dairy and sugar markets. The Australians won minor concessions on the dairy and beef fronts, but nothing on sugar. A system of quotas restricts the amount of sugar imported into the United States, inflating domestic prices. Americans pay as much as three times the world price, which is one reason candy manufacturers have had to export thousands of jobs in recent years.
Robert Zoellick, the United States trade representative, had earlier faced down the sugar lobby -- an alliance of Florida cane growers and Midwestern sugar beet farmers -- when he agreed to include sugar as part of the proposed Central American Free Trade Agreement. Central American nations' quotas (the amount they can sell in the United States) will moderately rise over time.
The deal with Australia is a huge setback in the process of liberalizing global agricultural trade. Poor nations whose only viable exports are agricultural goods are hampered by excessive protectionism. And by making a deal with Australia that leaves out sugar, Washington has jeopardized chances for meaningful progress on a hemispheric Free Trade Area of the Americas, and the latest round of negotiations at the World Trade Organization. As part of this effort to lower trade barriers, developing countries are rightly insisting that rich nations stop subsidizing their farmers and open up their markets to competition.
The agreement sends a chilling message to the rest of the world. Even when dealing with an allied nation with similar living standards, the administration, under pressure from the Congress, has opted to continue coddling the sugar lobby, rather than dropping the most indefensible form of protectionism. This will only embolden the case of those around the world who argue that globalization is a rigged game.
