Senator John Kerry picked up the endorsement of Gen. Wesley K. Clark on Friday at a rally where the two men highlighted their military service and national security credentials and struck hard at the White House.
On a day when President Bush ordered the release of all his Vietnam-era National Guard files, General Clark, a former supreme allied commander of NATO who dropped out of the Democratic presidential race this week, stood side by side with the senator, a decorated Navy lieutenant in the Vietnam War, at the armory building on the University of Wisconsin campus here. The two clasped hands and raised their fists together.
''Sir!'' General Clark announced crisply, turning to face Mr. Kerry. ''Request permission to come aboard! The Army's here!''
Mr. Kerry said later, smiling broadly, ''This is the first time in my life that I've had the privilege of saying 'Welcome aboard' to a four-star general.''
General Clark's endorsement gave Mr. Kerry new support as he hopes to push his most important remaining rivals -- Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont --out of the race right after the Wisconsin primary on Tuesday.
''I ask you to join me in standing up for an American who has given truly outstanding service to his country in peace and in war,'' General Clark said at the rally.
The joint appearance came a day after President Bush's re-election campaign and the Republican Party opened a series of attacks against Mr. Kerry, treating him as if he were already the Democratic nominee. Ed Gillespie, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, in a speech on Thursday night, attacked Senator Kerry's record on military and intelligence issues and predicted that Democrats would run ''the dirtiest campaign in modern presidential politics.''
At the same time, Mr. Bush's re-election campaign posted a video on its Web site accusing Mr. Kerry of being ''unprincipled'' and the tool of special interests.
Mr. Kerry and his newest supporter, General Clark, struck back.
Saying he was not surprised that the Bush campaign was attacking him, Mr. Kerry ticked off a litany of issues -- health care, jobs and the environment among them -- that he said Republicans could not talk about. ''They can't talk to you about anything except destruction, except negative, except the politics of tearing down,'' he said at the rally.
General Clark sounded a similar theme. ''President Bush hasn't led America, he's misled America,'' the general said, adding that he would do ''everything I can to help when the Republican mean machine cranks up their attacks.''
Earlier in the day, Mr. Kerry proclaimed himself a ''fighter'' in an interview with Don Imus, the radio talk show host.
Asked why Mr. Bush's National Guard service during the Vietnam era as well as the senator's own history as a decorated Vietnam veteran who became a war protester were an issue, Mr. Kerry said, ''It seems to be the war that won't ever go away,'' and called it ''the pivotal event of our generation.''
He said of his decision to oppose the Vietnam War, ''Look, I didn't love coming back from the war I fought in and having to tell people, 'This is wrong, this is screwed up,' but it was and we lost a lot of lives.''
Mr. Kerry also denied to Mr. Imus -- and again later to reporters in Wisconsin -- a charge posted Thursday on the Web site of the Internet gossip columnist Matt Drudge that the senator had had an extramarital affair.
''Is there anything, anything, that's going to come up?'' Mr. Imus said, before making an oblique reference to the Drudge report.
Mr. Kerry replied: ''There's nothing to report. So there's nothing to talk about. I'm not worried about it.''
Later in the day after a town-hall-style question-and-answer appearance with Gov. Jim Doyle, Mr. Kerry told reporters: ''I just deny it categorically. It's rumor. It's untrue, period.''
Mr. Kerry, who has vowed to compete in primaries in every state, spent much of the day here before heading to Nevada, where caucuses will be held on Saturday. He expects to return to Wisconsin on Saturday afternoon, and will remain here through the voting on Tuesday.
Throughout the day, at both the rally and the town hall meeting, Mr. Kerry campaigned on the issues of health care, special education and especially veterans benefits, which he said have been cut by the Bush administration.
He said he would not stand attacks on his patriotism -- a reference to recent efforts by conservatives to highlight his record as an antiwar protester -- ''when the first definition of patriotism is keeping faith with the people who wore the uniform of our country.''
Though he has yet to have the Democratic nomination wrapped up, Mr. Kerry was getting repeated questions about whom he might choose as a vice-presidential running mate. At the question-and-answer session with Governor Doyle, a woman asked Mr. Kerry if he would consider Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, the Ohio Democrat who has not won any primaries but came in third recently in Maine and Washington State.
Mr. Kerry paused for a minute before answering, ''I can consider anybody if you nominate me.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
