Federal prosecutors are planning to seek a criminal indictment against Jeffrey K. Skilling, a former chief executive of Enron, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The timing of the charges is still in flux, these people said, although the current plan is that they will probably be announced Thursday or later. Throughout the Enron case, prosecutors have repeatedly filed charges under seal for a few days, announcing them only after the defendants have surrendered to the authorities.
The precise charges that might be brought against Mr. Skilling could not be immediately determined. But most of the issues being investigated by prosecutors pertain to events that took place from 1996 through early 2001 when he was chief operating officer and president of Enron.
In recent months, prosecutors have been seeking evidence of Mr. Skilling's involvement in a series of accounting moves at Enron that the government has contended in other criminal cases were part of an effort to falsely inflate the company's financial performance.
In earlier questioning of witnesses, prosecutors also sought to link Mr. Skilling to what they contend was a criminal conspiracy to misrepresent the technological abilities of Enron's broadband unit from 1999 through 2001. Several executives from the Enron broadband division were indicted on such charges last year.
A lawyer for Mr. Skilling, Bruce Hiler, said that his client had done nothing improper. He said that all of Mr. Skilling's actions were taken with the full knowledge and approval of scores of lawyers, accountants and members of the company's board.
''Jeff Skilling has nothing to hide,'' Mr. Hiler said. ''If the C.O.O. can be indicted for transactions that were reviewed and recommended by dozens of experts, then no C.O.O. should go to work tomorrow morning, because if something goes wrong with their company, they are in danger of being indicted.''
The anticipated indictment of Mr. Skilling is not solely the consequence of any sudden breakthrough in the investigation but rather is the result of a slow compilation of evidence pursued over multiple lines of inquiry. Indeed, what began two years ago as an investigation into Enron's improper use of off-the-books partnerships has evolved instead into a multitiered case, involving both basic accounting and financial reporting issues as well as the more complex accusations raised by the partnership machinations.
At the same time, the case has transformed from somewhat straightforward questions of criminality to more subtle ones. The investigation that once largely focused on what amounted to thefts of corporate cash by the former chief financial officer is now one examining the more subtle and potentially more important issue of when earnings management crosses the line into earnings manipulation.
As a result, people involved in the investigation said, this is not a case that will be dependent on the testimony on any single witness. Instead, it is one involving an array of witnesses whose cooperation was secured over the course of the inquiry. These witnesses are expected to testify to a series of transactions that, taken together, create a portrait of what prosecutors contend is an effort to deceive the public about Enron's true financial state.
The reason for the timing of the case is fairly simple: Prosecutors appear to have pretty much gathered all of the evidence they can. The former chief financial officer, Andrew S. Fastow, agreed last month to plead guilty to multiple felonies and provide evidence against others. That information contributed to the subsequent indictment of one of his colleagues, Richard A. Causey, the former chief accounting officer, and is also playing a role in the potential indictment of Mr. Skilling, people involved in the case said.
The government had spent months pressing Mr. Causey to provide evidence against Mr. Skilling, but he has refused, saying that he had nothing to offer and did not engage in wrongdoing. A group of defendants in another Enron case, involving the company's broadband division, have also been repeatedly urged to cooperate against Mr. Skilling, but they also have maintained their innocence and contended that they knew of no illegalities involving the former chief executive.
Now, with virtually every high level executive who worked directly for Mr. Skilling either under indictment or cooperating with the government, the prosecutors have built a case that is about as strong as it is going to get.
Prosecutors have long considered Mr. Skilling a primary target of the criminal inquiry. He succeeded Kenneth L. Lay as Enron's chief executive in early 2001 and resigned less than six months later, a move that set off deep public questioning of the company's financial position. Accounting problems rapidly emerged, and within four months, Enron filed for bankruptcy protection.
But most of Mr. Skilling's reputation came from his earlier years. A former consultant to Enron, he joined the company in 1990 to head a business he had envisioned that wed finance, trading and marketing of natural gas. He persuaded regulators to account for natural gas contracts under the mark-to-market method. With it, Enron was able to collapse the current value of projected cash flows for energy contracts spreading out as much as decades into the first year, reporting them as current revenue.
As Mr. Skilling transformed what had once been a staid pipeline company into something more like an investment bank, he surrounded himself with a cadre of young and aggressive executives who believed in his business plan. They included Mr. Fastow, the former chief financial officer, and Mr. Causey, the former chief accounting officer.
As the years progressed, Enron's accounting and finance efforts became increasingly aggressive, until finally they crossed the line into illegality. Mr. Fastow built an array of off-the-books partnerships, which he used both to illegally enrich himself with company cash and to manipulate Enron's finances by engineering bogus transactions between the entities and the company. Last month, Mr. Fastow pleaded guilty to multiple felonies and has agreed to a prison sentence of at least 10 years.
As part of his plea deal, Mr. Fastow agreed to cooperate against other Enron executives. As part of his initial discussions with prosecutors, people involved in the case said, he provided evidence against both Mr. Causey and Mr. Skilling.
As described in court papers, Mr. Causey, Mr. Fastow and others ensured Enron's financial performance by manipulating expenses, revenue, debt levels, cash flow and asset values all to reach desired results. That was accomplished, the charges said, through means including fraudulent valuations, misuse of Mr. Fastow's partnerships, improper corporate reorganizations and intentional mistreatment of accounting reserves.
According to records of interviews conducted soon after the company's collapse as part of an internal investigation, Mr. Causey openly discussed certain transactions that are now the subject of the criminal case and suggested that Mr. Skilling played a role in them.
