In the heavily Guyanese enclave in Richmond Hill, Queens, the police detective known simply as Rudy was ubiquitous in his blue community affairs windbreaker. The detective, Rudranauth Toolasprashad, 38, could chat in Hindi with local immigrants about news from Guyana, and he often introduced them to his fellow officers and superiors.
"Whenever you need help in this neighborhood, you go to Rudy," said Tony Yassin, who owns the Spice World grocery store on Liberty Avenue. "It used to be very difficult to get help from the police, but now if there's a problem in the community, Rudy takes care of it."
But now he is one of two detectives and a sergeant who have been reassigned to desk duty in connection with an investigation into corruption accusations in the 102nd Precinct in Richmond Hill, police officials have said.
Detective Toolasprashad, the precinct's community affairs officer, was ordered to hand over his gun and shield, and was transferred to an administrative job with the department's Housing Unit, the officials said. The scope of the investigation and the accuracy of the accusations remain unclear; he remains on the payroll, and no criminal or administrative charges have been filed.
The news buzzed yesterday through the sari shops, halal meat stores and roti restaurants along Liberty Avenue, the main thoroughfare in a neighborhood dominated by Guyanese immigrants and others of Indo-Caribbean background. Guyana, a former British colony and the only English-speaking nation in South America, is home to descendants of indentured servants from India and Africa.
Detective Toolasprashad (pronounced tool-AHS-pra-SHAD) came to the neighborhood several years ago and became a well-liked figure, residents said yesterday. They said that he comes from an affluent Guyanese family, has a nice home in Jamaica Estates, a neighborhood of stately houses in Queens, and drives a Jaguar. He readily gave out his cellphone number.
Maria Thomson, president of the 102nd Precinct Community Council, said he ''tried to bring everyone together.''
''Some people don't like new people assimilating,'' she said, ''but Rudy was one of the best community affairs officers we've had in the 102nd Precinct in my 30 years involved.''
A police spokesman said yesterday that he could not comment on the case because it was still ''an active investigation.'' But people with knowledge of the investigation have said the case could include allegations of misconduct involving green cards and passports and off-duty employment.
Harpreet Singh Toor, president of the Sikh Cultural Society, a temple on 118th Street, said yesterday of Detective Toolasprashad: ''To the best of my knowledge, he never asked for any money and nobody approached him for any hanky-panky business. I saw Rudy as a straightforward cop who was always telling people that you have to follow the regulations and work within the system.''
That appeared to be a common assessment. Mr. Yassin, the grocery store owner, said Detective Toolasprashad was known as an effective liaison between the Guyanese and Sikh populations and the police.
He became the man to see for residents who needed help getting police permits for religious events and for merchants seeking latitude on parking rules for truck deliveries. He helped arrange permits for Indo-Caribbean parades and negotiate complaints about the customary four-day celebrations for Guyanese weddings. He often escorted police commanders to speak to local groups and arranged security details at Sikh temples.
After Sept. 11, 2001, residents said, Detective Toolasprashad encouraged the precinct to assign officers to prevent bias crimes against the temples of Sikhs, who wear turbans and are often mistaken for Muslims.
Some of those who voiced support for the detective said they suspected that he had been set up by local residents who were angry that he helped empower Guyanese immigrants. They said he persuaded them to attend community meetings and join groups like the precinct's community council and Community Board 9.
''He was aggressive in promoting community affairs at the precinct, and these things can have repercussions; people get offended,'' Mr. Yassin said. ''He helped bring a total turnaround in the way the precinct relates to the Guyanese community.''
The chairman of Community Board 9, Paul Sapienza, said, ''He has always gone out of his way to draw the community into the mainstream, and he introduced people to us who then became members of the board.''
Basil Persaud, who owns the Persaud Hardware store on Liberty Avenue, called the detective ''a person of great respect.''
He added: ''Yes, he was a guy who could get things done, but I never heard of him asking for anything. If you had a grievance about the police harassing so we cannot do business, like sanitation summons or delivery trucks getting tickets, he would speak to the captain or superiors and ask them to ease up.''
