A season that was supposed to be about the Los Angeles Lakers playing some of the best basketball in history has degenerated into a soap opera, with one controversy after another threatening to spoil a run toward their fourth N.B.A. title in five years.
Not surprisingly, the latest hullabaloo concerns Kobe Bryant, who has been embroiled in nearly every thick subplot of the season. Bryant, who is facing a criminal trial on charges of sexual assault, declared before the season that he would opt out of the final year of his contract, making him a free agent after the season.
While Bryant has repeatedly stated that his first choice is to remain with the Lakers, he awoke Friday to newspaper reports that he had decided to leave the Lakers and that several officials within the organization knew it.
Bryant, who will start for the Western Conference in Sunday's N.B.A. All-Star Game here at the Staples Center, spent Friday afternoon denying the reports.
''That's just not true,'' the 25-year-old Bryant said. ''I want to be a Laker for the rest of my life. That hasn't changed. I've been a Laker fan since I was 6. It's been a dream come true to play for the Lakers.''
Asked why he would opt out of his contract if he wanted to stay, Bryant, who is due to make $14 million next season, said he simply wanted to experience free agency.
''I want to look at different options,'' said Bryant, who has played eight seasons in Los Angeles. ''I've never had the opportunity to look at different options.''
The controversy over Bryant's pending free agency was ignited by his seeming indifference to the club's previous controversy, which occurred on Wednesday when the Lakers announced that discussions to extend Coach Phil Jackson's contract had ceased.
When asked if Jackson's future with the Lakers would affect his decision to leave the team or to stay, Bryant said, ''Not really.''
When asked if it mattered to him whether Jackson was or was not the Lakers' coach next season, Bryant said, ''I don't care.''
Suddenly, there was a flood of reports about this being Bryant's last season with the Lakers, who signed Karl Malone and Gary Payton last summer in an effort to dethrone the San Antonio Spurs.
On Friday, Bryant played down his remarks, saying he meant that the status of Jackson's contract would not be a distraction to him or to the team on the floor.
''Of course I care about the coach here,'' Bryant said. ''Do I care to the point it's going to be a distraction to what we're trying to accomplish this season? No.''
Bryant added, ''Of course I want him to be here next year.''
But Bryant admitted that his relationship with Jackson is tense. Bryant is not a big fan of Jackson's triangle offense. Nor does he like Jackson's insistence that center Shaquille O'Neal be the focal point of the offense.
''Our relationship has always been pretty dicey,'' Bryant said. ''But I have a lot of respect for Phil because he understands the game so much. If he says run this, that or the other, I'm going to say, 'Why?' I want to learn. Our relationship has always been that way, but it's been successful.''
Jackson is in the final year of a five-year, $30 million contract. Talks about a two- or three-year extension had been continuing since last summer, but getting the Lakers through this season riddled with injuries and turmoil has become the priority. Mitch Kupchak, the Lakers' general manager, has said the club's goal remains to re-sign Jackson as its coach. Kupchak has also said the Lakers will not trade Bryant before the Feb. 19 trade deadline.
O'Neal, like Michael Jordan before him, has said he does not want to play for any coach besides Jackson. He repeated that sentiment on Friday. ''I said that,'' O'Neal said. ''That's what I said. My statement still stands.''
When asked about Bryant's future with the Lakers, O'Neal, whose long-running feud with Bryant became extremely ugly when Bryant called him ''fat and out of shape'' in October, seemed indifferent.
''People have to do what's best for them and their family,'' O'Neal said, adding that Bryant had not given his teammates any indication that he was leaving. ''It's a business, and they have to do what's right for them. I don't have any take on it whether he stays or leaves. Businesswise, it probably wouldn't be a smart move, but people have to do what's right for him, because when you talk about where he can get the most money at, we could pay him the most money, so I don't know.''
When Bryant becomes a free agent on July 1, Utah, Atlanta, San Antonio, Denver, Phoenix and the Los Angeles Clippers will be able to offer him a lucrative contract. Denver, which is near Eagle Rock, Colo. (where he was accused of sexual assault), and Utah are probably out of the question. The Clippers appear to be a very likely destination because Bryant would not have to move, and Phoenix has a solid core of frontcourt players to put around Bryant.
Nonetheless, no club can come close to the seven-year, $141 million offer the Lakers can make. The most a team can offer will be around $98 million over six years. With Bryant losing several endorsements because of his legal issues, money might be more of an issue for him.
Many of the N.B.A.'s other stars had trouble understanding why Bryant would leave the Lakers, with whom he has won three championships. ''Anybody that would want to leave Shaq, I would think is crazy,'' the 76ers' Allen Iverson said. ''But then again, Kobe's got three titles, so he might want to, but you never know.''
The Magic's Tracy McGrady said, ''The guy has three rings, so maybe he wants to see if he can do it on his own.''
Bryant said that but for reporters' questions, he has not thought about what he will do this summer.
''I'll think about that at the end of the season,'' he said. ''I'm not going to think about that now. I have too much going on.''
There's always something going on with Bryant and the Lakers.
PRO BASKETBALL
