A former pediatrician from Sunset Park, Brooklyn, who was convicted last year on charges that he traveled abroad to have sex with minors at what the government called a pedophiles' resort was sentenced yesterday to more than 21 years in prison, the maximum punishment allowed by federal guidelines.
The former doctor, Stefan Irving, 56, baited destitute street boys as young as 6 in Mexico and Honduras with action figures and children's books, then took advantage of them, a federal prosecutor, Michael Scudder, said at Mr. Irving's jury trial, which lasted one week in Federal District Court in Manhattan in September. Mr. Irving was found guilty of all counts in a five-count indictment that accused him of committing sexual offenses against children.
At sentencing proceedings yesterday before Judge Lewis A. Kaplan of United States District Court, the government asked for a sentence longer than the range provided by the federal sentencing guidelines, 210 to 262 months in prison. A lawyer for Mr. Irving, Cheryl Stern, argued for less.
''It is not necessary to lock Mr. Irving up for the rest of his life to protect children from him,'' she said, noting that there were periods in his life when he exercised self-control.
But Mr. Scudder, the prosecutor, said that Mr. Irving engaged in extensive sexual contact with children not only in Mexico and Honduras, but also in Middletown, N.Y, where he lost his medical license after a pedophilia conviction 20 years ago. Judge Kaplan responded: ''The man is, as I said, a predator. He has abused, I'm confident, a lot of children. But I think, all things considered, the guidelines make appropriate provisions for people like that.''
Mr. Irving will not be eligible for parole. ''Two hundred sixty-two months for a man in his late fifties may turn out to be a life sentence,'' Judge Kaplan said.
When given the opportunity to speak, Mr. Irving indicated that he had nothing he wanted to say.
According to his complaint and indictment, federal investigators began a nationwide initiative in 1996 focusing on individuals suspected of traveling for the purpose of having sex with minors. The investigation came to focus on a resort in Acapulco known as Castillo Vista del Mar, which, the government has said, existed to cater to American men who wanted to have sex with Mexican boys. Evidence presented to the court showed that Mr. Irving patronized Castillo Vista del Mar, where homeless orphans were given food and shelter in exchange for sex.
Judge Kaplan called Mr. Irving's crimes ''particularly galling'' given that he had been a doctor.
Martin Ficke, the special agent-in-charge at Immigration and Customs Enforcement, a unit of the Department of Homeland Security, said the Irving case had become a model for training at the department, which has begun to expand its focus on sexual crimes against minors. ''It's a classic example of how to work with our international counterparts,'' Mr. Ficke said.
