His doctor tells him he can take longer walks in the woods, and he says he feels less fatigued, but Devils defenseman Scott Stevens does not know when he will be able to resume his hockey career. Still.
No news, in this case, is bad news for Stevens and the Devils. He has postconcussion syndrome, and the outcome of his attempted comeback, if he even makes one, continues to be a mystery. Stevens, 39, has not played since Jan. 7, when he skated in his 1,635th game. In his 22 seasons, he has played in more games than any other defenseman in N.H.L. history.
''A lot of times, you play through things -- a broken finger, a bad wrist, whatever,'' Stevens said Friday in a telephone interview from his home. ''This isn't something you fool with.''
The Devils have played their last 16 games without Stevens, their captain. He would like to play again, in part, because his children want him to. But he still has no idea whether his comeback will happen this season, next season or ever.
Asked whether he had contemplated retirement, Stevens said, ''Definitely not.''
Devils General Manager Lou Lamoriello said in an interview Wednesday that Stevens was feeling better and that he hoped his return was ''in the near future.'' But Stevens said Friday that he had no timetable.
''There are so many question marks,'' he said.
Stevens has spent most of his time chauffeuring his three children -- Kaitlin, 14; Ryan, 12; and Kara, 8 -- from one activity to another. He has snowshoed in the woods, and he has taken his dogs for walks.
''They keep me busy,'' he said of his children. ''Keeps my mind off things.''
Stevens said he would like to resume exercising, but his doctor, Karen Johnston, a concussion specialist based in Montreal, has said he should stick to walking and monitoring his heart rate.
He does not want to rule out returning this season; the Devils have 27 regular-season games remaining. And he said the lack of a collective bargaining agreement for next season would not alter his decision on when to return.
''I'm working on right now,'' he said. ''That's the way I'm going to continue to approach it.''
Stevens said this was probably not the first time in his career that he had sustained a concussion. He remembers being knocked out of a 1994 playoff game against Boston, and returning for the next game.
That was just the way things were done. Stevens does not second-guess himself for playing through such an injury; not as much was known then about the lasting effects of concussions.
''You've got to think about family now,'' Stevens said.
It would seem that Stevens might want to compare notes with Rangers center Eric Lindros, who sustained the eighth concussion of his career Jan. 28, but he said he had not spoken with him.
''I do think Eric's dealt with it better than anyone,'' said Stevens, whose hit on Lindros in the 2000 Eastern Conference finals resulted in one of those concussions.
He knows the Devils need him. The Devils (28-16-10-1) have begun to struggle. They have lost three straight games by a combined score of 11-2, and the first-place Philadelphia Flyers are now 9 points ahead of them in the Atlantic Division. They have dropped to sixth in the Eastern Conference standing.
''We just need to be concerned about the way we're playing,'' Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur said after practice Friday.
Stevens continues to have larger concerns. He has not seen Johnston since Jan. 15, but he says he talks to her on the phone occasionally. He is guardedly optimistic about his progress, but knows he has not recovered.
''I feel pretty good,'' he said. ''Some days, I don't feel good.''
The Devils play home games Saturday and Sunday, but Stevens will probably not watch either of them, not even on television. He says he does not watch much television, for one thing, and he has never liked to watch hockey.
''I find it easier to listen to the radio,'' he said. ''I'm always uptight when I'm watching hockey, even when the Devils aren't playing. I'm not good at watching games.''
HOCKEY
