''Go ahead please -- take day off!,'' cajoled the vintage cartoon image of the Japanese enemy that loomed over the audience before the opening of a conference about fear at the New School University last week.
After Pearl Harbor such were the methods of urging Americans to work hard and support the war effort. In a preliminary slide show another image showed an even more ominous caricature of a Japanese and a Nazi peering over opposing ends of the globe, greedily eyeing the verdant lands of North America. ''Warning! Our homes are in danger now!,'' it read.
This used to be called propaganda. And even when crude it had an accepted function: to galvanize, urge, justify, remind and, yes, frighten. More recently, with less calculation, images of the collapsing World Trade Center have had a similar effect. But at a time in which a war on Islamist terror is working itself out in so many incarnations and with so many controversies, what seems noteworthy is that there are now so few examples of graphic American propaganda and none using ethnic or racial caricatures.
Yet this conference, called ''Fear: Its Uses and Abuses,'' which extended over three days, paid little attention to that difference. Beginning with former Vice President Al Gore, who delivered the keynote address, speakers asserted again and again that the American government is preoccupied with instilling fear. The conference, organized by the journal Social Text and its editor, Arien Mack, gathered scholars like the poet and critic John Hollander, the political scientists George Kateb and Ira Katznelson, and the law professor Cass R. Sunstein. There were talks on the neuropsychology of fear, the social psychology of fear and fear in literature, and varied analyses of the Bush administration from critics like the Nation columnist Eric Alterman and Aryeh Neier, the president of the Open Society Institute.
But the dominant idea was that, as the conference's thematic statement put it, fear was being ''encouraged by our government and exacerbated by our media.'' It was compared with the irrational fear of Communism and the perversions of McCarthyism. It was described as part of a counter-constitutional coup by a radical right. Talks about other aspects of fear -- how, for example, it tends to drive out reflective thought with its stimulus of the ''lateral nucleus of the amygdala'' -- mainly served to frame the theme. Mr. Hollander devoted some time to discussing Roosevelt's classic statement that ''the only thing we have to fear is fear itself,'' but after a while it became evident that ''fear itself'' was what many speakers wanted to inspire, not just to describe.
Mr. Gore asserted that a ''powerful clique'' had the run of the White House. We were being ruled, he said, by a president with a ''determined disinterest in the facts,'' who ''abused the trust of the American people by exploiting the fears of the American people,'' and a Republican party that thinks of other Americans as ''agents of treason.'' The ''machinery of fear is right out in the open,'' he said, ''operating at full throttle.''
This image, which was meant to frighten not a little itself, did indeed galvanize the audience; later in the conference some speakers pushed it in even more radical directions.
Mr. Kateb, an emeritus professor of politics at Princeton, saw a conspiracy at work. He compared President Bush to a ''despot.'' In Chomskyesque fashion he argued that the American government is using its war on terror ''to justify the national security state'' and feed its economy, and that terrorism is just a stand-in ''for a much larger enemy, which is made up of Arabs and Muslims everywhere'' who are now being tyrannized in a ''racist'' and ''imperialist'' enterprise.
Some speakers were more restrained. Mr. Katznelson argued that the American public was for the most part maturing politically; that there had been no such generalized campaign of hatred; and that America was in the demanding position of having to be a key player in a century-long series of world crises. Mr. Sunstein, also measured, outlined some of the complexities of dealing with civil liberties in times of crisis and made specific proposals for checks and balances.
For the most part, though, fear of the administration was strenuously cultivated.
But wouldn't this fear also be vulnerable to accusations of manipulation? Or to assertions that it was stymieing rational thought? Or to claims that it distorted context and proportion? Why wasn't this conference, too, an abuse of fear?
Presumably because its instigators believed it justified; they believed they were correctly outlining fearsome manipulation and exaggeration. But that shows it is necessary to determine how justified fear is before judging its abuse. And that was the issue least well explored. By narrowly focusing on aspects of the Iraq war, most speakers treated the answer as evident: fear was unjustified. Even if that assessment is granted for the sake of argument, what of the larger context of the war on Islamist terror? Didn't the attacks of 9/11 involve something on a different scale than what the conference statement called a ''small, determined band of fanatics?'' Isn't that a crucial point? What kind of enemy is being faced?
There was a reluctance to use the concept of an enemy to refer to anything but domestic political opponents. This is similar to a problem described in Lee Harris's ''Civilization and Its Enemies: The Next Stage of History'' (Free Press, 2004), a new book that in its idiosyncratic brilliance and unrelentingly aggressive vision about the war on terror is bound to stir more controversy -- and fear -- than the New School conference. For we live, according to Mr. Harris, in a civilization with an intellectual culture that is reluctant to take the idea of an external enemy seriously; its enemies, though, have no such qualms.
''We are caught,'' Mr. Harris writes, ''in the midst of a conflict between those for whom the category of the enemy is essential to their way of organizing all human experience and those who have banished even the idea of the enemy form both public discourse and even their innermost thoughts.''
For those prepared to accept even some of Mr. Harris's premises, there is nothing to fear but the lack of fear itself.
CONNECTIONS  Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  The Connections column in Arts &amp; Ideas on Saturday, about a conference at the New School University on fear, misidentified the journal that organized it. It is Social Research, not Social Text.
