Conrad M. Black filed a $644 million libel suit on Friday against members of a special committee set up by Hollinger International, contending that they had set out to transform him from ''a respected owner of a successful media chain into a loathsome laughingstock.''
The suit, filed with the Ontario Superior Court of Justice here, contends that Richard C. Breeden, the committee's special counsel, and the committee's other five members defamed Lord Black by accusing him and his associates of improperly receiving $200 million in noncompete payments from Hollinger. The special committee was created to investigate the payments.
The suit also contends that members of the committee knowingly hid evidence from Lord Black that would have supported his case that Hollinger's board had properly authorized the payments.
Mr. Breeden's lawyer, Thomas J. Kavaler of Cahill Gordon &amp; Reindel, described the suit as ''ridiculous.'' In a statement, Mr. Kavaler said that the lawsuit would not deter Mr. Breeden, who is a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, from fulfilling his duties on the special committee.
Besides Mr. Breeden, the special committee members named in the suit are Gordon A. Paris, James R. Thompson, Richard D. Burt, Graham L. Savage and Raymond G.H. Seitz.
Lord Black, who is Hollinger's biggest shareholder, is embroiled in a number of disputes with the current directors over his stewardship of Hollinger, whose holdings include The Daily Telegraph in London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post.
The two sides are scheduled to meet next week in a Delaware court, where each has filed suit seeking control of the company.
Among the points of dispute is a tentative deal made by Lord Black in January to sell his controlling stake in Hollinger to the British investors David and Frederick Barclay, owners of Press Holdings International.
Hollinger's board has challenged the legality of this deal and has invited other offers. Several bidders stepped forward earlier this week.
A person close to Lord Black said on Friday that the defamation suit had been filed in Canada rather than in the United States because Canadian libel law was more favorable to plaintiffs. Besides defamation, Lord Black is seeking damages for conspiracy to injure, intimidation and intentional misrepresentation.
According to the suit, the members of the special committee induced Lord Black last November into resigning as Hollinger's chairman and chief executive so that they could gain control of the company ''to enrich themselves financially and to further their business, professional and political careers.''
''The defendants wanted to destroy Black's reputation to enable them to achieve their goal,'' the statement said. ''Knowing that if they published statements that Black had taken unauthorized payments from Hollinger, such statements would ignite a veritable firestorm of vilification and defamation in the international media against Black.''
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
