Joe Gibbs returned to his little Nascar side business Friday, taking a short break from his full-time job as coach of the Washington Redskins. He is at Daytona International Speedway this weekend to take care of previous commitments for his Joe Gibbs Racing team.
He does not expect to spend much time with his Tony Stewart and Bobby Labonte racing teams this year. Gibbs handed over the operation to his son J. D. in January when he took over the Redskins, a team he coached to three Super Bowl titles before becoming a champion racecar owner. Gibbs said he spent more than four hours Thursday night meeting with the Redskins' owner, Daniel Snyder, before turning his attention to racing.
Gibbs brushed off concerns about his health after going to an emergency room in St. Augustine, Fla., on Monday.
''I'm so stupid,'' he said at a news conference. ''I have medication for diabetes. Well, I switched the two medications without even paying any attention to it, which is dumb to start off with. So I said, 'I better go by and at least have this checked to make sure I'm O.K.'
''I feel great. There was nothing to it. It was just a precautionary thing.''
The health of the Redskins is another issue. Although Stewart and Labonte are serious contenders to reach the 10-race runoff in Nascar's Nextel Cup this season, Gibbs is not feeling particularly buoyant about the prospects for the Redskins next season. He praised quarterback Donovan McNabb and the Philadelphia Eagles, who have dominated the National Football Conference East in recent years.
Gibbs also said he was studying film of many teams, including the Super Bowl champion New England Patriots, and said: ''I'll steal whatever. I have no pride.''
As for the Redskins, he said: ''We're going to have a tough time. Our football team has got some holes there.''
Gibbs admits he has much to learn after being away from football since 1992, when he left the Redskins to start his Nascar team. ''I definitely feel like I'm starting all over again,'' he said. ''All the other stuff that we did back in the old days, it really is the old days. It was 12 years ago. So I look at this, you're starting all over again. You've got to prove yourself again. I've got a ton I have to learn.''
During his news conference, Gibbs spoke on divergent topics like the need to control the rising costs of competing in Nascar and the desire to prevent young college football players from joining the N.F.L. He is opposed to players like Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett joining the league. Clarett played one season for the Buckeyes, but sued and won the right to enter the N.F.L. draft. The league is appealing. Gibbs, though, said he would draft any young talented player who was available.
As for sponsorship, Gibbs said he was happy to see an advertisement for the new Mel Gibson movie, ''The Passion of the Christ,'' placed on Labonte's car. He said he was not concerned about the controversy the movie had stirred; some Jewish leaders view it as anti-Semitic.
''I didn't see a whole lot of that for me, personally,'' Gibbs said. ''I don't know what the odds are, what people believe in God, there's probably well over 80, 90 percent. It's a movie. It's a movie that a lot of people will see. We were happy to be part of it. There's some things written about it or some controversy, but I don't think there was a lot.''
Tire Wears on Teams
New tires and a lower spoiler were supposed to improve competition in Nascar this season. But the tires drew loud complaints from drivers after Thursday's qualifying races for the Daytona 500. ''The tire is not a good tire,'' Dale Earnhardt Jr. said after winning one of the Gatorade 125 qualifiers.
Most drivers said the new, softer tires, which wear out more quickly, made car handling difficult. But a Goodyear representative, Greg Stucker, said the tires used at Daytona were actually harder than last year's version. The problem, he said, was the spoiler, and an inability by some teams to adjust their cars to handle it.
Bush Campaign Stop in Daytona
President Bush will take his re-election campaign to the Daytona 500 on Sunday. It will be the second time he has visited the speedway; he attended the Pepsi 400 in 2000 during his first presidential run. According to Jim Hunter, Nascar vice president of corporate communications, a study showed 70 percent of Nascar fans in Florida voted for Bush in 2000.
AUTO RACING: NOTEBOOK  Correction:  February 20, 2004, Friday  A report in the Auto Racing Notebook column on Saturday about changes made by Nascar to improve competition referred incorrectly to spoilers, the aerodynamic devices on the rear of cars. Lower spoilers were not mandated for races at Daytona International Speedway, but at the tracks for most other Nascar races. Higher spoilers are required for races at Daytona.
