For a moment, it seemed as if Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and the president of the firefighters' union had put their differences behind them during a joint appearance yesterday on the mayor's radio program to announce increased staffing for engine companies.
Mayor Bloomberg declared that the agreement with the Uniformed Firefighters Association showed how people could work together in this city and pointed out that both he and the union leader, Stephen J. Cassidy, were still in their first terms in their respective positions.
''Both of us are going to get re-elected, I trust,'' Mayor Bloomberg said on his weekly program on WABC-AM. ''I mean, I hope you'll work for my re-election. Would you like me to work for yours?''
But Mr. Cassidy quickly replied, ''Uh no, Mr. Mayor. I don't want you to work for mine.''
Both men laughed, and in the end, the mayor seemed not to take offense.
''We just hope they all get home safely every night,'' the mayor said of the firefighters. ''They put their lives at risk to save others, but we have a commitment to them to get them home to their families.''
The Bloomberg administration negotiated an agreement with the 8,600-member union last year to restore a fifth firefighter to 60 engine companies by July 1, in return for a reduction in the amount of sick leave taken by firefighters. City officials said this week that those reductions in sick leave had been made ahead of schedule, allowing for the early restoration of the firefighters to the engine companies.
Mr. Cassidy, who called in during show, said that increasing staffing was critical for ensuring the safety of firefighters and city residents. ''The difference between a five-man engine and a four-man engine is dramatic,'' he said. ''It actually takes twice as much time for a four-man engine to get water on a fire.''
Mr. Cassidy said the number of leaves was declining as firefighters with injuries and illnesses retired and younger firefighters took their place in the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks.
Mayor Bloomberg, who seemed to be in a jovial mood about turning 62 today, also reached out to another group he has often been at odds with. The mayor, who strongly favors gun control, was asked by a caller if he would oppose the National Rifle Association holding a convention in New York.
''Well, I'd love to have everybody come to the city, no matter what their views are,'' he said.
Still, Mayor Bloomberg went on to add that too many people have guns, and in big cities like New York, ''you don't want people walking around with guns -- guns kill people.''
Calls to the N.R.A., which is based in Fairfax, Va., were not returned yesterday afternoon. The N.R.A. plans to hold its annual convention in Pittsburgh in 2004, and in Houston in 2005. New York is not listed as a future site.
