The highly classified digest that provides President Bush with his daily intelligence updates is being scrutinized within the government and Congress after criticism that the information Mr. Bush has been given on Iraq and other matters has not reflected a broad range of views, senior administration and Congressional officials say.
Both the Central Intelligence Agency and the Senate Intelligence Committee, which voted on Thursday night to expand its inquiry on Iraq intelligence, have signaled their intent to examine the shaping and presentation of the daily briefing, the officials said Friday.
The inquiries were prompted in part by questions about whether prewar White House statements regarding Iraq and its illicit weapons were based on the best available intelligence on that subject, the officials said.
As much as any information the president receives from top aides, the daily briefing informs his view of the world, ranging across issues of terrorism, arms control, military events and more.
But under Mr. Bush, the number of intelligence agencies receiving the data was reduced, prompting complaints from senior officials in those agencies.
They say that because they do not know what is presented in the digest, prepared by the C.I.A.'s intelligence directorate, they have no way of challenging information with which they disagree, administration officials said.
Under previous administrations, the heads of agencies like the State Department's intelligence branch and the Defense Intelligence Agency were among those who received daily copies of the briefing document.
In the prewar debate on Iraq, other agencies, particularly the State Department's intelligence branch, were more skeptical of the idea that Iraq possessed illicit weapons than the C.I.A. was, the officials said.
The C.I.A. review was announced in an unpublicized address at the agency this week by Jami Miscik, the deputy director for intelligence, who said it would focus on the ''quality and approach taken'' in the preparation of the digest, formally known as the President's Daily Brief, or P.D.B.
The separate review by the Senate committee will consider whether the digests presented the White House with an accurate picture of prewar intelligence on Iraq, and whether they adequately reflected the views of intelligence agencies outside the C.I.A., senior congressional officials said.
In a telephone interview on Friday, Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the Senate panel, declined to say whether the panel was seeking to read the highly classified documents. But a senior Congressional official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said ''the P.D.B's have become a focus of greater interest on our part.''
A senior intelligence official said that the briefings often spelled out the views of agencies other than the C.I.A. ''if we know of competing views'' and that the reasons for the disagreements were explained.
A senior intelligence official also said representatives of the Defense Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency, the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and others also took part in a daily planning meeting at C.I.A. headquarters in which the contents of the presidential daily briefing document were mapped out in general terms.
In her speech, Ms. Miscik said the C.I.A. review would compare the approach adopted under President Bush with the one in place until 2000 under President Bill Clinton. An overhaul three years ago ''significantly improved the quality of the product we put in front of the president each morning,'' Ms. Miscik said, but the review would ''see if some of the strong points of our earlier approach have been lost.''
Ms. Miscik did not publicly describe the nature of the earlier changes. But a senior intelligence official said that under Mr. Bush, the intelligence digest included more operational, real-time information than before, including detail about the sources of intelligence that could not have been shared with a larger audience.
Intelligence officials said the C.I.A. review would not address the question of how widely the briefing should be distributed, a decision they said was up to the White House. But Congressional officials said that the Senate intelligence panel would be likely to address that issue.
A White House spokesman, Sean McCormack, said: ''The P.D.B. is a product prepared for the president, and each president decides the distribution of the P.D.B. President Bush decided at the start of his term that only his closest and most senior advisers should receive copies.''
On Thursday night, that Senate panel voted unanimously to expand the scope of its inquiry into intelligence on Iraq, to address not only whether the intelligence was well founded but whether public statements and testimony on Iraq by government officials ''were substantiated by intelligence information.''
The contents of the president's daily brief are so closely held that most Congressional and administration officials who have raised questions about the briefings given to Mr. Bush acknowledge that they have never been permitted to see the document. They say they do not know if the briefings on Iraq and other subjects reflected the general consensus of the intelligence community.
The White House asserts that the documents are covered by executive privilege. Even members of the Congressional commission that is investigating the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States have been permitted only limited access to the documents, under highly restricted circumstances.
The staff of the Senate Intelligence Committee still has not yet been able to strike an agreement with the White House that would allow it to review copies of the briefings on Iraq in the months before the war, as part of its broadened effort to compare the administration's public statements with prewar intelligence.
A joint statement issued by Senator Pat Roberts, the Kansas Republican who is the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, and Mr. Rockefeller said that other new areas the panel would review would include the role played by the Iraqi National Congress in providing information to intelligence agencies.
Some of the defectors introduced to American intelligence officers by the exile organization, which is headed by Ahmad Chalabi, were determined to have fabricated some of the information they shared about Iraq and its illicit weapons, according to intelligence officials.
Republicans had sought for months to block any widening of the Senate inquiry. In his own statement, Senator Rockefeller said that ''a few outstanding issues'' continued to divide Republicans and Democrats on the panel, but he said the two sides had ''made a lot of progress.''
''We will address the question of whether intelligence was exaggerated or misused by reviewing statements by senior policy makers to determine if those statements were substantiated by the intelligence,'' Senator Rockefeller said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INTELLIGENCE
