Awaiting the legions of fashion professionals filing into the Donna Karan show yesterday were copies of a magazine called Woman to Woman, one in which Ms. Karan wielded a heavy editorial hand. In it, she wrote about her summer vacation in the Maldives, where she learned to scuba dive, and in Corsica. (''The colors!'') Earlier, the reader learned, she ventured out to Sun Valley, where she was introduced to the work of a glass blower named William Morris. ''Glass blowing is extremely visceral and dangerous,'' Ms. Karan wrote. ''I got burned twice when I tried it myself!''
Mr. Morris is photographed across a two-page spread wearing an olive tank top, his muscles fully engaged as he plunges an iron rod into a burning furnace. ''Whether or not anyone sees the direct correlation, Bill's work greatly inspired this collection,'' Ms. Karan concluded.
The designer, a fledgling journalist and the promulgator of a vague spiritualism, was right in anticipating that some might see the connection as tenuous. Ms. Karan's show, the last shindig of the weeklong collections here, doubled as her 20th anniversary. The clothes neither served as an especially potent tribute to her past nor seemed to evoke the intensity of Mr. Morris's craft.
More than anything else, Ms. Karan's collection seemed suspended in a historical purgatory between the 1940's era of the femme fatale and the 1970's of ethnic discovery. Skirts and dresses were cut in zigzagging panels of body-hugging jersey. Shoes came with vaguely rounded toes and platform soles. From the back, the models looked like Bette Davis descending a staircase. From the front, they looked lifeless in their drab olives and burgundies -- women neither ripe with the experience of having been somewhere nor threatening to an insurance agent stopping by for a visit.
For years now, Ms. Karan's ethos has resisted sound-bite reduction, which is anathema in a business with the collective attention span of a 4-year-old. Ralph Lauren is the emperor of Seventh Avenue because he has sequestered his taste and interests exclusively in two Americas. His are not the two Americas of Mario Cuomo and John Edwards, of course, but those of Telluride and late-20th-century Connecticut.
His show yesterday merged geography to some extent. He layered Western references -- silver belts and chunks of turquoise -- with lean camel trousers and skirts of the sort not generally seen on the ranch. The colors played off each other beautifully. There was a disjointedness, though, when Mr. Lauren delivered fitted jackets matched with full fluted skirts that seemed a concession to the 1950's mood preoccupying other designers with a less consistent vision.
Richard Tyler's vision is consistent to the point of seeming utterly benighted. In his notes, Mr. Tyler explained that the Visconti movie ''The Damned'' moved him to produce the collection he showed yesterday. The clothes -- full-length white tuxedo coats, double-breasted suits worn with fedoras -- called to mind instead the indelible image of a career-peaking Celine Dion.
A stronger dose of cheerfulness was the commodity for sale at Michelle Smith's show for the popular Milly line. Ms. Smith nodded to the 1950's with cigarette pants, capelets and pastel coats with wide collars. No purveyor of dowdiness, Ms. Smith turned out creative prints: silk dresses emblazoned with gift boxes and full skirts splattered with poppies. No glass blowing, no excursions.
