''I hate chic,'' the actress Tilda Swinton was saying on Thursday night, at Jeffrey Deitch's gallery in SoHo. She was sipping a glass of white wine and circulating during the moments before a dinner party held in her honor, to celebrate her appearance on the cover of Paper magazine's latest issue, the theme of which is style.
''I don't know how people do Fashion Week,'' Adam Kalkin, an architect, was saying as he wandered with a companion through the $50,000 prefab Quik Build house that he had erected inside the gallery, in the living room of which the dinner party was being held. ''I couldn't take it for 10 minutes,'' he said.
''I'm finally done with Fashion Week, and now I'm having a Svedka vodka pear martini, and I'm starting to feel better already,'' Mandie Erickson, a fashion publicist, was saying as she drained one drink and deliberated the next. ''Actually, this is my second,'' Ms. Erickson said with what one might refer to as a distinct martini glow.
''Downtown is not Manhattan because Manhattan is so locked down now,'' Kim Hastreiter, a founding editor of Paper magazine and also a political activist, was saying. This was the same Ms. Hastreiter whom a friend once called a ''bang-down-the-doors, let-me-out-of-here lefty,'' and also one of a handful of editors responsible for keeping downtown alive. ''Downtown, at this point, is in your head,'' Ms. Hastreiter was saying as the guests were guided to their tables by a handsome young waiter named Lucas Noonan who is also a Golden Gloves boxer and the son of the singer Willie Nile.
''I'm looping Johnny Knoxville tomorrow morning at 6:30, so just one glass of wine,'' John Waters, the film director, was saying, referring to the star of his latest film, ''A Dirty Shame.'' Mr. Waters makes even compulsiveness a compulsion, a fact he illustrated by pointing out that the New Museum is displaying his photographs and artworks and a publisher is about to release a new edition of ''Crackpot,'' his classic Waters compendium, and Fine Line Features is preparing to enter for consideration at Cannes a movie the director has described at various times as being about either the discovery of a new sex act or else a woman who loses her sex drive after getting conked on the head.
''I love smoking,'' Mr. Waters said as he cast a hungry eye on the guests enjoying a rare opportunity to smoke in public. ''I used to smoke when I was swimming, when I was sleeping. I set the bed on fire.'' His addiction, he said, peaked at five packs a day.
''Smoking is actually just like yoga,'' Kai, a member of the design collective As Four, was saying while lighting a cigarette, although not one produced by Liberty, the company that sponsored As Four's shows last year. ''You are constantly aware of your breath and the circle of life,'' he said.
''I just had to cancel,'' the designer Maria Cornejo was saying, in response to a question about her abrupt withdrawal from last week's fashion shows. ''The truth is that, if you don't have a backer and the money for all the hype, you can't be in the business anymore, so I decided that I would rather pay my bills,'' she said.
''Have you seen Hopey?'' one dinner party guest was asking around, as he searched for Hope Atherton, the mediagenic artist who works with animal bones and carcasses collected by taxidermists and who recently said that ''To me, the beauty is seeing something for what it really is.'' Ms. Atherton happened to be deep in conversation with Justin Bond, whose gender-blurring performances as the addled lounge singer Kiki, of Kiki &amp; Herb, jab at conservative politics, beauty and fashion with the same wholesomely malicious glee.
''There is this dusty, powdery, self-conscious perfection about fashion'' in Europe, Ms. Swinton was saying as people around her leaned close to listen and also to gawp at a physical presence that is spookily lunar and reassuringly earthbound all at once. ''That's why I love Los Angeles,'' the actress added, saying that she now commutes between Los Angeles, where she has just finished shooting ''Thumbsucker'' with Keanu Reeves, and a house at the border of a Scottish wilderness where she is raising her children, twins. ''Chic gets outed in the L.A. sunshine,'' Ms. Swinton said with a grin. Every so often, the same thing happens even in the cold northern light of New York.
FASHION DIARY
