An assistant principal at a suburban high school near Albany said on Friday that instinct and ''just doing my job'' enabled him to subdue a 16-year-old student who wounded a teacher and fired at classmates with a shotgun on Monday.
The administrator and the teacher, who helped restrain the student, gave their first public accounts of the incident on the same day a local grand jury handed up an 86-count indictment against the student, Jon W. Romano, in the attack at Columbia High School here.
Many people believed that the assistant principal, John Sawchuck, and the teacher, Michael Bennett, prevented a blood bath.
At a news conference at the school, Mr. Sawchuck said he heard what he suspected was an explosion in a shop classroom on Monday morning and went to a second-floor hallway to check on it. ''Teachers and administrators step into the hallways to investigate noises and commotion all the time,'' he said. ''You do what you have to do.''
Along the way, Mr. Sawchuck asked for help from Mr. Bennett, a special-education teacher. The two did not know that the booms were two shots, which the police said Mr. Romano had fired from a pump-action shotgun at two students in the hallway, scattering birdshot into ceilings, walls, carpet, and windows.
The East Greenbush police chief, Christopher Lavin, said Mr. Romano had loaded his gun in a bathroom and walked into the hallway. He said that the student peered into a few classrooms but did not fire.
According to Chief Lavin, Mr. Sawchuck and Mr. Bennett turned into a hallway hazy with gun smoke; students were screaming and Mr. Romano, his back to the two men, was pointing the gun down the hallway, the chief said.
''I think he was as surprised as we were,'' Mr. Sawchuck said. Chief Lavin said that Mr. Sawchuck and Mr. Bennett rushed Mr. Romano, getting within tackling distance, when the student wheeled and fired, hitting Mr. Bennett in the calf.
The police chief said that Mr. Sawchuck reached Mr. Romano as the gun recoiled and the two fell to the ground. ''I just thank God I reacted quicker than he did,'' Mr. Sawchuck said, adding that he wrested the gun from Mr. Romano.
''We don't think we did anything unusual,'' said the administrator. ''As an educator and as a father, you protect kids. That's what we did.''
Asked how he felt about Mr. Romano, Mr. Sawchuck said, ''I'm grateful nobody got hurt, including Jon Romano.''
Mr. Romano was charged with one count of assault and three counts of attempted murder in the second degree for shooting Mr. Bennett and for firing his shotgun at the two students. Patricia DeAngelis, the Rensselaer County district attorney, said that the 82 counts of reckless endangerment pertained to students and teachers in the hallway at the time of the shotgun blasts.
Mr. Romano is being held without bail. If convicted, he could face more than 75 years in prison.
The Times Union of Albany reported earlier that Mr. Romano's mother, Lorraine Barde, had bought the gun for her son. Chief Lavin said that records from the Pistol Parlor, an East Greenbush gun store, show that the shotgun was bought there on Feb. 7, two days before the shooting. The police chief noted that the Pistol Parlor closed for business shortly after selling Mr. Romano's shotgun.
''The shotgun they sold Jon Romano may have been the last gun they sold,'' Chief Lavin said.
