Robert G. Torricelli, the former United States senator from New Jersey, is once again emerging as a principal fund-raiser for Democratic candidates and, as overseer of $2.3 million left from his own campaign fund, as a donor as well.
The ex-senator has come under scrutiny this week as his fund-raising efforts for Senator John Kerry's presidential campaign have drawn attention, leading some Democrats to distance themselves from Mr. Torricelli. Many others, however, are seeking support and receiving money from Mr. Torricelli, who dropped his 2002 re-election bid after accusations of ethical missteps and an admonishment from the Senate ethics committee for his relationship with a wealthy campaign donor.
''All of a sudden this guy who left national politics under a very dark cloud seems like one of the New Jerseyans who's going to have access to the Democratic nominee, and maybe the next president,'' said David Rebovich, a political scientist at Rider University in Lawrenceville, N.J.
Mr. Torricelli, through a spokesman, Richard McGrath, declined to discuss his plans. The former senator has no official role in the Kerry campaign, although ''he is an old friend and colleague'' of Senator Kerry, Mr. McGrath said. He has met with campaign organizers and offered to raise funds, however.
Republicans and many Democrats seized upon reports this week that Mr. Torricelli donated $50,000 to an organization that sponsored political advertisements attacking Howard Dean, who last month was Mr. Kerry's main rival in the Democratic presidential primaries. In an angry response, Dr. Dean said Mr. Torricelli had ''raised money from the same donors'' to contribute to Mr. Kerry and the Florida-based group that ran the advertisements, Americans for Jobs, Health Care and Progressive Values.
Mr. Torricelli's support for Mr. Kerry has put him at odds with Gov. James E. McGreevey, who endorsed Dr. Dean. ''Democrats in New Jersey are upset because early on they went to Dean,'' said a New Jersey political consultant, speaking on the condition of anonymity. ''There's a little bit of jealousy because the biggest name for Kerry in the state is Bob Torricelli.''
Mr. Torricelli's latest report to the Federal Election Commission, covering the fourth quarter of 2003, does not list any contributions to Mr. Kerry. Donations by Mr. Torricelli's committee included $20,000 to a labor-affiliated group called Grassroots Democrats and $15,000 to the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, a fund-raising arm of the national party.
Mr. Torricelli gave $10,000 to the campaign of Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich of Illinois, $25,000 to the joint committee working for Senator Harry Reid of Nevada and $10,000 to a potential gubernatorial candidate in California, Phil Angelides.
Mr. Torricelli also gave small contributions to New Jersey candidates. He sent $1,000 to David Del Vecchio, the mayor of Lambertville, near Mr. Torricelli's home, but because Mr. Torricelli was facing charges in court there in connection with a traffic accident, Mr. Del Vecchio said, he tore up the check to avoid any suggestion of impropriety. ''Given the circumstances that seemed like a good thing to do,'' he said.
Mr. Del Vecchio, who is also a county Democratic chairman, said he had accepted a donation from Mr. Torricelli before the accident.
In the two years since Mr. Torricelli left office and moved to Delaware Township, he has worked as a consultant, primarily on real estate deals. He was named by a federal judge to oversee an environmental cleanup project in Jersey City.
As the chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, Mr. Torricelli helped raise $50 million for the party in 2000. He angered the national party leadership, however, when in withdrawing from the Senate race in 2002 he refused to turn over campaign funds to his successor, Frank R. Lautenberg.
The remaining money, which one consultant called ''a trust fund for Democrats,'' is Mr. Torricelli's to distribute to other candidates and nonprofit groups. The money cannot be spent for personal use.
''I thought Torricelli would lie low for another couple of election cycles,'' Mr. Rebovich said. ''But the rules have changed. He was never convicted of any crime. In New Jersey we have plenty of people going to jail. So he might say, 'Why should I sit and mope?'''
