Cingular Wireless submitted a $35 billion bid yesterday for AT&amp;T Wireless, according to people close to the auction, while Vodafone was putting the final touches on its offer and Nextel was said to be considering one.
But NTT DoComo, which owns about a 17 percent stake in AT&amp;T Wireless and had indicated that it was exploring a bid, has decided against participating in the auction, these people said.
AT&amp;T Wireless is expected to meet today to consider the offers it does receive.
The deadline for bids was 5 p.m. yesterday. AT&amp;T Wireless, the nation's third-largest mobile phone company, did not disclose how many companies submitted offers or the amount of the bids.
Shares in AT&amp;T Wireless, which has risen steadily from about $7 in early December, rose 15 cents yesterday, to $11.82.
The auction comes at a time the mobile phone industry is engaged in intense competition, characterized by price wars and heavy marketing campaigns. The competition intensified last November after federal rules went into effect that allow cellphone customers to keep their phone numbers when they switch providers.
Over the holiday marketing season, the mobile phone companies battled each other vigorously to pick up new subscribers.
While the number transfer rules did not generate as much customer movement as some industry analysts expected, they did seem to reinforce the relative positions of the six major players, with Verizon Wireless and Nextel as the two appearing to gain the most in market share. AT&amp;T Wireless fared poorly, losing more than its share of customers.
The stumble by AT&amp;T Wireless on number transfers and other technical and operational difficulties over the course of last year, some analysts said, led to the company's decision to put itself up for sale.
Many on Wall Street have been arguing that the industry with six major players -- Verizon Wireless, Nextel, Sprint, T-Mobile USA, AT&amp;T Wireless and Cingular is due for consolidation because fierce competition will eliminate the weaker competitors.
Several Wall Street analysts have said that they hope Cingular wins the auction because that would cut the number of major carriers to five.
Conversely, if Vodafone, which does not have an independent mobile business in the United States, buys AT&amp;T Wireless, the market would still have six major separate mobile phone companies.
''If Cingular purchases AT&amp;T Wireless, it's a huge positive for the industry,'' said Kevin Roe, an analyst with Roe Equity Research. ''If Vodafone wins, it makes things worse.''
Mr. Roe noted that a Vodafone purchase would make competition tougher for others by replacing AT&amp;T Wireless with a company with deeper pockets.
Since AT&amp;T Wireless announced last month its intention to put itself up for sale, Wall Street analysts and traders have been consumed with speculation about who would bid, and for how much. The rumor mill has been fed in part by the companies involved in the auction, with each party pushing its own agenda.
For instance, it has been in AT&amp;T Wireless's interest to suggest that there would be numerous bidders, thus pushing up the amount of the offers.
