At Baghdad's Central Teaching Hospital for Children, gallons of raw sewage wash across the floors. The drinking water is contaminated. According to doctors, 80 percent of patients leave with infections they did not have when they arrived.
Doctors say they have been beaten up in the emergency room. Blood is in such short supply that physicians often donate their own to patients lying in front of them.
''The word 'big' is not enough to express the disaster we are facing,'' said Ahmed A. Muhammad, the hospital's assistant manager.
To be sure, Iraq's hospitals were in bleak shape before the American-led invasion last year. International isolation and the sanctions imposed after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 had already shattered a public health care system that was once the jewel of the Middle East. Crucial machines stopped working. Drugs were in short supply.
Conditions eased a bit once the United Nations oil-for-food program started in 1996, but the country still suffered, especially the children.
But Iraqi doctors say the war has pushed them closer to disaster. Fighting and sabotage have destroyed crucial infrastructure and the fall of Saddam Hussein precipitated a breakdown in social order.
''It's definitely worse now than before the war,'' said Eman Asim, the Ministry of Health official who oversees the country's 185 public hospitals. ''Even at the height of sanctions, when things were miserable, it wasn't as bad as this. At least then someone was in control.''
Occupation authorities insist improvements are coming.
''I've been all around the country and we're better than prewar levels across the board,'' said Bob Goodwin, an American health adviser for the Coalition Provisional Authority who has been working with the Health Ministry since last summer.
He said that many hospitals had new generators and new wiring and that the distribution of medical supplies was fairer now than it was under Mr. Hussein's clannish rule.
But, he added, ''there are so many problems, sometimes it is hard to stay on top of everything.''
''When we took over in April, it was a total system collapse,'' he said. ''The Health Ministry was literally on fire.''
The fire may be out, but Iraqi doctors say their profession has yet to recover. Hospital administration, which used to be strictly managed top-down, has atomized into hundreds of disparate parts.
The violence on the streets has seeped into the wards, with attacks on staff members and feuds being finished in the corridors.
And the list goes on. While Health Ministry officials say no comprehensive health survey has been conducted since the war, several doctors here said that infant mortality is up. Of 48 babies recently brought to the neonatal clinic at Yarmuk Hospital, 19 died, said Tala al-Awqati, a pediatrician. ''That is twice as many as last year,'' she said.
She also said that more women were choosing to give birth at home, increasing the chances of complications, because they were frightened of venturing into the streets to deliver at a hospital.
The Red Cross and the United Nations used to run health programs in Iraq. But after the headquarters of both organizations were bombed last year, foreign experts pulled out.
Doctors also said that the postwar sabotage of the country's primary pharmaceutical factory in Samarra and the looting of the central supply depot in Baghdad had depleted the country of needed supplies.
''Last week a man bled to death right in front of me because we didn't have any IV's,'' said Ali Qasim, an emergency room doctor at Baghdad Central Hospital.
Then there is the experiment with democracy. After Mr. Hussein's government fell, doctors decided to pick their own leaders. ''They told us this is the democratic way,'' said Dr. Asim, the Health Ministry official. ''Now we have dentists in charge of surgery centers.''
Despite signs of a public health crisis, medical experts here say it is hard to get foreign donors to pay attention. ''Bombs and elections -- that's all people on the outside seem interested in,'' said Khalil Sayyad, head of the Baghdad office of Médicos del Mundo, a Spanish organization working on health projects.
American officials say things will get better. It will just take time. Last year, $550.6 million was spent on public health in Iraq, according to the Health Ministry. This year, it is expected to increase to $1.7 billion, including nearly $500 million to fix crumbling infrastructure and build new facilities.
Before the sanctions, Baghdad Central offered 11 gleaming floors of state-of-the-art health care. Now it is a grubby expanse of cracked tile, bald hallways and drafty rooms.
Dr. Asim, the Health Ministry official, recently inspected 40 hospitals around the country. ''There were days I came back crying,'' she said.
Many problems predate the war, like the flowing sewage at the children's hospital. The hospital sits at a low point in the city. Whenever sewage backs up, waste pours into the basement and trickles into the wards.
''Can you hear it?'' asked Dr. Muhammad during a recent visit.
The gushing liquid sounded like a fountain.
Doctors said the problem had gotten worse since the war because of a lack of maintenance.
American officials said they were aware of the hospital's condition and that the Spanish government had pledged $11 million to fix it.
Upstairs, past the banana peels and crushed cigarettes, is a ward for treating dehydrated children. Women leaned over babies with thin faces and wide-open eyes.
''Habibee,'' said a young mother to a bundled mass. ''Don't cry.''
Another mother, Sama Hamid, said the hospital used to be much cleaner. ''Nobody has discipline any more,'' she said.
Outside, an ambulance driver, Mahir Jalal, said he sometimes ran errands in his vehicle. ''If they need me,'' he said, ''they can find me.''
A few months ago, Dr. Hafiz Hussein was signing the death certificate for a newborn who had just died in his arms when the baby's relatives stormed into the emergency room. He said the men grabbed him and hit him in the face about 20 times.
''I felt such shame,'' Dr. Hussein said. ''The child died and I got beaten in front of my colleagues for it.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: MEDICAL CARE
