President Bush moved on Friday night to try to stem potentially damaging election-year questions about his military record and whether the White House mishandled intelligence threats before the Sept. 11 attacks.
In dual announcements capping a week of intense political pressure on Mr. Bush, the White House said it had decided to release all documents from the president's National Guard files and, within hours, disclosed that Mr. Bush would appear before a commission investigating the terrorist attacks.
But the hundreds of pages of National Guard files contain no new evidence and are unlikely to change the basic standoff between Mr. Bush and the Democrats, which is where, when and how often the president showed up for duty from May 1972 to May 1973.
The White House maintains that Guard payroll records, a dental exam that Mr. Bush had in Alabama and the undisputed fact that he was living there during the time in question definitively prove that he turned up for duty. Mr. Bush's critics say the documents prove only that he had his teeth checked in Alabama on Jan. 6, 1973.
The White House has been consumed for days with responding to attacks on the president's truthfulness, especially about his military service 30 years ago.
The only document in the two-inch-thick stack that puts Mr. Bush in Alabama in that period is a document that the White House released on Wednesday, a copy of a dental exam performed at Dannelly Air National Guard base in Montgomery on Jan. 6, 1973.
The documents also include glowing reports from Mr. Bush's superiors on his performance as a pilot in training.
''Lt. Bush is an exceptional fighter interceptor pilot and officer,'' Lt. Col. Jerry B. Killian wrote in an evaluation dated May 26, 1972, when Mr. Bush was serving in Texas. ''He eagerly participates in scheduled unit activities.''
Colonel Killian added that Mr. Bush's major strength was ''his ability to work with others.''
The White House released the documents with little advance notice at 6:30 p.m., after much of the staff had left for a long holiday weekend. It seemed to be as much an effort at public relations as an attempt to quiet Mr. Bush's critics, at least temporarily, by demonstrating the president's willingness to be open about his military service.
The announcement that Mr. Bush would appear before the 9/11 commission came less than a half-hour later, shortly before 7 p.m., in a short statement e-mailed to reporters by the White House. In it, the White House said Mr. Bush had agreed to a request for a private meeting with the commission, which is led by Thomas H. Kean, a former Republican governor of New Jersey.
There was some indication that the president wanted to swiftly address two nagging controversies that had dominated the White House press briefing room and much of the television airwaves and was in effect going home for the weekend and trying to start afresh next week.
''He sees the silliness going on in the briefing room,'' Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director, said. ''He says, 'Put it out.' ''
Republicans, who had grown increasingly restive as the White House found itself under attack, generally applauded the moves.
''Bush is seeking to get back on offense, and good for him,'' said Rich Bond, the former chairman of the Republican National Committee. ''By settling these two items for now, Bush can move past them.''
Scott Reed, a Republican strategist and the campaign manager for Bob Dole in the 1996 presidential contest, said it was good idea that Mr. Bush meet with the 9/11 commission in private. ''They were wise to shut that door quickly because no president should have to go through that,'' Mr. Reed said.
In announcing that Mr. Bush would submit to questions from the Sept. 11 commission, the White House statement suggested that the president would not appear in public but would meet with a delegation of the commissioners in private.
''The president has agreed to the request,'' the statement said. ''While the chair and vice chair have suggested the possibility of a public session at a later time, we believe the president can provide all the requested information in the private meeting, and there is no need for any additional testimony.''
It was unclear how much of Mr. Bush's testimony would eventually be made public in a commission report. But commission officials said that much of the testimony might have to remain secret because it would almost certainly deal with highly classified intelligence matters.
Commission officials said that a letter requesting testimony from Mr. Bush had been delivered to the White House only late on Friday afternoon. On Thursday, the commission announced that it intended to seek testimony from Mr. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney, former President Bill Clinton and former Vice President Al Gore, as well as several senior White House officials and cabinet officers in the Bush administration.
Commission officials said that they had a tentative commitment from Mr. Cheney, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore to submit to questioning as well.
''The commission is delighted that the president has responded favorable to the invitation to appear at a private session,'' said Al Felzenberg, the panel's spokesman. ''There will now be meetings between the commission staff and White House aides about time and place and format.''
The decision to accept the commission's invitation for testimony carries political risks for Mr. Bush because it will be the first time he has been subjected to extensive outside questioning about his actions in the weeks and months before the Sept. 11 attacks. He also could be questioned about whether he had intelligence before Sept. 11 that suggested a catastrophic attack was being planned on American soil.
In addition, Mr. Bush can expect to be questioned extensively about an intelligence briefing report that he received on Aug. 6, 2001, that suggested that Al Qaeda might be planning a major terrorist attack using commercial airplanes. The White House has declined to release the briefing papers but has confirmed news reports that they contained the warning.
The commission, known formally as the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, has required all of its witnesses at public hearings to be placed under oath.
But it has generally not required witnesses who testify in private sessions to be sworn in, and commission officials have said it was unclear whether Mr. Bush would be asked to testify under oath.
Mr. Felzenberg said it was also too early to say if the commission would press for Mr. Bush to appear at a public hearing as well. He said the letter to Mr. Bush on Friday afternoon requested a private meeting but also noted that the commission would ''welcome'' public testimony, as well.
Mr. Bush, who initially opposed creation of an independent commission to investigate the Sept. 11 attacks, has had a strained relationship with the panel.
Until Friday, Mr. Bush had been unwilling to say if he would submit to questioning from the panel.
In a similar way, the White House went back and forth all week on how many of Mr. Bush's National Guard documents it would release. In an interview Sunday on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, Mr. Bush promised that he would release his entire military file, but Mr. Bush's aides backed off that pledge this week, saying that Mr. Bush would only make public those documents ''relevant'' to his service.
They moved Friday night to end the dispute by releasing all the documents, which they said had only arrived in Washington on Friday afternoon from a National Guard personnel records center in Denver.
''This is absolutely everything,'' Mr. Bartlett told reporters.
Many of the previously unreleased documents that the White House made public on Friday were Mr. Bush's National Guard medical examinations from 1968, 1970 and 1971, all of which certified him for flight training in Texas.
The White House also more definitively explained than it has in the past why Mr. Bush skipped a 1972 National Guard medical exam, which has been a source of enormous speculation from Mr. Bush's critics, who have suggested he did so because drug testing was introduced around that time.
The records show that Mr. Bush was suspended from flying beginning Aug. 1, 1972 because he failed to take the exam. His last flight exam was on May 15, 1971.
Mr. Bartlett said Mr. Bush missed the exam because he felt there was no reason to take it. Mr. Bush, he said, had begun his training in 1968 with the Air National Guard in Texas, where he flew a fighter jet, the F-102. When he moved to Alabama in 1972 to work in the Senate campaign of a friend of his father, Mr. Bush transferred to an Alabama unit of the Guard that did not fly the same plane. Because there was no way Mr. Bush could fly planes in Alabama, Mr. Bartlett said, he did not bother to report for the medical exam.
Mr. Bartlett acknowledged that his explanation would probably not stop Mr. Bush's critics. ''They're never going to be satisfied,'' he said. ''Their intent was not the truth. Their intent was trolling for trash.''
