The song could belong to Shawn Colvin, Beth Orton, Carly Simon. It is sweet and whiny. Plaintive (for what other word exactly applies?), the Lilith Fair-like lament comes about two-thirds of the way through ''It Must Be Love,'' a movie having its premiere tonight on CBS.
Possibly the gloriously slurred and sad-smiling drawl of Mary Steenburgen, who stars in the movie and talks through much of it, tunes the ear to this song's register. Certainly the movie's depiction of an unraveled marriage as it reravels puts one in a wistful mood. And thus the simple chords and the lyric -- ''My head is spinning and I need some peace tonight'' -- sound gratifying, even personal. Clem (Ms. Steenburgen) and George (Ted Danson, Ms. Steenburgen's husband) are the Gazelles, a longtime couple who, in a lazy way, have come to dislike each other. You can see why. Clem is gluttonous and fussy; George is pompous and unfaithful.
George also foists a loopy modernist aesthetic on Clem, who diffidently just wants a comfortable chair. But lest her modest desires make her appear all virtue, Clem is also annoying, hauling bags of ''car food'' on a road trip, blabbing without cease and gobbling cheese puffs.
After their daughter's wedding, at which Clem endeavors to replicate a Native American ritual by having guests set costly butterflies free (George finds his dead), the Gazelles hit the road in a 1982 Airstream. The purpose of their trip, which takes them from Connecticut to Maine, is to agree on the terms of a divorce. They plan to separate their possessions and, with the pressure off, pay emotional debts by admitting affairs and resentments.
Though ''It Must Be Love'' provides a gateway to Valentine's Day, the movie convincingly entertains the possibility that the Gazelles will really split. Ms. Steenburgen and Mr. Danson are good at getting on each other's nerves. They appear tired of each other's bodies.
This malaise only grows when George drives off the road and gets the RV stuck in the snowy woods. He and Clem blame each other, getting nasty. Worse still, they talk very loudly, as if onstage. This choice, possibly a directing error, makes both of them seem more divorceable.
Written by the playwright Beth Henley, ''It Must Be Love'' features elliptical dialogue, and its characters are certifiably morally ambiguous. Furthermore, steel furniture and precious wedding contrivances, especially those with some righteous atavism, are funny. In fact, this better-than-average weepie seems to be hitting its marks very nicely.
Then there's Bobby.
''We raised two children together,'' George says.
''We raised three children together,'' Clem says.
''Yes, of course, three.''
''You always forget Bobby.''
''No, I don't.''
''Well.''
Bobby is, of course, the couple's buried child. He is such a sorry plot device that no more will be said of him.
Back at the Gazelles' misbegotten modern pile in Hartford, their two children hold a vigil for them. Finally, the missing parents, who can't get a cellphone signal, merit the involvement of a search team.
And as surely as spring follows winter, the Gazelles begin to soften. Clem comes down with a respiratory infection. George develops frostbite. Living on Twizzlers and marshmallows, they nuzzle, joke and reminisce.
This is not bad on balance. The clash of the cutesy and the vain modern makes a hearty theme in a comedy of remarriage. Ms. Henley almost seems to be grieving for shopworn theatrics. The Gazelles' redemption comes, in the end, when they manage to escape Noël Coward-style repartee and the boozy tragedies of the 20th century. This allows them to come triumphantly into the present, leaving the pretensions of macabre family life, as we've seen it too many times onstage, behind.
IT MUST BE LOVE  CBS, tomorrow night at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.
Directed by Steven Schachter; Wendy Hill-Tout, Michael Jaffe, Howard Braunstein and Keri Selig, executive producers; Mimi Riley and Michelle Wong, co-producers; Irene Litinsky, producer; written by Beth Henley, based on the short story ''Rediscovered Love'' by Nancy Whitmore, from the book ''Meant to Be'' by Barry and Joyce Vissell. Produced by Voice Pictures and Jaffe/Braunstein Films in asociation with Intuition Films.
WITH: Ted Danson (George Gazelle), Mary Steenburgen (Clem Gazelle), Erin Karpluk (Tess Gazelle), Adam Nicholas Frost (Joe Gazelle), Polly Holliday (Mama Bell) and Bonnie Bartlett (Kate Gazelle).
TELEVISION REVIEW
