LIKE many Americans, Alicia Adrian of Tampa, Fla., dreamed of running her own business. So when Mrs. Adrian, a longtime computer programmer, was offered a chance to take over a Web design firm two years ago, she jumped at it.
Then Mrs. Adrian ran into a problem, one that had the potential to turn her life into a nightmare of wrangling with the Internal Revenue Service.
She kept her business records on a personal computer that failed. The only backup was a shoebox filled with unsorted receipts, some of which, she said, had been inadvertently tossed out by her husband.
The receipts showed that the business hardly made a profit, making the records especially valuable since no one wants to pay taxes on income they did not have.
''I don't know what to do,'' Mrs. Adrian wrote in an Internet newsgroup before last year's deadline. ''I am not even going to file, because if I file, it will be so screwed up that I will be audited and then what do I do?''
Tax woes can sink a nascent small business, even when little or no taxes are owed, just by diverting time and attention from the business. Preventing such problems is not all that hard, especially with inexpensive accounting software to track spending.
''The fact is that 67 percent of all audit disputes revolve around poor records,'' said Daniel J. Pilla, a tax litigation consultant in White Bear Lake, Minn., and the author of ''The I.R.S. Problem Solver.''
''So if businesses did nothing but have a comprehensive guide to what kinds of records they need to keep,'' Mr. Pilla said, ''they could avoid most audits,''
Businesses can face penalties of 25 percent for not filing on time, and another 25 percent for not paying taxes on time, Mr. Pilla said. Nina E. Olson, the taxpayer advocate for the I.R.S., reports that the I.R.S. assesses more than $18 billion a year in penalties, with about half of that amount eventually withdrawn or forgiven.
Frederick W. Daily, a tax lawyer in Incline Village, Nev., and the author of ''Tax Savvy for Small Business: Year-Round Strategies to Save You Money,'' advises small businesses with more than one or two employees to consider a payroll tax service. ''It is a relatively inexpensive thing to do,'' he said, ''and they will see to it you file and pay on time.''
The largest payroll service for small employers is Paychex. For a company with two employees who are paid weekly, the service charges an average of $14 a week for payroll services plus $10 for handling tax payments, prices similar to those of competitors.
Even if the business is too short of cash to pay taxes, it is critical to file every tax document on time so that any penalties are only for paying late, not for filing late, said Martin S. Kaplan, a New York accountant and the author of ''What the I.R.S. Doesn't Want You to Know: A C.P.A. Reveals the Tricks of the Trade.''
''The people at the I.R.S. are just like you and me -- they hate to be ignored,'' Mr. Kaplan said. ''So answer their correspondence, whatever it is, right away.''
Trying to avoid the issue by treating employees as independent contractors, whose pay is reported on Form 1099, is also a good way to get into trouble with the I.R.S. and the state tax authorities, Mr. Kaplan and other experts said.
Harvey J. Shulman, a tax lawyer in Washington who represents companies involved in disputes with the I.R.S., said respecting the formalities of paperwork was crucial. ''Having proper contracts is vital because, the government doesn't have to prove that you were wrong, you have to prove that you were right,'' Mr. Shulman said.
Ms. Olson, the taxpayer advocate, has recommended that Congress impose modest withholding on payments to independent contractors, with a basic rate of 5 percent. Doing so, she said, would lessen pressure to treat independent contractors as employees while ensuring that taxes are paid. The idea is opposed by some antitax groups.
Mr. Kaplan said one way to reduce the risk of an audit is to avoid filing the tax form for sole proprietorships, a Schedule C, and to spend the $400 or so needed in filing fees to become a limited liability company or partnership. ''The I.R.S. audit rate for Schedule C's is as high as one in 60,'' he said, ''but for other entities it is about one in 400.''
GAME PLANS
