For Giorgio Armani, long the king of Italian fashion and the designer of choice for stars in Hollywood, the world has seemed a harsh place lately. Fashion editors have dismissed his styles as no longer cutting-edge. Industry analysts say his clientele is too old. Store buyers gently whisper to him that, at age 69, he really should be choosing a successor to run his privately owned empire.
But Mr. Armani and his representatives are fighting back. They cite retail data indicating that the global sales of Giorgio Armani S.A. -- 1.26 billion euros ($1.58 billion) in 2003, down from 1.3 billion euros -- have remained fairly constant and that most of the company's American department store business has actually increased in the last year. They provide dozens of recent photos of Armani-clad young celebrities -- including the 22-year-old singer Beyoncé Knowles -- to demonstrate the label's currency.
And yesterday in Milan, Mr. Armani, still the company's chief designer, kept his signature tans, grays and blacks, but displayed them on some adventurous silhouettes, in a major runway show of the fall line, which he called ''Eccentricity.''
This past weekend, Mr. Armani ventured onto new business terrain by signing a deal with a real estate developer based in Dubai to help produce 14 Armani-brand hotels. Mr. Armani's participation would include contributing more than $100 million of his Casa home furnishings line for buildings planned in Dubai, and London, New York, Paris and Tokyo among other locations. An aide said yesterday that although the team was still scouting locations, it was committed to building six hotels and two resorts in the next five years.
Meanwhile, in a nod to the brand extensions of other designers, like Chanel and Dior, Mr. Armani is ramping up his company's production of shoes and handbags -- complete with a new emphasis on Armani logos.
''It surprised me, too,'' he said in a recent interview with a reporter who could not helping arching an eyebrow at the large ''Emporio Armani'' logo across the instep of a skyscraper-heeled sandal. ''But they tell me this is what sells.''
At the same interview, in his yellow stucco 16th-century palazzo -- around the corner from the Via Montenapoleone, Milan's fanciest shopping street -- he wryly agreed with his critics' contention that his clientele is growing old with him. ''It's true that the Giorgio Armani customer is a certain age,'' said Mr. Armani, speaking in Italian and nodding to the white-jacketed servant dishing out risotto and veal Milanese in his dining room. ''You have to be a certain age to afford my clothes.''
But Mr. Armani means to keep those older customers, while enticing younger ones by expanding the color palette for this summer, then changing the shapes for next fall. Regardless of the age group being targeted, Armani's couture collection never goes cheap. Dresses start at $1,000 and can top $10,000. The entry-level buyer, might have to make do with a form-fitting neoprene jacket from the Armani Jeans line, for $250.
As further evidence that Armani remains a draw, the company notes that Mr. Armani's one-man show at the Royal Academy in London, which closed last week, consisted of seven rooms devoted to his particular brand of fashion. Over the last three decades he has been credited with taking men away from big stiff shoulders and easing women into tailored business suits.
But there are those who wonder if -- like Chanel, Dior and Gucci have done -- Giorgio Armani S.A. can reinvent itself.
''He created the wardrobe for women in the 90's,'' said Alexander Vreeland, who oversaw sales and licensing for Armani USA from 1989 to 2001, and now produces lines for Calvin Klein and Ungaro. ''The question is whether he can create the wardrobe for women today. People are saying what he's creating is not for the modern woman.''
If Mr. Armani can succeed in proving his critics wrong, it would not be the first time.
In 1985, after the death of his personal and business partner, Sergio Galeotti, Mr. Armani faced a barrage of questions about whether his business could survive. Until then, Mr. Galeotti had managed the financial side of the business while Mr. Armani focused on fashion.
Spurning merger offers from some of the biggest names in fashion, Mr. Armani shouldered both jobs, and the company continued to grow -- accumulating sizable chunks of Milanese real estate along the way. These include the large Armani store, just off the Via Montenapoleone, that offers all the label's latest fashion lines, as well Armani cosmetics, Armani flowers, Armani sweets and the Armani cafe (whose menu recently featured ''warty venus and small quenelles of caviar'' for 23 euros).
So this time around, Mr. Armani says he is not worried by the comments of naysayers, like the industry executive who recently said: ''Armani used to own Hollywood; now it's an open playing field: the agents wear Gucci and Prada. The starlets wear Chanel, Dolce &amp; Gabbana -- and Armani.''
There may be more competition, but Britney Spears and Ashanti have both appeared at public events in the last year wearing Armani. On Style.com, a popular Web site about celebrity fashions, the current picture of Halle Berry shows her in a clingy apricot Armani gown. And this Sunday evening, at the Academy Awards ceremony, Julia Roberts plans to wear a gown especially created by Mr. Armani. ''She didn't go to anyone else,'' said Marcy Engelman, her publicist. ''She just wanted to wear Armani.''
And Mr. Armani can note that his garments are still rolling off the assembly lines, in factories he owns.
On a recent day, in a clothing factory in Antinea, a manufacturing town between Venice and Milan, hundreds of pairs of glitzy, highly beaded and sequined women's slacks, encased in plastic bags, sped along an overhead mechanized rack, routed by computer to niches on the second floor, each niche corresponding to an American department store.
Altogether, Armani says it has sold 5,486 pairs of those pants to buyers in the United States for the spring/summer collection: 2,590 to Saks Fifth Avenue, 1,251 to Neiman Marcus, 473 pairs to Nordstrom and the rest to American specialty stores.
The Armani team offers those statistics to help rebut rumors that the label's sales are declining in United States department stores. They concede that American department stores contribute less to the company's overall business -- 28 percent in 2002, compared with 31 percent in 2001 -- but they say it is simply because the business elsewhere, particularly Europe, is growing.
According to the company, Armani sales at Saks Fifth Avenue stores were up 8.3 percent last year, up 5.6 percent at Neiman-Marcus stores and 5.1 percent at the various Bloomingdales -- figures generally confirmed by the stores. The only major American store where sales declined, Armani says, were at Bergdorf Goodman, the retailer owned by Neiman-Marcus, where they were down 4.6 percent.
But Bergdorf is not giving up on Armani. The store on Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan has put the new Armani on its reconstructed second floor, alongside some of the hottest names in fashion: Gucci, Chanel and Dolce &amp; Gabbana.
''We could have put them on the fourth floor, next to the more traditional names -- Oscar de la Renta, Carolina Herrera -- but we didn't,'' Robert Burke, the fashion director at Bergdorf, said during a recent tour of the remodeled second floor. ''We talked with them, we've worked with them. We have been proven right. We are getting a lot more young people.'' He pointed to a tight red sweater dress. ''Look at that red dress,'' he said. ''You'd have to be pretty young to wear that.''
The main thing that seems to concern American retailers about Giorgio Armani -- the man and the company -- is who will run the business after the founder. ''We have loyal clients, who want to keep wearing his clothes,'' said Suzanne Patneaude, the vice president for designer apparel at Nordstrom. ''If and when he decides to step down.''
Dining in his palazzo, Mr. Armani confided that he planned to retire in five years. And then?
Although he has two nieces and a nephew who work in crucial management and design roles at the company, ''there is no one chosen,'' he said before smiling broadly. For now, ''I like being in control too much to give it up.''
