With the confidence of a native New Yorker, Paul S. Plemenos, the principal owner of the New York/New Jersey Juggernaut of the National Pro Fastpitch softball league, took the first step yesterday toward carving out a sports niche in the shadows of the Yankees, the Mets and the Liberty.
In introducing the Juggernaut as the the first women's professional softball team to play in this region, Plemenos, who was born in Jamaica, Queens, and grew up in Whippany, N.J., said he knew what it would take to make it in New York.
Speaking at a news conference at the Yogi Berra Museum and Learning Center in Little Falls, N.J., Plemenos noted that 12 million people are within the 100-mile radius of the Montclair State softball stadium, where the Juggernaut will play its home games.
''Our venues seat 1,500,'' said Plemenos, a 35-year-old money manager. ''If we draw 2,000 a night that means we've got 500 standing.''
The Juggernaut does not expect to compete with the Yankees or the Mets, or even the Liberty, for that matter. The demographic may be similar -- girls and boys ages 6 to 17 -- but softball also draws its next-biggest fan base from men ages 21 to 55.
''We're such a different game,'' Plemenos said of women's fastpitch. ''We're more like minor league baseball and we've got these incredible, attractive athletes, engaged in a very competitive, fast-pace game.''
Michael Kafantaris, 32, a bond trader from Brooklyn, is the other owner of the Juggernaut, one of eight teams in the recently restructured league, formerly the Women's Pro Softball League. Juggernaut Manager Linda Derk, first baseman/outfielder Erika Hanson and pitcher Michele Smith were also at the news conference yesterday.
Derk led the Tampa Bay FireStix of the W.P.S.L. to the 1999 championship and was named coach of the year. Smith, a New Jersey native, is a two-time Olympic gold medalist.
The team, which has already signed 14 of its 16-player roster to contracts, opens its 58-game season June 1, with a three-game homestand against the New England Riptide.
Plemenos and Derk, who is also the vice president for softball operations, have built the team around pitching. Kaci Clark, the W.P.S.L. most valuable player in 1999, and Amanda Scott, a four-time all-American at Fresno State, are the other pitchers.
''We're playing the game at 43 feet, as opposed to 40 feet, which is a challenge,'' said Derk of the distance between the mound and home plate.
Major League Baseball is working with the league and with teams like the Juggernaut to attract sponsors. The league is currently in contract talks with ESPN for the 2005 season.
SOFTBALL
