Skuas' North Sea Diet
For great skuas and other scavenging birds of the North Sea, there's no longer such a thing as a free lunch. With severe restrictions on the fishing industry because of depleted stocks in recent years, an important food source for these birds -- fish innards and undersized catch tossed off commercial boats -- has markedly declined.
Now a team of European researchers has tried to determine the ecological effects of the demise of the gravy train. Their conclusion, in the case of great skuas at least, is that the decline in discards will affect other seabird communities as the skuas start preying on other smaller birds like fulmars and kittiwakes.
The researchers used figures on fish discards from 1986 to 2002 and on the skuas' diet from a 30-year study of the largest colony in the world, in the Shetland Islands. In addition to fish discards and other birds, skuas eat sand eels, tiny shoaling fish.
The study, reported in the journal Nature, found a strong correlation between the low availability of discards and of sand eels (which have been in a long-term decline, as well) and a greater proportion of seabirds in the diet.
Other studies have shown the effects that skuas can have on other birds. One population of black-legged kittiwakes in the Shetlands was reduced by more than half over 15 years because of predation by skuas.
The researchers do not suggest that discard rates be increased or even maintained. That would be foolhardy, given the dire state of North Sea fish stocks. But scientists suggest that attention be given to conserving sand eel populations, so that the skuas have something to eat besides other birds.
Crabs Come Knocking
In the words of the immortal Kenny Rogers, you've got to know when to hold 'em, know when to fold 'em. And what's true for gamblers, apparently, is true for hermit crabs, too.
Studies of common European hermit crabs by scientists at Queen's University Belfast show that when one crab attacks another, the defender evaluates its chances and, if it senses a lost cause, gives up without wasting any energy, in the form of glucose and glycogen, on a fight.
Hermit crabs fight when one desires the shell of another. The covetous crab first performs a little war dance and then attacks the other by pounding on its shell. The defender either holds on and outlasts the attacker or gives up, releasing its grip on the shell and allowing the attacker to evict it forcefully.
The researchers set up fights between male crabs of unequal size and then measured glycogen and glucose levels in the crabs' muscles after the fights. (Unfortunately for the crabs, that was done by freezing them immediately afterward.) In fights that the defender won, it used up energy holding on to its shell. In fights that ended in eviction, the defender used little or no energy.
The researchers, who reported on their work in The Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences, suggest that the defender crab knows when to fold 'em based on the strength and frequency of the punches to its shell.
If the pounding is soft and there is a pause between each hit, the defender knows the attacker is weak and decides to put up a fight. But if the pounding is strong and steady, the defender decides that discretion is the better part of valor.
Biggest in the Belt
Astronomers have discovered what may be the largest object in the Kuiper Belt (except Pluto), a planetoid roughly 1,000 miles in diameter that is more than 4 billion miles from Earth.
The object was discovered by scientists from Caltech, Yale and the Gemini Observatory of Hawaii in images taken on Feb. 17 using a telescope on Palomar Mountain in California. Although its exact size is yet to be determined, it probably eclipses Quaoar, which is about 750 miles in diameter and was discovered by the same team in 2002.
Observatory
