Hormone replacement for women past their childbearing years was originally popularized with the promise that taking estrogen could keep women ''feminine forever'' -- preserving their health, skin, bones, muscles, brains and, especially, their sexual pleasure. Now our youth-oriented culture has spawned another rush to fountain of youth drugs, this time testosterone for men.
As with estrogen, testosterone -- the hormone that surges in puberty to turn boys into men -- is known to act on myriad tissues in the body, either directly or through its derivatives. Various studies have documented the influences of testosterone on bones, muscles, strength, stamina, abdominal fat, hair, mood, cognitive functions like memory and, of course, libido and potency.
Also documented is the gradual decline in testosterone production that occurs as men age. After 30, blood levels of both total testosterone and biologically active free testosterone decline by 1 to 2 percent a year, so that by 70 a man's testosterone production may have dropped by a third.
These facts have generated a soaring demand for the drug, especially when coupled with the development of new ways to deliver the hormone and with the publicity surrounding them. In 2002, nearly two million prescriptions for testosterone were written, up from 648,000 three years earlier, according to a committee of the National Academy of Sciences' Institute of Medicine, which in November urged a go-slow approach to testosterone replacement.
Given the shocking recent discovery of potentially serious ill effects of hormone replacement for women, it is hardly surprising that many experts are warning against assuming that supplemental testosterone is safe and effective for men experiencing the normal effects of aging.
The Issue of Safety
A major problem is that most studies of testosterone replacement have been too small and too short to demonstrate long-term safety and health benefits. It was not until thousands of women had been randomly assigned to take hormone replacement or a placebo that serious risks became apparent and the belief that the hormones benefited the heart was shown to be unfounded.
No one denies the value of countering encroaching frailty, weakness, failing memories and loss of sexual function in aging men. But the institute's committee recommended that even before a large long-term clinical trial is started to explore the safety and effectiveness of testosterone replacement, smaller studies should be conducted to see whether the hormone can treat age-related problems. Only then can a lengthy preventive study of thousands of otherwise healthy men be justified, the committee maintained.
If its recommendations are followed, it could be decades before the answers are known. Meanwhile, men who choose to take testosterone have only preliminary research to go on. Dr. Ernani Luis Rhoden and Abraham Morgentaler, urologists at the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and the Harvard Medical School, reviewed what was known about the drug in The New England Journal of Medicine on Jan. 29.
A major concern is the possibility of promoting heart disease, which men tend to develop earlier than women. In their review, the physicians found ''few, if any, data'' to support a causal relationship between higher testosterone levels and heart disease. ''Indeed,'' they wrote, ''several studies suggest that higher testosterone levels may actually have a favorable effect on the risk of cardiovascular disease.'' Nor did they find evidence that the hormone, taken in normal amounts, unfavorably affects blood lipids, including either good cholesterol, H.D.L., or bad cholesterol, L.D.L. The second major concern is a possible effect on enlargement of the prostate and cancer in it. In men with low testosterone, administering the hormone increases the size of the prostate, but only to the size in men with normal hormone levels, the researchers wrote. A greater fear is promoting the growth of a hidden prostate cancer because it has been known since 1941 that suppressing testosterone production causes prostate cancer to regress. ''To date, prospective studies have demonstrated a low frequency of prostate cancer in association with testosterone replacement therapy,'' the doctors said. But those figures are based on just three years of follow-up, and it is possible that longer studies will show otherwise.
In the same issue of the journal, Dr. Peter J. Snyder, an endocrinologist at the University of Pennsylvania, noted that ''according to one estimate, a study would need to include 6,000 elderly men'' with low testosterone who were randomly assigned to receive either testosterone or a placebo for six years to determine whether the hormone increased prostate cancer risk by 30 percent.
Only slightly reassuring is the fact that prostate cancer becomes more prevalent at ages when men's testosterone levels naturally decline.
In any case, Dr. Rhoden and Dr. Morgentaler strongly recommend that any man using testosterone replacement be carefully monitored for early signs of this cancer. They recommend a biopsy if levels the prostate-specific antigen, or P.S.A., rise even slightly.
Monitoring red blood cells is also important. Testosterone can alleviate mild anemia, but it may also overstimulate red blood cell production, thickening the blood and increasing the risk of clots leading to stroke and vascular disease.
Another known hazard is the development or worsening of sleep apnea, a serious disruption in breathing during sleep that increases the risk of heart failure. In addition, the testicles may shrink and infertility may occur until the supplements are discontinued. Other possible effects include breast enlargement and tenderness, oily skin and acne, increased body and facial hair and flushing.
Possible Benefits
As for the benefits of testosterone replacement, Dr. Snyder noted that only a few of the studies compared the hormone to a placebo. In general, when testosterone is given to elderly men with a natural deficit, they show an increase in muscle mass, a decrease in body fat and a trend toward greater bone density ''but no clear improvement in muscle strength, energy or libido,'' Dr. Snyder reported.
One study, the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging, found that over an average of 10 years, older men with higher natural levels of circulating testosterone had better visual and verbal recall and performed spatial tasks more adeptly than their peers. Another study, at the University of California at San Francisco, also showed better mental performance among older men with higher testosterone levels. But none of this means that giving testosterone to men with lower levels will improve these functions or prevent a decline.
Should any man use testosterone before further research is completed? Cautious physicians like Dr. Snyder suggest that the treatment be limited to men with consistently and clearly subnormal levels -- ''perhaps below 200 nanograms per deciliter.'' Normal in a young man is about 600 nanograms. Several tests should be conducted early in the mornings of different days to determine a man's natural hormone level, which can vary widely.
All experts warn against taking testosterone orally because that can cause liver disease. The safest and simplest form, so far, appears to be a testosterone gel followed by a skin patch.
PERSONAL HEALTH
