Rebels who have wrested nearly half of Haiti from government control now promise to march on the capital, and the police and armed gangs loyal to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide threw up roadblocks and barricades on Monday on the northern outskirts and vowed to fight to the death.
Haiti has been engulfed in violence for the past two weeks as political unrest has spilled into open rebellion against President Aristide, a former parish priest who, his opponents say, rigged the country's last elections in 2000. More than 70 people have died in the clashes.
Staging surprise attacks on understaffed and outgunned police garrisons, the rebel troops -- an alliance of former pro-Aristide militias and ex-army officers -- have seized control of virtually all the northern half of Haiti with remarkable speed.
Their biggest prize so far, the country's second city, Cap Haitien, 90 miles north of Port-au-Prince, fell on Sunday, and the rebel leader, Guy Philippe, said the capital was the next target. He predicted that his troops would control all of Haiti within two weeks.
So far government resistance seems to have collapsed, but loyalist forces promise that the rebels will face much fiercer resistance in the capital, home to more than two million people, the remaining bastion of Mr. Aristide's dwindling power and the base of his ruthless chimère militias.
''This is not Cap, this is the capital,'' said Rincher Jacques, a 36-year-old teacher who stood by a police barricade erected Monday in Bon Repos, a suburb four miles north of the downtown presidential palace.
''We expect them any night now, but it would be better if they didn't come,'' he said. ''We know who they are: they are people who in the past have done a lot of harm to the Haitian people.''
Several crucial figures in the rebel forces have been accused of involvement in atrocities while serving in the police or armed forces in past Haitian governments, or as former enforcers for Mr. Aristide.
Government supporters like to single out Louis-Jodel Chamblain, a former army sergeant suspected of involvement in the killings of 34 voters who died during violence in the 1987 elections.
Mr. Jacques, who denied that he was a member of the president's Lavalas Party, said local residents were patrolling with police officers at night in vigilante groups that would resist the rebels ''with guns, with machetes, with rocks and sticks if necessary.''
''We will fight to the death,'' he said.
Prime Minister Yvon Neptune urged the capital's residents to help the police ward off any rebel attack. He also urged the international community to save Haiti from ''terrorists who sow violence and death.''
Many residents expect the fiercest resistance to any rebel attack to come from the chimères, armed gangs used by Mr. Aristide to terrorize political opponents. They are based in Cité Soleil, a sprawling shantytown near the heart of the capital.
Others say the rebels have already infiltrated agents, primarily ex-army officers, throughout the capital who will be able to count on popular hatred of the chimères to root them out. ''Everyone knows where they live, who they are,'' said one resident, who identified himself only as Frantz. ''They will have nowhere to hide.''
A peace plan presented by the United States over the weekend suggests a reduction of Mr. Aristide's powers and international involvement in the reform of Haiti's police force. Even so, opposition leaders continued to insist that the president must step down.
''We are prepared to negotiate with Mr. Aristide, but only about how he leaves,'' André Apaid, an opposition leader, said at a news conference. ''One man can't hold a nation hostage. He must resign.''
The speed of the rebel advance seems to have emboldened the opposition to take a harder line, infuriating some diplomats in the negotiating team.
''They are risking everything by refusing the helping hand of the international community,'' a senior Western diplomat said. ''They face a tremendous risk that they are not part of the political future of Haiti.''
In response, Micha Gaillard, another opposition leader, said simply: ''Too bad! By refusing, we may lose our credibility internationally, but we will maintain our integrity in the eyes of the Haitian people.''
