The Pentagon yesterday announced the cancellation of the $38 billion Comanche helicopter program, a weapons system from the cold war era that was decades behind in development and that became a victim of new technology and rising concerns about military costs and the federal budget deficit.
The decision ends a program that began in 1983 and at a cost of $8 billion had yet to produce a single operational craft. Moreover, the Comanche, an armed reconnaissance helicopter, was designed for operations against Soviet and Warsaw Pact armies and has been overtaken by the Army's need for lighter and more flexible aircraft to fight terrorists and guerrillas.
''It's a big decision,'' said Gen. Peter J. Schoomaker, the Army chief of staff. ''We know it's a big decision. But it's the right decision.''
The cancellation must be approved by Congress when it reviews the Pentagon's budget for the 2005 fiscal year, which contains allocations for the Comanche. But many Congressional aides say that the helicopter program lacks widespread support in Congress that many other weapons have and that the Pentagon may not have a difficult time scrapping it.
In a Pentagon briefing, General Schoomaker, along with acting Army Secretary Les Brownlee, said that ending the program would free up money for other Army aviation programs, mainly a modernization of the Apache attack helicopter now in combat use, along with more purchases of Blackhawk helicopters and continued development of drones.
Behind this decision is also a realization by the Army that the Comanche program did not fit in with the desire of Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and the administration to transform the military by eliminating outdated weapons programs and substituting newer technologies.
In that effort, the Comanche was vulnerable. A joint venture between the Boeing Company and the Sikorsky Aircraft unit of United Technologies, the Comanche was billions of dollars over budget, decades behind schedule and had been losing favor in Congress and in the Pentagon.
As the cost of each copter grew to $58.9 million from an initial $12 million each, the number of helicopters the Pentagon could afford to buy fell to around 650 from an initial estimate of more than 2,000.
''If the program cannot produce a single helicopter in 20 years, you've got a problem,'' said Loren Thompson, a military analyst at the Lexington Institute, a nonprofit research group in Arlington, Va.
In addition, many questioned investing tens of billions of dollars more into a twin-engine, two-pilot craft when drones could perform many of the Comanche's battlefield surveillance tasks at a lower cost and with no risk to life.
''We looked very closely,'' Mr. Brownlee said, ''at the operational environment in which we're currently operating and have operated in the last two and a half years and what we could see in the foreseeable future and decided that it was inconsistent with the capabilities that were in the Comanche as opposed to those things we could do to the rest of Army aviation with the resources if we applied it to other aircraft.''
The decision drew cheers from some critics who had come to regard the Comanche as a symbol of Pentagon procurement gone awry, especially as financing continued long after the Soviet threat it was designed to counter had disappeared.
''The final curtain has fallen on one of the most wasteful military money pits in United States history,'' said Keith Ashdown, vice president of policy at Taxpayers for Common Sense, a Washington nonprofit group that has long criticized Pentagon spending. ''For too many years, taxpayer money has been chopped to ribbons by the gold-plated rotors of this over-priced boondoggle.''
The cancellation also reflects some hard realities faced by the administration as it anticipates tough Congressional questioning about its proposed $401.7 billion military budget for fiscal 2005; that does not include supplementary funds of as much as $50 billion it is expected to request later this year for Iraq and Afghanistan.
The military request comes against a backdrop of a rising budget deficit, estimated to reach $521 billion this year, but which the administration says it wants to cut in half by 2009, the year when the Comanche production line was scheduled to begin.
The Comanche is the third major weapon system to be halted by the Bush administration. Over objections from many in the Pentagon, in December 2001 the administration killed a Raytheon missile defense system for the Navy budgeted at an estimated $9 billion, then killed the $11 billion Crusader mobile howitzer program by United Defense Industries in May 2002. In both cases, the Pentagon fought the administration with aggressive lobbying in Congress. This time, however, the Army decided to take the initiative and terminated the Comanche program itself.
''This program was going to get whacked sooner or later,'' said Richard L. Aboulafia, a military analyst with the Teal Group, a consulting firm in Fairfax, Va. ''The budget would not have grown to accommodate it. For the Army, the handwriting was on the wall, so the best way was to be pro-active and look like they are reinventing themselves.''
Sikorsky said that ''while we regret the Army's announcement, we are committed to working closely with our customer.''
The impact on Boeing, which has about $27 billion in military contracts, will be less as money that had been earmarked for Comanche will go for other programs, mainly the Apache upgrade and the construction of new unmanned reconnaissance craft.
In a statement, Boeing said it was ''disappointed'' with the cancellation, but added that ''of course, we understand that the Army and the Department of Defense have critical priorities that they must address within limited resources.'' It added that the cancellation was ''not expected to have a significant financial impact on the company.''
Boeing's stock fell by 1.6 percent, or 72 cents a share, to $43.62; United Technologies shares fell by 2.9 percent, or $2.82, to $93.80.
Cushioning the loss to the companies are termination payments that analysts estimated could be as much as $2 billion. Mr. Thompson of the Lexington Institute called the cancellation a ''body blow'' to Sikorsky.
In Congress, the Pentagon's action was called ''a sound decision'' by Senator John Warner, the Virginia Republican who is chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. While many Pentagon efforts to cancel weapons systems have been thwarted by legislators concerned about jobs in their home districts, it is expected that the Comanche may not have the same political support.
Since production was not scheduled to begin until 2009, the immediate number of jobs affected is about 700 in Connecticut and about 600 in Philadelphia, along with roughly 1,000 more scattered around the country. While many of these cuts would come in electoral swing states like Pennsylvania and Florida, a rising military budget, in general, is expected to tamp down concerns.
In addition, current concerns may trump politics. ''If you take a look at when Comanche was envisioned, and you take a look at the threat that we faced at that time and the kind of battlefield that we envisioned, Comanche made a lot of sense, General Schoomaker said. ''But it makes less sense today.''
