The West Side rail yards, where the city, the state and the Jets want to build a $1.4 billion football stadium with a retractable roof, is at least 13 gritty blocks away from the Broadway theater district around Times Square.
But theater owners like Gerald Schoenfeld and Rocco Landesman and union workers who make their living in a business that attracts 225,000 patrons a week say that the proposed stadium would cast a dark shadow over one of the city's most important tourist attractions. It would, they say, obstruct traffic and discourage tourists and New Yorkers from visiting the theater district. Further, they say that the stadium, which would double as a central Olympic site if the city wins its bid for the 2012 summer games, would contribute little other than congestion to the city's economy.
Mr. Schoenfeld and Mr. Landesman, who together own 22 of the 35 Broadway theaters, and Tom Short, president of the 5,000-member International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, have emerged as outspoken critics of the city's effort to build the stadium, a key element of a comprehensive plan to expand the nearby Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, extend the No. 7 subway line and transform the low-scale far West Side of Manhattan into a high-rise residential and commercial district.
Generally the city's West Side efforts have enjoyed at least modest public support from the hotel industry, the real estate lobby and the chamber of commerce. But the stadium has become a flashpoint. There have been rumblings among some business and civic leaders. And now the theater industry is adding its voice to a small chorus of opposition that includes community groups, local politicians and even some trade show executives who contend that the stadium could interfere with the expansion of the Javits.
''The stakes for the city are enormous,'' said Mr. Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, Broadway's biggest landlord. ''I think the Javits can expand without being tied to an Olympic Stadium. There is no evidence of a stadium having a positive effect on an urban center. This is a valuable piece of real estate; we should not be rushed in deciding its fate.''
Mr. Schoenfeld and some leading real estate executives favor building the stadium in Queens, where they say it would less disruptive.
The Jets have been puzzled by the chilly reception for the 75,000-seat stadium, despite its offer to invest $800 million, more than any other professional team has ever put into a sports arena in the United States. Plans call for the city and the state to invest an additional $600 million in constructing a retractable roof and a platform over the rail yards, on which the stadium would be built. That brings the total cost to at least $1.4 billion, or two to three times that of recently built sports structures.
Economists generally view stadiums as poor public investments that enrich teams and players, but do little to spark new business in the area other than parking lots.
But stadium advocates contend that the Jets stadium would provide a broader public benefit because it is designed to provide up to 200,000 square feet of exhibition space for the adjacent Javits Convention Center, which brings in more visitors. Traffic congestion should be less of a problem, the Jets say, because the team plays only 10 home games a year, usually on Sundays.
Unlike Mr. Short's construction union brethren who have embraced the stadium, Mr. Short himself has denounced it as a problem for the neighborhood.
''Many of our members live in that area, and they could be displaced by this, '' said Mr. Short of the stage employees union.
Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff has put the stadium and the plans for the West Side on a fast track for approval, which has upset those who want a public debate over the use of the city's scarce resources.
''A lot of people are shy about articulating their concerns, because they don't want to alienate the mayor,'' said Mr. Landesman, president of Jujamcyn Theaters.
After Mr. Doctoroff unveiled a financing plan last week, for one portion of the West Side plan, real estate executives began questioning the estimates. The city plans to create a development corporation that would issue $3.7 billion in bonds and short-term debt for the subway line extension, new streets and a deck over the eastern rail yard.
Mr. Doctoroff said the bonds would be paid for by selling development rights and from new taxes generated by office and residential buildings constructed over the next 30 years. The plan envisions selling the development rights for $100 a square foot, while instituting property taxes equivalent to $12 a square foot. With a vast supply of development rights to sell, real estate executives said, it is unlikely that the city will get anything close to $100 a square foot.
The New York Times Company recently paid about $58 a square foot -- far less than Mr. Doctoroff envisions -- for development rights for a new headquarters to be built at Eighth Avenue and 40th Street, away from the higher prices of Times Square but still considered a far more desirable block than the 11th Avenue sites envisioned by Mr. Doctoroff.
