Thankfully, We Are Not That Sensitive
''You look great,'' a reporter for Us Weekly told MARY-LOUISE PARKER, who was slim in a black jacket, blue jeans and black boots, as she made her way down the red carpet at the opening of ''Bridge &amp; Tunnel'' at 45 Bleecker Street Theater.
''I just wanted to say what everybody is wondering .''
You know the way time slows in certain situations, as when your car spins out, and there is time for many thoughts, including vivid pictures of roadkill, not excluding oneself. So it was at this moment. Ms. Parker, who just won a Golden Globe for best supporting actress in the HBO production of ''Angels in America'' recently gave birth to a son, WILLIAM. She was dumped by the baby's father, BILLY CRUDUP, when she was eight months pregnant. We held our breath and waited for the collision.
''how did you get in shape so fast?'' the reporter continued.
Oh, that.
''Cocaine!'' Ms. Parker said, joking. ''I feel like everybody is waiting for me to say something like that. I'm eating all the time.''
''My mother was the same way, really. I've been eating more; actually, I've gained a little weight because everybody keeps telling me how thin I am. I would hate me if I weren't me right now.''
Quite a crowd of impressive names turned out for ''Bridge &amp; Tunnel,'' a one-woman show by the poet and actor SARAH JONES.
We spotted TERRENCE McNALLY, JEAN KENNEDY SMITH, KHALILAH ALI (a daughter of MUHAMMAD ALI), CHAD LOWE and BOB BALABAN (who walked the red carpet with a slice of pizza folded up in a paper plate).
The reason for the turnout?
The involvement of MERYL STREEP, who is one of 10 producers for the show, but clearly, a producer with clout.
''Meryl,'' said PHILIP SEYMOUR HOFFMAN, when asked what had brought him there.
''Meryl,'' said Mary-Louise Parker. ''I think that I would just come to whatever she recommended I come to.''
Meryl, too, said SARAH JESSICA PARKER. ''One doesn't turn down an invitation from Ms. Streep.''
Meanwhile, Ms. Streep was evangelizing for Ms. Jones, who plays 14 characters in the show.
''She's sort of superhuman,'' Ms. Streep said of Ms. Jones. ''I'm the fake producer. There are real producers, but I'm the one who's sort of making all the noise. I'm the cheerleader.''
The curtain was delayed for 45 minutes, for SEAN COMBS.
(A suggestion for the V.I.P.'s in the audience: Just for the fun of it, how about trying the same maneuver when Mr. Combs makes his Broadway debut in LORRAINE HANSBERRY'S ''Raisin in the Sun'' this April?)
The after-party was at the Maritime Hotel in Chelsea. There, photographers at the door greeted Sarah Jessica Parker with a round of applause. Many questions followed about clothing.
We paid scant attention, however, for there, in a corner of the bar, was a woman to whom the red carpet reporters of America, yea verily, the world, owe a debt no goodie bag could repay.
(Oh, this is so embarrassing. Those little watermarks on the paper? Unless the neighbor's Shih Tzu got to the column first today, those -- SOB! -- are our tears.)
Yes, Columbia J-School young 'uns, your professors may encourage you to study HOMER BIGART, MEYER BERGER, E.B. WHITE, A.J. LIEBLING, JOSEPH MITCHELL, NELLY BLY, MAX (''I Cover the Waterfront'') MILLER and EDITH EVANS ASBURY, but there is a social chronicler whom they consistently overlook: the woman who made ''Who are you wearing?'' the most oft-repeated phrase in red carpet reporting, the great JOAN RIVERS. She was outfitted in a chunky black fur coat with white feathers. Atremble, we were, to have the honor of asking that question of Herself.
''This I think was a very fat ostrich,'' Ms. Rivers said, picking at the feathers. ''And this'' -- the rest of the coat -- ''was mink.''
The Oscars are but 10 days away. Shouldn't she be out there?
''I only go out at the very end,'' Ms. Rivers said. ''Because you get out there too early, you get nervous.''
And what of those celebrities who won't talk to her?
''Very few. All the major ones do. And so, if KATHY BATES doesn't say hello, I'm not going kill myself. If NICOLE KIDMAN didn't say hello, I'd probably reach for the razorblades.''
Gee whiz.
Ms. Kidman didn't speak to us the last time we saw her. We guess she didn't recognize us.
with Melena Z. Ryzik
Boldface Names
