Andre Barrett, a point guard with a soft, squeaky voice and brush burns on his knees, wanted to run away.
The Seton Hall basketball program was disintegrating around him in the 2000-1 season. The Pirates had lost 13 of their last 19 games that season, when he was a freshman. Then, less than a month after the season ended, their coach and top player left within six days.
Barrett had arrived at Seton Hall with two other heralded freshmen, Eddie Griffin and Marcus Toney-El, and the Pirates won 10 of their first 12 games, bolting into the national top 10. It was supposed to be only the beginning of a wonderful era.
Then Seton Hall collapsed. Two weeks after the season, Coach Tommy Amaker took the head-coaching job at Michigan. Griffin, the power forward who got into a fist fight with a teammate, Ty Shine, after a loss to Georgetown, announced he was leaving for the N.B.A.
''That was a hard thing to watch -- to go right from the top to the bottom,'' Barrett said of his freshman season.
His mother remembers him being devastated, especially with Amaker's departure. Barrett broached the subject of transferring with his parents, Yvette and Leon. They reminded him of one drawback.
''I told him: 'You're not a kid who likes to sit, and you're going to have to sit out a year if you transfer. That's not your style,' '' Yvette Barrett said, referring to the N.C.A.A. rule that would have forced Barrett to miss a season.
Barrett decided to stay. By the standard that seems to matter most to him, Seton Hall has not recovered.
Barrett -- who was so good at Rice High School in the Bronx that Seton Hall unretired Richie Regan's No. 12 jersey when he arrived -- has still not played in an N.C.A.A. tournament game.
''I think I've accomplished everything else at the collegiate level,'' Barrett said.
Seton Hall, which plays a Big East Conference game at Miami Tuesday, is 17-7 over all and 7-5 in the conference after a 70-68 victory Saturday over Villanova, but a berth in this year's tournament is still up for grabs. There is still plenty of time to falter.
Barrett thinks the Pirates will make the tournament, in part because they have been tempered by disappointment. He remembers watching the announcement of the N.C.A.A. tournament field last season with his teammates in the basketball office.
Seton Hall was bypassed, despite its 17-13 record.
''It was disappointing, discouraging,'' Toney-El, a senior forward from East Orange, N.J., said. ''But I remember us saying to each other, 'For us to get where we need to go, we need to remember this day.' ''
Barrett is convinced that this season will be different. Recent losses to Notre Dame and Boston College were believed to have put Seton Hall's chances for an at-large bid to the tournament in jeopardy, but Barrett thinks they only made the Pirates hungrier -- and more popular.
''These last two years, people have taken a liking to this team,'' Toney-El said.
At least the worst part is behind. Seton Hall went 12-18 in its first season under Amaker's replacement, Louis Orr, then lost 9 of 16 games to start Barrett's junior season. But a nine-game winning streak near the end of last season seemed to signal the start of a turnaround.
''Everybody had to check themselves, check their egos and leave it all at the door and play team ball,'' Barrett said.
Barrett, a 5-foot-10 senior, has been one of the primary reasons why the Pirates have continued to play that way. Orr, 45, has received much of the credit for restoring order to the program, which was thrown into chaos by the departures of Amaker and Griffin. But Barrett, Seton Hall's leading scorer at 17.6 points a game, helped Orr rebuild the program simply by sticking around.
''He's quiet -- really quiet -- but he's bright,'' Orr said of Barrett. ''He's kind of unassuming, and he blends in. But he loves the game. I think he's a basketball junkie. And he can be vocal if need be. He's a guy our guys look to.''
Some of those guys looked to Barrett even before they enrolled at Seton Hall.
Barrett, from the Soundview section of the Bronx, was a high school teammate of Andre Sweet, a forward who went to Duke when Barrett went to Seton Hall. Sweet decided to transfer to Seton Hall after his freshman season.
Sweet could have gone elsewhere, perhaps to St. John's or Boston College, after Amaker and Griffin left.
''Andre was a little shaky, too,'' Sweet said of Barrett. ''But one day he just told me: 'I need help. Come here.' Once he told me that, it really didn't matter who was coaching. He's my boy. I had to help him out.''
John Allen, a guard from Coatesville, Pa., had signed with Seton Hall before Amaker left. He decided to stay after Amaker had announced he was taking the job at Michigan.
''I liked the school,'' Allen said. ''And we just wanted to stick with Coach Orr. He was preaching the right things.''
Toney-El, a 6-6 forward from Seton Hall Prep, stopped going to off-season workouts after Amaker left. But Barrett told Toney-El that he was staying, and Toney-El said he was also staying.
''Seton Hall's a good school,'' Toney-El said. ''We figured, 'We're here. We might as well get the job done.' ''
There was a nucleus. Along the way, Barrett has become a better player. He was already quick, but Orr thinks he is now durable enough to play in the N.B.A. He has played fewer than 33 minutes in only 3 of Seton Hall's 24 games.
''The pace of the game in the N.B.A. is much faster and I don't think they really appreciate Andre's speed, quickness and athleticism,'' Orr, who played for the Knicks, said.
Barrett has developed the rest of his skills. His field-goal and 3-point percentages have improved in each of his seasons at Seton Hall. Villanova Coach Jay Wright said an opponent cannot concede Barrett a 3-point shot.
Barrett has made nearly 39 percent of his 3-point attempts. A defender who tries to deny Barrett a shot from the perimeter, Wright said Saturday, takes a risk on Barrett powering past him toward the basket.
''I love how he does whatever it takes to win,'' Wright said.
Barrett, a communications major, is expected to graduate from Seton Hall this spring. He said he is glad he stayed, for reasons that have nothing to do with basketball. There is still one goal to meet.
''I think Andre does understand now that when you have a goal, turmoil comes with it,'' his mother said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
