Rebels in Haiti were going house to house yesterday, arresting supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide and looting their possessions. The capital, Port-au-Prince, remained in government hands, but the nation's second-largest city, Cap Haitien, was held by the insurgents. The situation is clearly becoming dire. The United States needs to take the lead in protecting the Haitian people from the growing anarchy around them. There is much that Washington could do.
Only the slimmest hope remains for salvaging an international mediation effort that began last weekend. If it cannot be revived, there is a strong likelihood that the country's raging political crisis could ultimately be resolved by brute force. Abrupt and violent changes of government have been a regular feature of Haitian politics over the years and are among the main reasons that Haiti has never developed stable democratic institutions.
Mr. Aristide is no beacon of democratic principles, but he was freely elected to a five-year term that is not scheduled to run out until February 2006. It would have been better if all sides had accepted the proposed compromise that would allow him to stay in office while sharing power with the opposition.
Most, but not all, of the responsibility for the failure to reach an agreement lies with the leaders of Haiti's nonviolent political opposition. They argued that with popular anger against Mr. Aristide running so high, they could accept no compromise that did not cut short his presidency.
That public anger is largely Mr. Aristide's fault, because of a succession of betrayals of his original democratic promises. By failing to end a long impasse over flawed parliamentary elections, he has effectively shut down Parliament and now rules by decree. He has politicized the police and courts and uses special police brigades and armed gangs of his supporters to terrorize civilians and break up opposition demonstrations.
Yet the opposition's unwillingness to stand up to the former army leaders and opposition thugs now demanding Mr. Aristide's departure -- and their failure to back a compromise that would have been strongly supported by Washington and other mediating countries -- is a troubling sign. It suggests that these politicians may not have the toughness needed to make sure that any armed ouster of Mr. Aristide does not lead to a rapid restoration of the same discredited forces that ruled Haiti before he came to power. These include thuggish leaders of the country's officially disbanded army and the murderous paramilitary groups that supported military rule. Some of these elements have already re-entered Haiti from the neighboring Dominican Republic.
There is still time for the political opposition to reconsider its rejection of compromise before the armed rebels impose their own new tyranny.
Whether or not the opposition comes to its senses, Haiti's people deserve protection. More than 70 lives have already been lost. The United States should quickly offer to build up the current force of 50 marines who arrived Monday to protect the American Embassy and make it the core of a multinational stabilization force that would also include soldiers from France, Canada and Latin America. Haiti's army was dissolved in 1994, and a modest international military force could go a long way. It should be in place before armed rebel elements grab power for themselves.
Once a stabilization force is established, an American-led international effort should be mounted to train professional, politically independent police officers and judges. It was the absence of such institutions that allowed Mr. Aristide to create a new authoritarianism behind a democratic shell. American police training programs during the Clinton administration did not reach far enough or last long enough to succeed. Washington should also make it easier for Haiti to earn its way out of poverty by eliminating the American rice subsidies that have contributed to pricing poor Haitian rice farmers out of the market.
Developing a durable democracy in this deeply impoverished country, which has no history of strong, independent civic institutions, will take plenty of time and effort. Failure to begin that effort now will surely result in future revolts, future dictators and future tides of desperate refugees headed for American shores.
