Senator John Kerry tangled bitterly with President Bush's re-election campaign yesterday over defense, patriotism and political tactics, as he rolled through New York picking up endorsements, raising money and bracing for an advertising onslaught from the president.
It was a day of political pageantry in Harlem, hard-luck labor stories in Queens and fund-raisers on Park Avenue and Central Park West. But Mr. Kerry's two-borough tour was quickly eclipsed by his attacks on Mr. Bush's campaign, and the rapid-response counterattacks by the president's representatives, in what took on the crackle of a tense day in late October.
In the most taut exchange, Mr. Kerry again deflected Republican questions about his votes on Pentagon weapons by calling them thinly veiled attacks on his patriotism. He said the criticism was akin to the way former Senator Max Cleland of Georgia, a triple amputee from the Vietnam War, was defeated in 2002 after commercials showed his picture and those of Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein.
''They suggested he was weak,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''That's the underlying message of this attack. They did not come to you and say, 'This system is a great system and we need this system; John Kerry voted against this system.' ''
But Marc Racicot, the chairman of the Bush campaign, responded that Republicans had praised Mr. Kerry's patriotism and war record but were questioning specific votes over several years against weapons systems like the B-2 and Stealth bombers, the F-15 and F-16 fighters, the M1 Abrams tank, the Apache helicopter and the Patriot missile.
And he said Mr. Kerry had voted against a supplemental appropriation last year that included money for body armor, armored Humvees and hazard pay and family support for troops in Iraq.
In a hastily arranged conference call, Mr. Racicot said Mr. Kerry was ''running from his record'' by claiming that his patriotism was under attack. He suggested that Mr. Kerry was quick on the trigger with that particular charge.
''He seems to instinctively go to that justification for just about everything,'' Mr. Racicot said.
In point of fact, Mr. Kerry did speak about three of his votes, saying he had opposed Ronald Reagan's ''Star Wars'' missile-defense plan, the MX missile deployment and satellite warfare in space.
Mr. Kerry also accused the Bush campaign of planning a barrage of negative advertising against him and asserted that Republicans had even given it the name ''Operation Carpet-bombing.''
''Now, you go figure,'' he said.
But Mr. Racicot, who called Mr. Kerry ''particularly prickly'' yesterday, flatly denied Mr. Kerry's accusation. He said no one at the Bush campaign had referred to its advertising plans that way, ''particularly in the presently existing context.''
Mr. Kerry's aides at first said the ''carpet-bombing'' term had been published in several places but could not come up with a citation when pressed. David Wade, a Kerry spokesman, later said unnamed Democrats ''and even Republican friends'' had used the phrase to describe a coming advertising blitz.
''If the term hasn't found its way into print, its distortions certainly have,'' Mr. Wade said in an e-mail message. ''From Rush Limbaugh to Sean Hannity to Laura Ingraham to Saxby Chambliss to the R.N.C., you can't turn on a TV or pick up a radio without seeing a systematic and coordinated attack on John Kerry.''
Aides to Mr. Kerry said that his own campaign would begin to advertise in Ohio, Georgia and upstate New York today and could spend as much as $1.5 million before next Tuesday. Mr. Edwards is already advertising in the three states, but spending less than $300,000, by one media executive's count.
Mr. Kerry spent yesterday systematically locking up the support of the Manhattan and Queens Democratic organizations. He began with a rally in Harlem with Representative Charles B. Rangel; the Manhattan borough president, C. Virginia Fields; and dozens of other officials, many of whom had joined Mr. Rangel in backing Gen. Wesley K. Clark. Former Mayor David N. Dinkins was among them.
From there, Mr. Kerry went to a forum at York College in Jamaica, Queens, with about 600 people, many of them union members.
In Harlem and again in Queens, Mr. Kerry seized on Mr. Bush's remarks to the Republican Governors Association last night -- described by the White House as a preview of a stump speech -- and said even before Mr. Bush spoke that he was not being truthful in accusing his rivals of favoring raising taxes.
''I have no plan to raise taxes on middle-class Americans,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''The only plan I have is to roll back George Bush's tax cut for the wealthiest Americans, people who earn more than $200,000 a year.''
''I think George Bush is on the run, and I think he's on the run because he doesn't have a record to run on,'' he added. ''The real record,'' he said, is of job losses, deficits, and broken promises on health care and the environment. ''Tonight will be words, but the life that Americans are leading tells a very different story.''
Mr. Kerry's public day was done before 3 p.m., leaving him plenty of time to attend fund-raisers in Manhattan that were barred to journalists.
One, at the Sheraton New York, was for about 50 former supporters of General Clark, the campaign said; another, on Park Avenue in the 70's, was a dinner for new supporters held by Hassan Nemazee, an Iranian-American businessman; and a third, at the Central Park West home of the producer Jane Rosenthal, drew a crowd including Lauren Bacall, Robert De Niro and Harvey Weinstein.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
