Gov. John G. Rowland looked flushed and happy as he strolled across the pale marble floor of the J.W. Marriott Hotel on Monday. He was here for the winter meeting of the National Governors Association, and for the first time in months, no one was asking him about impeachment. No cluster of reporters trailed him from room to room. He chatted with old friends and lobbyists in blissful anonymity. No one seemed to care at all about the scandal that has been plaguing Mr. Rowland since December back home in Connecticut.
''Some people have said encouraging things, like 'Hang in there,''' Mr. Rowland said. Mostly, he added, no one has mentioned it.
On Sunday night Mr. Rowland took his daughter Kirsten along to a state dinner for the governors at the White House. On the receiving line there, they even shared a little joke with President Bush about the cowboy boots both men were wearing with their tuxedos, he said.
It was a far cry from a month ago, when Mr. Rowland, a Republican, who was elected to a third term in 2002, pointedly avoided a Greenwich fund-raiser for Mr. Bush. At the time, he said he did not want the impeachment controversy to detract from the president's evening.
It is still not clear how Mr. Rowland's difficulties will affect his strong ties with the Bush family. He has spoken with the elder George Bush several times since the scandal started in December, said Ronald Kaufman, who runs a public relations firm in Washington and knows both men.
''They spoke about a number of things,'' Mr. Kaufman said, but declined to say whether Mr. Bush had offered political advice or encouragement, or discussed Mr. Rowland's difficulties. Mr. Rowland's friendship with Mr. Bush and his son dates to the 1980's.
The president, too, has asked third parties to tell Mr. Rowland that he is ''thinking about him,'' Mr. Kaufman said. ''There is no question that the Bush family feel close to their friend John Rowland,'' Mr. Kaufman said.
It also seemed clear on Monday that Mr. Rowland still has friends among the nation's other governors. A number of governors greeted him warmly, and said later that they did not want to talk about the federal investigation and legislative impeachment inquiry that have clouded Mr. Rowland's political future.
''It is not on our radar screen,'' said Gov. Robert Taft of Ohio, the chairman of the Republican Governors Association, when asked about Mr. Rowland's difficulties. ''It's a Connecticut issue.''
One governor who has known Mr. Rowland for a number of years said he was surprised that Mr. Rowland seemed so relaxed, under the circumstances. ''I guess he's had a couple of months to steel himself,'' said the governor, who did not wish to be identified. ''I think if he was too troubled by it he wouldn't have come.''
Many of those who attended the meeting have reason to be loyal. Mr. Rowland was the chairman of the Republican Governors Association in 2002, and helped raise money for a number of the governors.
On Sunday afternoon, Mr. Rowland listened eagerly during a policy session on education and the work force, asking a question about the need for more and better science and math teachers.
Later, he bantered easily with six other Northeastern governors during a session about the pending highway financing bill. That bill, which in its current form provides smaller financing increases to Connecticut than to any other state, could prove a crucial test of Mr. Rowland's ability to govern effectively despite the scandal. But he seemed relaxed and confident, asking questions of his fellow governors and making a wry aside about the way Congressional committees work.
Some of those at the conference seemed not to know anything at all about Mr. Rowland's troubles.
''Lots of governors have problems,'' said Paul L. Nusbaum, who works in the office of Gov. Bob Wise of West Virginia, and knows Mr. Rowland through his work on health care issues. ''I haven't heard word one about it.''
