LOVING CHE  By Ana Menéndez  Illustrated. 229 pages. Grove Press. $22.
Ana Menéndez's incantatory first novel is about two women's efforts to recapture the past: the efforts of a young Cuban woman to discover the identities of her parents and to piece together the story of their abandonment of her; and the efforts of an older Cuban woman, a painter named Teresa -- who may or may not be the narrator's mother -- to memorialize the great passion of her life, her affair with the legendary Che Guevara.
''Loving Che'' displays the same radar for the telling emotional detail that Ms. Menéndez's impressive 2001 collection of short stories (''In Cuba I Was a German Shepherd'') did, but the tone and mood are decidedly different. Whereas the most powerful stories in ''German Shepherd'' blended humor and compassion in a gentle, Chekovian manner, the bulk of this novel -- which is dedicated to Ms. Menéndez's husband, Dexter Filkins, a foreign correspondent for The New York Times -- appears to take as its model the intense, lyrical voice of Marguerite Duras's best-selling 1985 novel ''The Lover.''
It is a narrative strategy with both obvious payoffs and obvious drawbacks. At its best Ms. Menéndez's story captures the electrifying, all-consuming power of erotic love, its ability to make one see the world anew, to awaken dormant energies, to inspire potent art, to infuse the mundane with the gleam of significance. At its worst the story trades the reportorial specificity and psychological particulars of the author's earlier work for the abstract, heavy-breathing prose of a romance novel. (''Loving Che was like palest sea foam, like wind through the stars.'')
Although Teresa's affair takes place against the backdrop of revolutionary Cuba, there are only glancing images of the turmoil that the country is experiencing: bombs going off on street corners, in schools, outside movie theaters; streets filled with young bearded soldiers; the destruction of a newspaper office; department store mannequins, vestiges of a vanished era, bearing silent witness to the convulsive changes.
These events are depicted as corollaries of sorts to Teresa's passion: the revolution, like her adulterous relationship with Che, is an earthquake that will forever alter the landscape of day-to-day life; and the rapturous beginnings of both will give way, with time, to a sense of loss and forsaken possibilities.
''Cataclysmic events, whatever their outcome, are as rare and transporting as a great love,'' Ms. Menéndez writes. ''Bombings, revolutions, earthquakes, hurricanes -- anyone who has passed through one and lived, if they are honest, will tell you that even in the depths of their fear there was an exhilaration such as had been missing from their lives until then.''
The story of Teresa's affair -- and her subsequent emotional withdrawal after Che's departure and the birth of their daughter -- is framed by the story of the narrator's search for her mother. She has repeatedly questioned her grandfather, who brought her up in Miami, but his answers are annoyingly elusive: all he will say is that his daughter insisted he take her baby away from Cuba and that his later efforts to contact her were fruitless.
The narrator's Telemachus-like search takes her to Cuba, where she knocks on doors in her grandfather's old neighborhood, looking for someone who might have known her mother. Eventually she stops traveling to Havana, the trips leaving her exhausted ''not only from the uncertainty but from the sadness that I came to understand more clearly with each visit'': Havana, she decides, ''so lovely at first glance, was really a city of dashed hopes, and everywhere I walked I was reminded that all in life tends to decay and destruction.''
Then, just as she is resolving to put her search aside, the narrator receives a mysterious package with no return address; the package contains some photographs of Che Guevara and some pieces of writing: fragmented reminiscences laying out the story of Teresa's doomed affair.
Although Teresa's story, like the one Duras told in ''The Lover,'' can devolve into mannered, breathy reveries, Ms. Menéndez has artfully constructed the tale to evoke the convoluted, possibly distorted workings of memory. As Teresa's recollections circle around and around the past, obsessively rehashing certain events while embroidering others, the reader comes to question both her veracity and the narrator's need to believe in the mythology she has conjured around both their lives.
If ''Loving Che'' begins as a self-conscious paean to the redemptive ferocity of love, it ends as an elliptical and finely nuanced meditation on the mysteries of memory and identity, a work that despite its occasional lapses, expands the talented Ms. Menéndez's fictional terrain.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
