In a move that would traumatize studio planners today, Laurence Olivier's ''Richard III'' was shown on television on the same day in 1956 that it opened in movie theaters. In an essay with the DVD released today by Criterion, Bruce Eder writes that about 62.5 million viewers watched the film on NBC, more than had previously seen this Shakespeare play since it was first performed in 1592.
Not surprisingly, relatively few saw ''Richard III'' on the big screen, but the upside-down scheduling partly righted itself 10 years later when a rerelease did well at the box office. In subsequent years the film appeared drastically shortened. The Criterion version runs 158 minutes, which is within the 155 to 161 minutes variously listed for the original.
Russell Lees, a playwright and stage director, and John Wilders, former governor of the Royal Shakespeare Company, provide commentary. In his third Shakespeare screen adaptation (after ''Henry V'' in 1944 and ''Hamlet'' in 1948), Olivier added material from ''Henry VI'' to set historical context and, Mr. Lees says, gave the sets a surrealistic look to prepare audiences for the language.
In the role of the royal usurper who offers his kingdom for a horse, Olivier accidentally took an arrow in the leg while filming the battle scene on Bosworth Field. Elizabethan audiences found Richard's brisk, witty villainy deliciously attractive up to a point, and Olivier's performance is filled with dash and energy.
In the DVD commentary he is contrasted with Marlon Brando, also at his peak in the 50's. Mr. Brando formed characterizations within himself, but Olivier built them from bits and pieces of others he found outside. In an interview with the critic Kenneth Tynan on the second disc, he says: ''I scavenge for that tiniest little bit of human circumstance. Observe it. Use it.'' 1955. $39.95.
'Hamlet'
Olivier was one screen Hamlet, but here we have Mel Gibson emerging, Caryn James wrote in The New York Times, ''strong, intelligent and safely beyond ridicule'' in Franco Zeffirelli's 1990 adaptation, released today by Warner.
Mr. Gibson had done two of his four ''Lethal Weapon'' movies. In one of two good documentaries with the the DVD of the Zeffirelli film, Ian Holm, who plays Polonius, also admires Mr. Gibson's Hamlet, if with some dry amusement at the movie's emphasis on physicality over traditional attention to language.
On DVD Mr. Gibson remains, as Ms. James wrote, ''by far the best part of Mr. Zeffirelli's sometimes slick but always lucid and beautifully cinematic version of the play.'' In the second documentary, made behind the scenes during the shoot, Mr. Gibson says that with a Hamlet portrayal you ''just have to wander in there and go crazy'' and describes his character as ''a guy who goes off his nut'' but ''not a guy who can just go and stab his uncle.''
He also introduces his mother and father, who were visiting the set. ''Hamlet'' is a good film for including your parents, he says. $19.97. 135 minutes. PG.
'Pieces of April'
In a commentary with his film, released on DVD today by MGM, Peter Hedges says that Patricia Clarkson dares the audience not to like her in the role of a mother, dying of cancer, who accompanies her family on a Thanksgiving visit to an estranged daughter, April (Katie Holmes), in Manhattan.
Ms. Clarkson has been nominated for an Oscar as best supporting actress. Ms. Holmes is also fine as a punky East Villager in her 20's struggling to produce her first Thanksgiving feast after her apartment's oven gives out and she must wander the building banging on doors and asking neighbors for help.
In a film with plenty of tenderness and humor, it is ''her surliness, as well as her intransigent determination to make Thanksgiving work, that keeps the laughs coming,'' Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times. 2003. $25.98. 81 minutes. PG-13.
'Matchstick Men'
In contrast to some other Ridley Scott films -- ''Gladiator,'' ''Hannibal,'' ''Black Hawk Down'' -- this one tells a comparatively modest tale of a manic Los Angeles con man (Nicolas Cage) who discovers his larger self with the help of a teenager (Alison Lohman) who appears to be his daughter. On DVD, however, Scott films tend to be extensive productions, and this is no exception.
Behind-the-scenes coverage begins five months before filming with the director arriving for a casting session. Mr. Scott works with a minimum of fuss, shoots most scenes in one or two takes and is so well-prepared that the production occasionally is ahead of schedule, in its own way nervous-making for crews who are usually behind.
During the editing of the film there is some question about balancing the comedy and darker elements. ''Mr. Scott, for his part, adroitly manipulates both our fascination with amorality and our desire to believe in human decency, and he gulls us into thinking we can have it both ways,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The Times. ''This makes 'Matchstick Men' both entertaining and empty.'' 2003. Warner. $27.95. 105 minutes. PG-13.
'The Missing'
Cate Blanchett first appears sitting in an outhouse in Ron Howard's film, an entrance she describes with good humor in one of five behind-the-scenes featurettes with the DVD released today by Columbia TriStar. As Maggie Gilkeson, a healer with two daughters in New Mexico in the 1880's, Ms. Blanchett then marches off to extract an Indian's tooth. When Maggie's teenage daughter (Evan Rachel Wood) is kidnapped by a renegade Apache mystic (Eric Schweig), Maggie and her father (Tommy Lee Jones) take up pursuit. Mr. Howard goes on at length about the film, his first western, which has moments of uncomfortably graphic violence.
''Nearly 50 years after John Ford's 'Searchers' we have arrived at a point in film history when the movie industry can offer a less sophisticated version of the same material,'' Mr. Mitchell wrote in The Times. 2003. $28.95. 115 minutes. R.
NEW DVD'S
