For much of the Martha Stewart trial, the onlookers in Courtroom 110 in the Old Federal Courthouse in Manhattan have been focusing on big issues: Will the judge throw out the securities fraud charge? Will Ms. Stewart testify on her own behalf?
Then there are all the other things spectators talk about: Why does Ms. Stewart wear mud-colored suits? Which lawyer does the jury hate most? Will another celebrity turn up at the trial now that Bill Cosby has been there?
And, of course, the other big question yesterday: Which of the dueling ''ink guys'' won?
These are technically forensic experts in ink analysis. And in their own quiet way they have provided some of the fireworks, or at least firecrackers, at the trial.
If you have not read or heard much about them, that is probably because their main quarrel seemed to be over whether it is proper to use a densitometer with thin layer chromatography. Or the other way around. Or something.
But their testimony has been important for both the government and Peter E. Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart's co-defendant and former stockbroker.
Each side brought in its own expert to opine on some scribbles Mr. Bacanovic made on a list of stocks owned by Ms. Stewart. The prosecution's expert, Larry F. Stewart (no relation), testified on Thursday; the defense's expert, Albert H. Lyter III, took the stand yesterday.
One of the aforementioned scribbles, next to the listing for ImClone Systems, is ''@60,'' which the defense says bolsters its claim that Ms. Stewart planned to sell her ImClone stock when the price dropped to $60 a share. The government asserts that she sold her shares because she got an improper tip from Mr. Bacanovic and then they concocted the $60 story to cover their tracks.
The experts actually agreed on quite a lot. The ''@60'' notation and a dash next to the listing for Apple Computer were made with an ink different from that used for the rest of the markings on the page. All the inks used were blue ballpoint pen.
Where they differed was over whether the bulk of the notation was made by the same ink.
Dr. Lyter said that his densitometer technique indicated that at least two different batches of ink were involved, suggesting that at least two other pens were used, and maybe more. Mr. Stewart had been dismissive about this use of a densitometer, which measures optical density by comparing a darkened area with a white area.
If Mr. Bacanovic used more than one pen to do his scribbling, the ''@60'' might seem less likely to be an effort to fool investigators.
Given that members of the jury were no more likely than members of the audience to recognize a densitometer if it fell on them, the experts relied heavily on their credentials to carry their points.
Last week, Mr. Stewart said the title of ''national expert for ink'' had been bestowed on him.
''How many national experts are there?'' he was asked by William A. Burck, a prosecutor.
''There is just one.''
Dr. Lyter, who now runs his own business, started out working for the government at what is now the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms. Did he know Mr. Stewart, Dr. Lyter was asked. Certainly, Dr. Lyter replied, ''He came to A.T.F. as a summer intern.''
