''Capturing the Friedmans,'' the Oscar-nominated documentary that raises questions about the guilt of a father and son convicted of child molestation, is being criticized by six of their former victims, who say the film omitted or distorted important information about their cases.
The six are suggesting that the director, Andrew Jarecki, created more ambiguity than actually existed about the case both to heighten the dramatic impact of the film and to elicit sympathy for the Friedmans. The film tells the story of the disintegration of a seemingly average Long Island family after the father, Arnold Friedman, and son, Jesse, were accused of molesting children in computer classes they held in the basement of their Great Neck home in the 1980's.
The film, an Academy Award nominee for best documentary, has been critically praised and brought intense debate at screenings, in editorials and on talk shows about the Friedmans' guilt and whether the case showed failures of the justice system.
Both Arnold and Jesse Friedman pleaded guilty to dozens of counts of child molestation in 1988. Arnold Friedman committed suicide in prison. Jesse Friedman, 34, who served 13 years in prison before being released, recently submitted a motion in Nassau County Court to vacate his conviction, citing disclosures in the film about police evidence that could have helped his case. The court motion has angered former victims and their families who had not previously attacked the film, which was released last May.
Mr. Jarecki, the director, ''ignored and hid evidence that Jesse was guilty and didn't reach out to actual victims, because I never heard from him,'' said the mother of one of 13 victims. Her son gave grand jury testimony against Jesse Friedman in 1987. The New York Times has agreed to protect her identity and her son's.
Mr. Jarecki said in an e-mail interview that he had tried to reach each of the 13 accusers of Jesse Friedman by registered mail and Federal Express, though he said he may not have had correct addresses for all. Two are included in the film, one on camera and another on audiotape. Asked how many victims he spoke to, Mr. Jarecki said: ''I don't know how many I spoke to. It was more than three.'' Mr. Jarecki said he had made 500 attempts to reach 100 of the Friedmans' former computer students.
The mother said that Mr. Jarecki's film omitted a third co-defendant, Ross Goldstein, a teenage neighbor who also pleaded guilty to charges of child molestation and who corroborated some of the children's accusations at the time and went to prison. She also said that Mr. Jarecki omitted a tearful confession by Jesse Friedman in prison on Geraldo Rivera's talk show in 1989. Mr. Friedman detailed how his father had molested him as a child. In interviews Jesse Friedman has retracted his confessions, saying he pleaded guilty because he feared he could not get a fair trial and would get the maximum penalty.
The mother of the accuser said: ''What fame is there in making a film about a pedophile who's a pedophile? What gives it the added twist? That it wasn't true.'' She said Jesse Friedman was not innocent. ''I'm very suspicious,'' she added. ''I know the truth. I think it's clear. He had all the evidence, and for some reason he chose not to use it.''
Mr. Jarecki responded by e-mail: ''I had no agenda in making this film other than to tell the story in a way that related it in all its complexity. I did not see ambiguity as a tool. It was a natural outcome of a three and a half year process. I did not shy away from showing the disgusting nature of Arnold Friedman's pedophilia, and I did not shy away from showing the disturbing failures in the police investigation.''
Mr. Jarecki said the material on Mr. Goldstein was left out because it duplicated statements by the 13 children but was included in the just-released DVD. He said he considered the Rivera interview unnecessary, since the film showed Jesse Friedman's confession in court.
But attacks on the film continue. Two former victims, including the son of the woman who spoke to The Times, wrote an open but anonymous letter last week to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which will give out the Oscars on Sunday. They said that the film portrayed the victims as if they had invented their stories to satisfy an overzealous Nassau County police force.
They wrote: ''We did not lie. We did not exaggerate. We were never hypnotized to tell our stories.'' They said the director had twisted the facts in the film to make it appear that they had.
If the film wins an Oscar, they wrote, ''it will be won at the expense of silencing the plaintive voices of abused children once again, just as our own voices were silenced 16 years ago by the threats and intimidation of our tormentors.''
The signers are a 24-year-old law student and a 27-year-old businessman; their identities have been confirmed by the judge who presided over the trial, Abbey Boklan, who is now retired.
A spokesman for the academy had no comment. Voting for the Oscars closes on Tuesday.
Four other victims who have retained a lawyer to fight Jesse Friedman's motion to vacate his guilty plea also criticized the film. ''I don't see the film as a representation of any type of investigation that was done,'' said Salvatore Marinello, their lawyer, who said the four men did not want to be interviewed.
''I see the film as a capsulized version of what was taking place in the Friedman household during the time the case was pending,'' Mr. Marinello said. ''There's no doubt that it's fascinating. But why are we reliving these events? Because some director decided to make a movie. They believe the motion filed on Jesse's behalf was simply a result of publicity garnered from the movie, that there's no factual basis.''
Mr. Marinello also said he knew of no attempt by the filmmaker to reach his clients.
Mr. Jarecki has been inconsistent in responding to some questions about his research. Asked repeatedly by The Times whether he knew of a lie-detector test that Jesse Friedman took and failed while he protested his innocence in the 1980's, Mr. Jarecki said he did not. But in an interview on a Web site, Mr. Jarecki spoke in detail about the lie-detector test, saying he considered it inconclusive.
The mother of the victim who spoke to The Times said her son appeared to recover quickly after he was molested at the age of 7 but had severe emotional problems when he became an adolescent.
The man, who is the 24-year-old law student who wrote to the academy, also wrote on Jan. 29 to the judge who presided over the case. ''This director's cause is wrong and his purpose is self-serving at my expense as well as at the expense of other victims,'' he wrote to Ms. Boklan. The letter is posted on a Web site of psychologists who specialize in child molestation and find fault with the film (www.leadershipcouncil.org). ''It was under the guise of an educator that Arnold and Jesse Friedman used computer technology to show young children pornography,'' the law student wrote. ''I became afraid of everything beyond my control. My childhood curiosity was replaced with an inherent distrust for adults, authority figures and every unknown.''
Last week Jesse Friedman released a statement saying he was not surprised that some of his accusers are standing by their statements to the grand jury. ''There has never been any dispute about the fact that these statements were made,'' he said. ''While I know these claims are untrue, I respect their right to make them, and I believe it is likely that they continue to believe these events took place.''
But Mr. Friedman spoke differently in an interview on ''Dateline NBC'' last month, when he challenged former victims to come forward, as well as in an interview on the DVD release of the film, in which he says that he and his brother David cooperated with the film in the hope that his former accusers would recant.
''The whole purpose of this movie for David and I was to try to get my conviction overturned,'' Mr. Friedman says in a segment for the DVD shot in September, 22 months after his release from prison. He hoped the movie would ''set up an environment where people in the computer class would come forward and say, 'I know I said certain things to the grand jury, but those things weren't true.' ''
Mr. Jarecki denies that he has become an advocate for Jesse Friedman. Still, Mr. Jarecki has submitted an affidavit on his behalf to the court.
''One of the hallmarks of a balanced film on a controversial subject is that advocates on both sides will never be satisfied that the film supports their agendas,'' he wrote by e-mail. ''Unlike some documentaries that underscore a point of view, 'Capturing the Friedmans' presents all the evidence and allows the audience to decide for themselves.''
