Barry Bonds, baseball's most feared slugger, showed up for spring training Monday and proceeded to take a half-hour of batting practice. Then he got down to the real business of the day, answering the first of what may be many questions this season about his connection to baseball's No. 1 issue: steroids.
In what almost seemed a warm-up for the regular season, Bonds maintained that he had never taken steroids; that he felt bad for his personal trainer, Greg Anderson, who was indicted Feb. 12 on charges of illegally distributing anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs; and that the most difficult thing he had to do this spring was deal with the death -- ''not even six months ago'' -- of his father and mentor, the former major league outfielder Bobby Bonds.
Bonds, who won his sixth Most Valuable Player award last season, arrived at the San Francisco Giants' training camp at Scottsdale Stadium in a blue T-shirt and black jogging pants and looking as robust as he has in several years past, despite a newspaper report that he had lost 20 pounds.
''I'm about 225, maybe heavier,'' said the 6-foot-2 Bonds, who broke into the major leagues as a 186-pound outfielder with Pittsburgh in 1986. He has attributed his increased bulk to weight lifting, nutrition and the use of legal supplements. ''People in my gym in San Francisco -- where I go five days a week, from a couple of weeks after the season to spring training -- say they wish they could tell the media how hard I work in the gym,'' Bonds said as he sat on the dugout bench. ''I tell them, 'Don't worry about it, I'm a big boy.' I'll just let my bat do all the talking.''
Bonds, who will turn 40 in July, said he would welcome more drug testing by Major League Baseball, which now tests every player once in spring training and, if there is probable cause, individual players randomly during the season.
''They can test me every day if they choose to,'' he said. ''Nothing wrong with it at all. That point doesn't bother me, never has.''
Bonds disputed the notion that anything could put into question his records, including the 73 homers he hit for a single-season mark, and the fact that he is two short of tying Willie Mays, his godfather, for third place on the career home run list with 660. (Only Babe Ruth with 714 and Henry Aaron with 755 are ahead of them.)
''If you want to be on top, you have to have broad shoulders,'' Bonds said. ''When you get on top, people want to knock you down. You have to be man enough to step up to the plate and be able and take it.''
In December, Bonds was one of several professional athletes who testified before a federal grand jury investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, or Balco, a supplements company. Two Balco executives and a track coach were charged with Anderson.
Bonds said that speculation about his connection to the case would not affect this season, but that the death of his father had been a great emotional hurdle for him.
''I had a hard time getting back into the batting cage over the winter,'' he said. ''I had never got into the batting cage without him. He's been there my whole entire career. He would analyze my swing, my patterns, he'd watch tapes. Now I have to do it all alone, and I don't know if I can. I never had to before. My dad was always the eyes behind my head. Now Willie may have to be.''
Felipe Alou, the Giants' manager, said that Bonds ''looks good to me.'' As for strains on him, Alou said they would be ''no problem.''
''He lost his father during the season last season, but he still went on to be M.V.P. in the National League,'' Alou said of Bonds, who batted .341 with 45 homers and 90 runs batted in. ''To be as great a player as he's been, you have to have the complete package, mentally, emotionally and physically. Whatever he has to deal with, he'll deal with and keep his focus on baseball.''
The Giants players have been urged by management not to discuss the steroids situation and Bonds.
''I don't think about it,'' pitcher Dustin Hermanson said. ''I'm just here to play baseball.''
In December, when Bonds went back to the batting cage at Pacific Bell Park in San Francisco, he said he did so with great reluctance because of thoughts of his father.
''I really didn't feel like swinging a bat, didn't want any part of it,'' he said. ''And at one point, I broke down crying. I wasn't even sure I wanted to continue playing baseball, but my family and Willie persuaded me to give up those thoughts. They said, 'Barry, this is what you love.' And I do. It's my job, I'm proud of it, and I enjoy being on stage. Regardless of the situation at hand, baseball is not stressful for me. Baseball is a release from stress for me.''
He has, meanwhile, been able to lean on Mays, who has ''eased the pain.''
''Willie and I have talked maybe three times a week,'' Bonds said. ''He said, 'Your dad's not here physically for you, but I'm here emotionally for you.' ''
When asked Monday about Anderson, Bonds said: ''I feel bad for him. I feel sad. We grew up together. We've been friends for a long time.''
When Bonds was asked a further question about Anderson and Balco, an official for the Giants interjected, ''That's a legal issue, and Barry can't discuss it.''
Bonds had plenty to say about the coming season, and how effective he believes he will be.
''I'm through the process and I'm focused and I'm ready,'' he said. If there is anything that will slow him down, he said, ''it's age.''
''My body doesn't hold up the way it used to,'' he said. ''I get beat up and sore in the training room in a way I never did before.'' He later added that his eyesight is not as good as it once was, and that the curveball has become a bit more difficult for him to hit. But, he said, ''When I get into a zone, I can still do it.''
In regard to Ruth's and Aaron's home run totals, Bonds said: ''I'm going for them all. As long as I'm playing, I'm going for them all.''
Then he repaired to the training room and was last seen listening to music on a headset with his nearly 40-year-old legs pedaling furiously on a stationary bicycle.
BASEBALL
