As far as Wendy Shear is concerned, airline rules are meant to be bent, if not broken.
Ms. Shear, a documentary filmmaker who lives in Los Angeles, routinely checks in luggage that weighs more than her free allowance. She waits for her flights in the United Airlines Red Carpet Club, drinking free bottled water, even though she is not a club member. ''And I can't remember the last time I sat in economy class,'' she said.
Like a growing number of business travelers, Ms. Shear believes that for every new rule or restriction that the airlines devise, there is a way around it.
A $100 change fee on a nonrefundable ticket? Try the first-class lounge, where the attentive staff is reluctant to use the word ''no.'' Excess luggage fee? A low-key conversation about the travails of life on the road is sometimes enough to make an overworked ticket agent look the other way. No room in first class? Once they are placed on a waiting list for an upgrade, Ms. Shear and other business travelers are finding other ways to work their way to the front of the cabin.
''If you want to get around the rules, being a frequent flier isn't enough anymore,'' said Joel L. Widzer, author of ''The Penny Pincher's Passport to Luxury Travel'' (Travelers' Tales Guides, 2004). In a recent poll of elite travelers, he found that waving the frequent-flier card -- a long-favored tactic when a business traveler hits a roadblock with an airline -- is losing some of its effectiveness. Replacing it is a new, more complex strategy that can involve arguing, appealing a request to a supervisor, begging and sometimes laying on the flattery.
Consider Ms. Shear, who is not an elite-level frequent flier on United. ''It doesn't matter if you're a triple-plutonium-mile member,'' she argued. ''A sense of entitlement, aggression or just plain rude behavior will get you nowhere. A smile, 'please' and 'thank you,' on the other hand, are a good beginning.''
Instead of writing to complain about poor service, her letters to the airline point out positive experiences: A crew member that makes a special effort to deliver good customer service, or a memorable flight. Maybe that is one reason, even though Ms. Shear invariably starts off at the bottom of an upgrade waiting list, she often leapfrogs over other travelers with a higher status to claim a choice seat.
''It's to the point where if it looks as if they might not have room for me in first class, the ticket agents start apologizing,'' she said.
Business travelers have been trying to bend the rules since there have been rules to bend, of course. But lately, it seems, there have been a lot more regulations to try to get around. Two years ago, airlines became more diligent about charging change fees for nonrefundable tickets. They also clamped down on overweight luggage, adding excess fees for overweight bags. The new policy was often referred to as ''no waivers, no favors.''
It turned out the carriers were just warming up. In recent months, they have trimmed their frequent-flier programs, making it more difficult to qualify for elite status. They have cut everything from free meals to the amount of legroom in coach class.
How are business travelers coping? Sandy Robinson, an accountant from Goodlettsville, Tenn., says a combination of mileage status, sound logic and above all, politeness can land her a first-class seat, a lounge pass or a free ticket change.
In extreme cases, buttering up a weary service provider can work wonders. Ms. Robinson recently tried to change the date and time on a ticket at an airport ticket counter. It happened to be Mother's Day, and her hotel had given her a two-rose corsage.
''When I asked the female airline employee if she missed being with her children on Mother's Day because she had to work, she looked very sad,'' she said. ''I took off my corsage and told her she should wear it.''
The ticket agent made the change and posted it as an airline error in the reservations system, saving her $100 in change fees.
''Sometimes a small amount of flattery or small talk, a look of extreme exhaustion and a sincere thank you, do the trick,'' she said. ''If all else fails, I do remind them how much money I spend with their carrier and how many points I've never had the time to use.''
Carver Farrow, a managing partner for a law firm in San Jose, Calif., grew so weary of being told no when he traveled that he began looking for employees who would give him another answer. He found them in the airport lounge.
''The staff members are trained to be more accommodating, since they generally deal with elite-level travelers,'' he said. That may not be the only reason the clubs are a way around the rules.
At American Airlines, for instance, the Admirals Club staff reports to a vice president for sales, whose views about making customers happy are likely to differ from those of the manager in charge of reservations.
An American Airlines spokesman, Tim Wagner, acknowledged that club members did receive special treatment, which can include having fees and rules waived. ''These are our most loyal customers, so we go out of our way to make them happy,'' he said.
Richard Kraus, a consultant from Annandale, Va., remembers a Thanksgiving Day flight with his family, where a helpful Admirals Club agent rebooked them on an earlier flight so they could make it home in time for dinner. It did not cost them a dime.
Sometimes, an impassioned plea to waive the rules also does the trick. That was the experience of Colleen Hughes, a public health consultant from Sparks, Nev., who recently missed a flight from Orlando, to Reno, Nev., with a connection in Nashville. She wanted to buy lunch before the long flight, and ended up cutting it too close.
''I panicked,'' she remembered. Her airline, Southwest, could have forced her to buy a new ticket, but instead it rerouted her on another flight through Phoenix at no charge. ''The agent simply bent the rules for me,'' she said.
Not everyone approves of all the tactics business travelers use to get special treatment.
Matthew Bennett, the editor of a newsletter for elite travelers and the Web site FirstClassFlyer.com, said in airline circles that these rule-benders were commonly called finaglers. He believed that their efforts hurt business travelers as a group more often than it helped them.
Airlines frown on many of the strategies, including practices like making a series of dummy reservations in the first-class cabin and then canceling them in the hopes of securing a standby upgrade.
''When you have this group of frequent travelers trying to get around the rules,'' he wondered, ''where does that leave the ones who play by the rules?''
BUSINESS TRAVEL
