WILLIAM HARRIS isn't talking.
Don't be mistaken, he is not silent. He's running through his litany of talking points and prepared answers, but he's not giving anything away.
Mr. Harris likes a surprise.
For months now, Mr. Harris has been quietly developing plans to stage one of the biggest parties New York has seen in a long time. He is the chief executive of the Republican National Convention, which is coming to Madison Square Garden this summer, and as such is a sort of super concierge to the national Republican Party.
He must find a way to entertain 50,000 delegates, dignitaries and guests, as well as hold the attention of a national television audience. All while giving President Bush a running start in his re-election bid.
And he isn't talking. ''I'm trying to figure out how not to tell you,'' Mr. Harris said as he sank into a black leather sofa in his office.
Here's some of what he's not telling: Where will President Bush give his acceptance speech? There has been speculation that he might do it outside the Garden, and while that is unlikely, Mr. Harris won't give so much as a wink or a nod. He isn't discussing the kind of events he plans to stage, the neighborhoods he'd like to visit, or really much of anything about what to expect.
It's always back to his talking points.
''A convention is a national event,'' he said. ''And so what you want in terms of a national event is to create an infrastructure -- a forum, if you will -- that's the most stable forum possible so you can present a vision and an image to the American people.''
Wherever did he learn to talk like that?
Mr. Harris is a veteran party operative, a Southern Republican who started rising through the ranks when Democrats still reigned supreme in the South. He grew up in Birmingham, Ala., and fell into politics when a roommate's sister married the executive director of the Alabama Republican Party. He did volunteer work for the party, helped run campaigns and eventually became chairman of the state party.
''I just sort of kept doing it,'' he said.
He's helped out in every convention since 1972, arranging transportation, aiding state delegations, serving as sergeant-at-arms. Now he is leading his party into enemy territory. The Republicans have never before held their nominating convention in New York City, where there are five registered Democrats for every registered Republican. There is talk of large protests and unprecedented security.
But Mr. Harris said he wasn't worried.
The Republicans insist that they are not coming to New York to capitalize on Sept. 11 and have said that they won't hold any convention-related events at ground zero. Not everyone believes them. When Mr. Harris was asked if they are still committed to staying away, he paused for a split second, then seemed to answer very carefully.
''I am committed to that, yes,'' he said.
So if not ground zero, then why New York? Mr. Harris says he would like to hold events in the neighborhoods, where his candidate could benefit by seeming to embrace the ethnic diversity that is New York. But he's not saying where or when. He says he'd like to employ some of the national icons here, but he won't say which ones. ''How about the Brooklyn Bridge?'' he was asked.
''That's a good suggestion,'' he said.
And so it's back to the talking points. ''In my mind, this commitment that I made to myself and to all the people I've talked to about getting this job was: let's really see if we can redefine this convention,'' he said.
But how?
SELECTING New York was a start. Mr. Harris has an office high above Madison Square Garden. His aides asked that the exact floor not be published, for security reasons, which would suggest more concern than Mr. Harris is ready to concede. Before coming to New York, Mr. Harris said, he was concerned about the traffic, the strong labor unions and the high prices. The traffic is still a problem, he said, and the prices are high, but the labor unions are very cooperative. He said he understood that they wanted the work the convention would generate and weren't in this to promote the president.
But for Mr. Harris, motivation doesn't matter. ''Some people who want it to be a successful experience aren't doing it because they want to help George Bush,'' he said. ''They want to do it because they see it as a good thing for New York.''
Considering all the time he is spending in New York, when he is not home in Virginia, Mr. Harris doesn't seem to be getting out much. He can't recall the restaurants he has dined in, and he hasn't been to a Broadway show this year.
Perhaps he has been way too busy with all those things he won't talk about. He became a tad playful when asked if California's governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, would play a prominent role at the convention. ''Oh, I think people will be very excited to see the governor,'' he said.
Does that mean Mr. Schwarzenegger will be giving a prime-time speech?
''I mean he gets access to the floor of the convention as governor,'' Mr. Harris said.
PUBLIC LIVES
