A rare study of young adults on the verge of leaving foster care systems reveals a bleak portrait of these 17-year-olds in Illinois, Wisconsin and Iowa. Many are lagging desperately behind in school, running into trouble with the law and struggling with psychological problems.
The survey of 732 youths, which will be released Tuesday by the Chapin Hall Center for Children at the University of Chicago, offers a glimpse of a group often overlooked in the piles of studies and surveys: young people, once removed from their homes because of abuse or neglect, now preparing to exit the child welfare system as adults.
''These are people heading out into the world who will have far less support than the average middle-class, working-class kids,'' said Mark E. Courtney, the study's author and the director of Chapin Hall Center. ''Up until now they have had the protection of the child welfare system. And as they head out, the deck, as you can see, is stacked against them.''
Dr. Courtney's study focused on 17-year-olds in the Midwest, who, like more than 20,000 young adults around the country each year, will soon leave the support system many of them have known for years. Many will ''age out'' at 18, though some states allow them to continue to get help until they turn 21.
What the survey makes clear, state officials and child welfare experts say, is that these young adults will need more help, not less.
''This is the ultimate outcome of a child: how well they transition into adulthood and become a productive member of society,'' said Vern Armstrong, chief of the bureau of protective services in Iowa's Department of Human Services. ''Obviously, we have a lot of work to do.''
Compared with a broad sample of youths from across the country, the 732 from foster care -- virtually all of the 17-year-olds from Iowa and Wisconsin and about two-thirds of those in Illinois -- were more likely to have been held back a grade, twice as likely to have been suspended from school and four times as likely to have been expelled, the study found. At age 17 -- though mostly in the upper grades of high school -- they were reading, on average, at a seventh grade level.
They were also more likely than the national sample to have been in trouble with the law. More than half had been arrested, more than a third had spent a night at a correctional facility, and one-fifth reported having been convicted of a crime.
Those in foster care had also received psychological counseling more often than the broader sample: more than a third said they had been counseled, and nearly a quarter said drugs had been prescribed to them for psychological problems. Seven percent reported spending at least one night in a psychiatric hospital in the past year, the study found.
But the study brought some more positive news, too. About 90 percent of those surveyed said they were optimistic about the future. More than half said they considered themselves lucky to have been placed in foster care. And an even larger segment said they were mostly satisfied with their experiences in foster care.
In recent years, federal and state authorities have significantly increased spending to help those making the transition out of foster care. Dr. Courtney estimated that officials were spending some $200 million a year nationally on such programs.
''Still, what's being done is very, very little,'' said Richard Wexler, executive director of the National Coalition for Child Protection Reform. ''They've doubled the money from one drop in the bucket to two drops in the bucket. And how many children do you know -- anywhere -- who are ready to go out into the world at 18? It's urgent to do more.''
At the same time, Mr. Wexler said, the more fundamental problem lies not at the end of a child's journey through the system but at the start. Fewer children, he said, should be removed from their homes and placed in foster care in the first place.
Patrick T. Murphy, who represents abused and neglected children as the public guardian for Cook County, which includes Chicago, said he attributed many of the troubling findings about teenagers to the constant moves from foster home to foster home many of them faced in earlier years.
''By the time a kid is moved four or five times, it's too late,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''By the time he is a teenager, he blows up.''
In Dr. Courtney's study, one-quarter of the teenagers had lived in just one foster home, nearly two-fifths had lived in four or more foster homes and many had moved from school to school.
For Bryan H. Samuels, the director of the Department of Children and Family Services in Illinois, the results of the study are simply the latest evidence that the agency must focus not just on children who will be adopted, not just on children who will return to their birth families -- but also on those who will stay in the system until they become adults.
''We have to change the way we serve them,'' he said. ''We have to change the menu of services that we offer them.''
Mr. Samuels, who himself lived in one of the state's residential programs from age 9 until 19, added, ''I understand the fear and anxiety many of them have.''
The study, commissioned by the three Midwestern states for about $1.2 million, will track the same 732 youths when they reach 19, and then again when they turn 21.
