Aziza Eizadin was sitting in biology class on Monday, learning about the digestive system, when her world suddenly exploded into a blur of glass.
Her hands were sliced open, her friends fell at her feet, and she ran screaming outside to see the police station next door on fire from a suicide car bombing. It killed at least 10 people, including a student, and wounded 50, including many civilians.
''Everyone in the classroom was cut,'' said Ms. Eizadin, a 19-year-old high school student, who had dried drops of blood on her neatly ironed oxford shirt.
In the smoking aftermath, many Iraqis were talking brave, insisting that they would not bow to terrorist attacks. But Kirkuk sits on a fault line between the Kurds and the Arabs, and deadly attacks like these are sharpening tensions precisely at a time when Iraqi leaders are deliberating over the future of this northern city.
Kirkuk is one of the most diverse areas in Iraq, home to rival clusters of Arabs, Kurds, Christians and Turkmens, and it is surrounded by some of the richest oil fields in the world. Kurdish leaders are trying to include Kirkuk in a special Kurdish zone that would have more autonomy than the rest of Iraq, but many Arab leaders are resisting.
Though police stations have become the target of choice across the country, the Rahimawa Police Station, in a Kurdish neighborhood, was unprotected. There were no concrete barriers, no sandbags and no coils of razor wire.
Police officials said that at 8 a.m. on Monday, when policemen were changing their shifts, a white Oldsmobile packed with explosives glided across the station's parking lot, pulled up next to the main gate and blew up.
''We knew we were vulnerable, and we kept asking the Americans for help, but they kept saying tomorrow, tomorrow, tomorrow,'' said the police chief, Torhan Yousef.
As he gazed across a parking lot of twisted metal and scraps of torn, wet cloth, he added, ''Look what happened tomorrow.''
Lt. Micah Blais of the United States Army, who arrived at the police station shortly after the blast, said he did not know why the post had been left so exposed.
''Obviously, this shows a breach,'' Lieutenant Blais said. ''We're going to work with these guys to improve it.''
The bomb gouged a small crater in the parking lot and blasted debris hundreds of feet in each direction. The steering wheel of the suicide car crashed into an office. Blood and flesh were smeared on the walls.
''These were my sons and brothers,'' Chief Yousef said.
Officials said they were not sure who was behind the attack, but they offered suspicions about foreign terrorists and Islamic militants.
The police chief said the investigation would be ''very primitive.''
''We will make some pencil sketches of what happened,'' he said. ''What else can we do?''
At a nearby market, flush with chocolates from Turkey and soaps from France, shopkeepers said the security situation had been improving.
''Yes, we still hear a little shooting at night, and there is a curfew,'' said Najemdin Rachman, a vendor of powdered milk. ''But we are trying to get along.''
Azab Abdul Karim, another storeowner, added: ''We want more business, not more fighting. But this doesn't help.''
At Kirkuk's central hospital, doctors said that several children had been blinded by flying glass from shattered windows and that at least one teenage girl had died.
Hours after the blast, children were still being trundled in, swathed in bandages.
Ms. Eizadin, the student at a girls' high school next to the police station, stood quietly in a hallway. Both her hands were wrapped in mittens of gauze.
Her father said she might lose the use of her fingers.
''I used to want to be teacher,'' Ms. Eizadin said. ''Now, I'm not sure I want to go back to school.''
