State education officials yesterday released a list of 1,012 schools that had made substantial gains on statewide English and math tests, including several New York City schools in poor neighborhoods where a sizable majority of students were scoring above grade level.
The list of most-improved schools is based on the annual reading and math exams, given in the fourth and eighth grades. The list shows the progress schools have made in the five years since 1999, when the current tests were first administered.
But while the list documents some stunning improvements among the state's fourth graders, the results for eighth graders are far less encouraging. For instance, while 598 schools statewide met the ''most improved'' criteria on the fourth-grade reading test, only 17 schools met that criteria for eighth grade.
The state education commissioner, Richard P. Mills, attributed the disparity partly to disagreement among educators about goals for middle school students, and he said that in the spring the Regents would likely adopt tough new regulations ''on what defines an effective middle grades program.''
''What should leadership look like in middle school?'' he asked. ''What should curriculum look like in middle schools? How should we use the time? That has been the subject of an extremely lively debate.''
To qualify for the most-improved list, schools must have achieved, between 1999 and 2003, a total increase of at least 20 percentage points in the number of students meeting or exceeding the standards on the exams. In addition, at least half of the school's students must now meet or exceed the standards.
In New York City, the most impressive gains in reading among fourth graders were at Public School 26 in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, and at Public School 82 in Jamaica, Queens. At P.S. 26, the poverty rate among students is 82 percent and at P.S. 82, it is 85 percent, according to the city Department of Education.
In 1999, only 22 percent of fourth graders at P.S. 26 met the state standards in reading. Last year, 82 percent of fourth graders met the standards. At P.S. 82 last year, 80 percent of fourth graders met the standards, up from 23 percent five years ago.
Jane Ginsberg, the principal of P.S. 82, said it was difficult to put the recipe for success into words. ''It's a process,'' she said, taking a deep breath. ''It takes a very committed and motivated staff. It takes good materials that are aligned with the standards -- up-to-date stuff -- it takes small classes, it takes support services and it takes attitude.
''I don't know how else to put it,'' she continued. ''It's all those things. It's my school nurse. It's the way my lunchroom people treat the kids. It's the way my custodian participates in what takes place in the school. It's really a central vision on the part of everybody who participates in the school, a belief in the kids.''
After spending her entire teaching career at other schools in District 28, Ms. Ginsberg moved to P.S. 82 seven years ago to become its assistant principal. She has been principal for five years. At first, she said, she lost a number of teachers to higher-paying jobs in suburban schools.
''My predecessor left for the same reason,'' she said. ''He went to Levittown and he got a $25,000 raise.'' But the team she put together has stayed in place. Severe overcrowding was eased with the use of an off-site annex that now houses the entire kindergarten. First-grade classes that had 33 students now have 21.
By last year, P.S. 82 had already made such strides that it was among the 209 schools that were exempted from the city's new standardized reading and math curriculums. P.S. 82 uses Harcourt and Open Court, reading programs regarded as more structured than the city's balanced literacy curriculum.
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein applauded the improved schools yesterday but said the city system still had much work to do.
''We will not rest until we can say that we would send our children to any and all of our city's 1,200 public schools,'' he said in a prepared statement.
In math, schools with some of the top gains among fourth graders included two Brooklyn schools with jumps of more than 60 percentage-points over five years: Public School 245 in Flatbush and Public School 23 in Bedford-Stuyvesant. At P.S. 245, 91 percent of students now meet standards, up from 30 percent, and at P.S. 23, 75 percent now meet standards, up from less than 15 percent in 1999.
In eighth grade, some of the biggest gains in both reading and math were at the Professional Performing Arts School in Manhattan, which serves 6th through 12th grades.
Marie Buono, the principal of Public School 196 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, which was also on the state's most-improved list, said that teamwork among staff and high expectations for children were the ingredients for success.
''The biggest thing is that we work together here,'' she said. ''Everyone can be successful, every child no matter what. They have to do their best.'' She added: ''It's not acceptable for a child to say I can't do it or I won't do it.''
