A lawyer for Gov. John G. Rowland on Monday asked the committee weighing impeachment charges against him to reveal the scope of its inquiry and to consider his legal opinion on what defines an impeachable offense.
The governor's in-house counsel, Ross H. Garber, requested that the panel ''identify at the outset the subject matters the Select Committee intends to examine and accept a legal brief on the standard for impeaching a Connecticut governor,'' according to a copy of the request.
But Arthur O'Neill, a Republican who is co-chairman of the 10-member committee, said it may be difficult to grant the requests. Although the committee met for the first time last month, it only began discussing strategy at its last meeting, last Thursday. At that time, during a four-hour executive session, the committee was not able to resolve a ''clear-cut scope for the investigation,'' Mr. O'Neill said, adding that more time was needed.
''What he's trying to do is get us to pick certain areas and take certain other areas off the table,'' Mr. O'Neill said of Mr. Garber. ''The problem is we may look into a certain area, find nothing there but wind up returning to it later.''
The committee was formed after Mr. Rowland, a Republican in his third term, revealed in December that he lied about accepting gifts and free work on his cottage in Litchfield from people employed by or doing business with the state. In addition to the impeachment inquiry, Mr. Rowland is under federal investigation.
Since its last meeting, the committee has indicated that it will be investigating several state contracts and business deals currently under federal scrutiny. On Monday, Mr. O'Neill noted that the committee's investigation includes examining work at the governor's cottage; gifts in connection with work on the cottage; and Robert V. Matthews, a friend of Mr. Rowland's, a local entrepreneur who has drawn the attention of federal investigators looking into whether the Rowland administration has steered contracts to favored parties.
Mr. O'Neill said the committee, which will meet again on Thursday, would probably accept a legal brief from Mr. Garber on his view of the standards for impeachment, a brief that is expected to take two weeks to produce. But the committee will not wait for the opinion; by April 14, it must issue its report and recommendation on whether articles of impeachment should be drafted against Mr. Rowland.
''There's nothing wrong with taking a look at another legal opinion,'' Mr. O'Neill said. ''But it s not like we're going to negotiate the impeachment standards with them, nor do we have to wait for their documents to issue our own standards.''
There is no standard for establishing an impeachable offense in Connecticut's Constitution.
Jacob D. Zeldes, the lawyer who was the special counsel to the only other impeachment inquiry proceeding in Connecticut -- that of a judge in 1983 -- said the committee in that case accepted all the legal briefs offered by the judge's lawyer.
