Michael King has played his entire professional soccer career under the roof and under the radar.
''When I came out of college, there was no opportunity to play outdoors, which was disappointing considering that's where everyone looks as a benchmark in a soccer career,'' said King, the top vote-getter among the Major Indoor Soccer League's American players for Sunday's All-Star Game. ''I would have loved to have played outdoors, but it didn't happen.''
King is a native of London who came to the United States in the early 1980's and attended Fairleigh Dickinson University in Teaneck, N.J. After bouncing around the M.I.S.L. after college, King landed in Milwaukee with the Wave, married, became a father and last year became a United States citizen.
King, 40, was a first-team all-American in 1984 and finished with 87 goals in 91 games, good for fourth on the N.C.A.A.'s Division I career list. He is still No. 1 in the F.D.U. record book in goals and total points (206).
The All-Star Game, in St. Charles, Mo., outside St. Louis, will be broadcast live on the East Coast by Comcast at 2:05 p.m. Sunday. For the first time, it will match players from 29 countries against the M.I.S.L.'s top United States players. This season, the nine-team indoor league expanded to Monterrey, Mexico, and St. Louis. Next season, there are plans to add at least one club, probably in Chicago. There could also be a team on Long Island or in New Jersey in 2005-6.
King bristled at the notion that the indoor game is a poor imitation of outdoor soccer.
''American football people look down on the arena league, but a couple of years ago the Super Bowl M.V.P. spent a number of years inside,'' King said during a recent telephone interview, referring to St. Louis Rams quarterback Kurt Warner. ''I tell kids that if you go outdoors to play with the skills you've learned indoors, you'll be a more dangerous player. If you're good enough to get paid to play, it doesn't matter if there's a roof over your head.''
SCOTLAND  Widespread Financial Problems
These are not the best of times for soccer in Scotland.
''The situation is pretty bleak,'' New England Revolution Coach Steve Nicol, who played 27 times for the Scottish national team, said in a recent interview. ''Common sense has gone out the window. It pains me personally.''
Scotland is rarely viewed as one of the top destinations for the world's elite players, and some clubs in the Scottish Premier League have spent beyond their means. Now three teams -- Motherwell, Dundee and Livingston -- are bankrupt, and Dunfermline recently asked its players to take cuts in pay. Heart of Midlothian said it planned to sell its 188-year-old stadium, Tynecastle, and move to Murrayfield, a rugby ground. Even Glasgow Celtic and Rangers, the only clubs capable of winning the league title, are deeply in debt.
''Too many clubs have overextended themselves,'' Frank McAveety, the Scottish sports minister, told Reuters, ''and we genuinely need to get back to the grass roots of the game and grow the game from below.''
An influx of relatively high-priced players has cost homegrown players valuable spots on top clubs. In turn, the national team has been abysmal in recent years. Scotland is tied with Israel at No. 53 in the FIFA world ranking. It last qualified for the World Cup in 1998, did not qualify for this summer's European championship and was embarrassed by Wales, 4-0, in a friendly last week.
''When you mention Scottish football to a Scotsman, they think of the national team,'' Nicol, the coach of the year in Major League Soccer in 2002, said. ''The only answer is to go with young Scottish kids. Clearly, what clubs are doing now isn't working.''
Corner Kicks
ENGLAND -- Arsenal said yesterday that it had completed financing for a $673 million stadium at Ashburton Grove, which is not far from its current ground at Highbury in north London and is due to open during the 2006-7 season. . . . Manager Gerald Houllier is under increasing fire after Liverpool was ousted from the F.A. Cup by Portsmouth. Glasgow Celtic Manager Martin O'Neill is a top candidate for the job.
METROSTARS -- The MetroStars have dropped goalkeeper Steve Reese and are in Spain for the La Manga tournament with two keepers: Jonny Walker and Zach Wells, the rookie from U.C.L.A. The MetroStars open the tournament tomorrow against Viking of Norway. The nine-team tournament includes three M.L.S clubs.
The team announced a development agreement yesterday with the A-League Long Island Rough Riders, giving the MetroStars three roster spots on the Rough Riders.
MEXICO -- Virginia Tovar became the first woman to call a game in the first division Sunday. She sent off two players in Irapuato's 2-1 victory over Club América. She also awarded a penalty kick to Irapuato, which resulted in the decisive goal.
A MOMENT'S SILENCE -- John Charles, known as the Gentle Giant, died in England over the weekend at age 72. Charles played for Wales, Leeds United and Juventus in the 1950's and early 60's. He was one of the first British exports to Italy, scoring 93 goals in 155 matches for Juventus. Throughout his career, Charles, who was 6 feet 2 inches, was never shown a yellow or red card.
ALL THE KING'S MEN -- An English historian announced last week the discovery of one of King Henry VIII's shopping lists, which included an order for 10 pairs of leather boots, 45 pairs of velvet shoes and ''one pair of sotular'' -- an old word meaning footwear ''for football,'' according to Agence France-Presse. Henry VIII ruled from 1509-47, had six wives and split the Church of England from the Vatican.
CHAMPIONS LEAGUE -- The knockout round begins today with four matches, including Real Madrid at Bayern Munich. There are four more matches tomorrow, including Manchester United at Porto. The return matches will be played March 9-10.
UNITED STATES -- The men's national team's match against Haiti on March 13 in Miami will be broadcast live at 8 p.m. on DirecTV's pay-per-view service and on HDNet. The women's national team opens regional Olympic qualifying tomorrow against Trinidad and Tobago in Costa Rica. Then it plays Haiti on Friday and Mexico on Sunday.
YANKS ABROAD -- In England, goalkeeper Brad Friedel headed home a late corner kick in Blackburn's 3-2 loss to Charlton; defender Frankie Simek has been wearing the captain's armband for Arsenal's reserve team; and in Germany, striker Clint Mathis scored his third goal in four games for Hannover 96.
SOCCER REPORT  Correction:  March 11, 2004, Thursday  A brief note in the Soccer Report column on Feb. 24 about the death of John Charles, a British player known as the Gentle Giant, misstated the basis for his nickname. What Charles never received during his playing career in the 1950's and 60's was an oral caution by a referee. (Yellow cards and red cards for a referee's caution or a dismissal were not used until 1970.)
