The first question that springs to mind when a new production of ''Pericles'' is announced is, ''Why?'' It is a minor play of dubious authorship, a sort of Jacobean stage version of a chase movie. A staging by the Theater for a New Audience at the Brooklyn Academy of Music fails to come up with a good answer.
In his lectures on Shakespeare, W. H. Auden suggested that ''Pericles'' was a play that should be performed only ''by schoolchildren with a Svengali director.'' Bartlett Sher, the New Audience director, is no Svengali, and there is nothing hypnotic about this ''Pericles'' except that the first half may induce drowsiness before Shakespeare takes over and the characters come to life.
The latest scholarship says that Shakespeare wrote about half of the play, the latter three of the original five acts. At best it's a good example of Shakespeare as play doctor.
The first two acts are now attributed to George Wilkins, a popular novelist of the day whom Harold Bloom, in his book ''Shakespeare: The Invention of the Human,'' called a ''lowlife hack.''
Wilkins brought out a novelization of ''Pericles'' about the time the play was first performed, and it was a page-turner. Theatergoers wanted action, romance, sex and violence, all thrown together with a happy ending: pretty much what audiences today want.
''Pericles'' has it all. This story of the prince of Tyre dates to ancient Rome, and it was first told in English in by John Gower, a colleague of Chaucer, a full 200 years before the play that bears Shakespeare's name was first staged in 1608.
The plot has more twists than a maze, and the misfortunes that befall Pericles make Job sound like a crybaby.
It begins when Pericles travels to Antioch to try to win the hand of the king's daughter by answering a riddle. Pericles figures out the answer, which is that the King of Antioch is having an incestuous affair with his daughter. The king guesses Pericles knows the truth and puts out a contract on him.
Pericles then goes on the run. He travels back to Tyre, then to Tarsus, to Pentapolis, to Ephesus, to Mytilene.
He survives more storms at sea and shipwrecks than Patrick O'Brian's Master and Commander. He marries a princess, has a daughter and, at one time or another, thinks both are dead. The daughter is sold into prostitution, but thanks to the intervention of the goddess Diana never loses her virginity. There are some friendly pirates and double-crossing friends.
More labored than the story line, however, is the writing in the opening scenes, which at times seems almost a bad parody of Elizabethan blank verse. For example, after Pericles is back in Tyre, he muses on the threat from the King of Antioch, ''whose arm seems far too short to hit me here.'' Muhammad Ali wrote better poetry.
But once Shakespeare goes to work, what has been mostly a snooze of a play suddenly takes flight.
Consider two descriptions from separate storms. In Act II, Wilkins's Pericles chides the elements: ''Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!/Wind, rain, and thunder, remember earthly man/Is but a substance that must yield to you,/And I, as fits my nature, do obey you.'' In contrast, in Act III, Shakespeare's Pericles is again threatened by the weather: ''Thou God of this great vast, rebuke these surges/Which wash both heaven and hell; and thou, that hast/Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,/Having called them from the deep.''
With a couple of exceptions the cast seldom rises above the weaknesses of Wilkins's text in the first part of the play or achieves the potential of Shakespeare's work.
Mr. Sher, whose staging of ''Cymbeline'' a couple of seasons back featured American cowboys and samurai warriors, has mounted a fairly straightforward production. There is a sprightly and diverting dance that enlivens the first half a bit, but Shakespeare's bawdy and ribald whorehouse scene is more loud than funny. Mr. Sher's decision to change actors playing the title role in the final scenes smacks of self-indulgence, although Christopher McCann provides one of the better performances as the older Pericles, giving the character full Shakespearean stature.
Tim Hopper, the Pericles through most of the play, is at best adequate, better in some scenes than others, but he never quite achieves the superhero status the plot needs. Linda Powell is consistently charming as Thaisa, and Andrew Weems brings some needed energy to two roles, first as Simonides and later as Boult, a servant in the brothel. Philip Goodwin adds a nice turn as Helicanus, and Brenda Wehle is cogent as Old Gower, the narrator. Elizabeth Caitlin Ward's costumes are sumptuous.
PERICLES
By William Shakespeare; directed by Bartlett Sher; sets and lighting by Christopher Akerlind; costumes by Elizabeth Caitlin Ward; sound design and music composition by Peter John Still. The Brooklyn Academy of Music, Alan H. Fishman, chairman of the board; Karen Brooks Hopkins, president; William I. Campbell, vice chairman of the board; Joseph V. Melillo, executive producer, presents the Theater for a New Audience production, Jeffrey Horowitz, artistic director; Theodore C. Rogers, chairman of the board; Dorothy Ryan, managing director. At the Brooklyn Academy of Music, Harvey Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene.
WITH: Brenda Wehle (Gower, Lychorida and Diana), Christopher McCann (Antiochus, Poor Man and elder Pericles), Tim Hopper (Pericles and Lysimachus), Julyana Soelistyo (daughter of Anitochus and Marina), Robert LuPone (Cleon and Pandar); Linda Powell (Thaisa); Andrew Weems (Simonides and Boult); Philip Goodwin (Helicanus, Marshal and Cerimon) and Kristine Nielsen (Dionyza and Bawd).
THEATER REVIEW
