Trent Hunter presents a jumble of contradictions, but he is hardly a contrary athlete. At age 23, he is young to be going bald, a reality he accepts and accentuates by shaving his head. It is a striking look that he emphasizes with a long goatee but no mustache.
His chin whiskers flow thick and taper to a point, giving him a slightly sinister look, which he dispels with frequent smiles that seem naturally modest. ''I guess it can look a little intimidating,'' Hunter said. ''But I'm not trying to scare anyone.''
A rookie on the Islanders, he plays with the poise of a veteran. Although one of the slower skaters on the team -- with a form called ''ugly'' by General Manager Mike Milbury -- Hunter often arrives at important and contentious places a step ahead of opponents.
Despite his inexperience, his technique is cerebral; he seems to sense what might take place a moment before most others do. Hunter is a big right wing, a 6-foot-3, 210-pound power forward who, as they say in the sport, ''finishes his checks'' by crashing into opponents as they try to carry or pass the puck.
Yet his total of 12 penalty minutes in 56 games is the sort of statistic that might someday earn him consideration for the Lady Byng trophy for sportsmanship. But first, Hunter could win a different award, the Calder Memorial Trophy as rookie of the year. His 22 goals and 43 points lead the Islanders, and his total goals and six game-winning goals lead all rookies in the National Hockey League. And those numbers do not take into account his diligent defensive effort.
When the Boston Bruins visit Nassau Coliseum tonight, Hunter and the Islanders will probably face goalie Andrew Raycroft, another contender for the award as top rookie.
''When people first started talking about it, I kind of started laughing because I didn't think there was any chance for me,'' Hunter said of his Calder candidacy. ''I was more focused on just trying to make the hockey club and being an everyday contributor. Now, hearing talk about it, it's a great honor. But it's not something I want to focus too much on.''
The Calder is voted by the Professional Hockey Writers Association. Other Islanders to win the award have been Bryan Berard (1997), Mike Bossy (1978), Bryan Trottier (1976) and Denis Potvin (1974). Another candidate this season is the Montreal Canadiens' Michael Ryder, whose 28 assists and 44 points lead all rookies; Hunter is second in both categories.
In a 4-1 Islanders victory over Buffalo on Saturday at the Coliseum, it was easy to focus on Hunter. Early in the second period, on a rush up ice, he passed perfectly -- long and horizontally across the Sabres' zone -- to set up a goal by Shawn Bates, his linemate and roommate, who had not scored since Dec. 13.
Less than three minutes later, Hunter jarred the puck loose from a Sabre with a check behind the Buffalo net. Then he skated to the front to occupy a defenseman and screen goalie Martin Biron. This helped Islanders defenseman Adrian Aucoin score on a shot from the point.
But Hunter's best play of the period was a defensive one, when the Islanders held a 3-1 lead. Buffalo defenseman Andy Delmore crept in from the blue line and took a pass in the slot for what looked like a clear scoring chance against Islanders goalie Rick DiPietro. But Hunter sprang toward Delmore and clamped his stick down on top of Delmore's, dissolving his scoring chance.
''That was huge, especially at that point of the game, to deny them a Grade-A scoring opportunity like that,'' DiPietro said. ''He brings so much to the table. He's strong physically, he gets in there on the forecheck, he hits everything that moves. He's so big, he's hard to push off the puck. He never gets too cocky and that's tough when you're scoring as much as he's doing.''
Michael Peca, the Islanders' captain, centered a line with Hunter on Saturday, and said: ''He's got great poise. This allows everybody to do their own jobs. Sometimes, you get young kids and, in the back of your mind, you worry about covering up, especially in the defensive zone. But the guy is so in control of his game. He's so reliable. It's easy to play with him. He fits in with any line.''
Referring to Hunter's personality, Peca said: ''He's one of those happy-go-lucky-type kids. Real humble. He waited for his opportunity and he's making the most of it.''
Hunter's opportunity arrived gradually. A native of Red Deer, Alberta, he did not begin playing in the top level of junior hockey until he was 17, when he scored 13 goals for Prince George of the Western Hockey League. He was the 150th player drafted in 1998, by Anaheim.
When the Mighty Ducks did not sign him, they traded him to the Islanders for a fourth-round pick in 2000. He spent most of the next three seasons in the American Hockey League and many summer weeks at minicamps and skating schools. Steve Stirling, in his first year as the Islanders' coach, coached Hunter in the A.H.L., at Bridgeport.
''I knew when I saw him three and a half years ago he had N.H.L. hands and N.H.L. head,'' Stirling said. ''It was just a matter of learning that he could get whacked around. He got beat up pretty good last year in the playoffs by Binghamton. But he played hard and he scored some goals. That was the turning point. He realized, 'Hey, I can get beat up and I can survive.' ''
Milbury said he acquired Hunter on the advice of Gordie Clark, a scout now with the Rangers. ''The first time I saw him, I couldn't believe how bad a skater he was,'' Milbury said.
Although improving, Hunter's stride is still not elegant. He sways from side to side, as if he were a sailor walking across the deck of a ship on a restless sea.
Some people compare Hunter's approach to Dave Andreychuk's. A wing for the Tampa Bay Lightning in his 22nd season, Andreychuk has scored 626 goals, 11th on the N.H.L. career list. Hunter's willingness to struggle for space in front of the opposing team's net has earned him playing time during power plays, in the manner of Andreychuk.
Hunter has a heavy, accurate shot and can score from a distance. ''He's got the head juke going and the hands are going,'' Milbury said. ''He manages to get away from people. He just keeps coming. He's a real coachable kid.''
After practice Friday, Hunter sat at a table, signing 200 color photographs of himself. Like many things happening to him this season, the autograph session was a learning experience.
''New and exciting,'' Hunter said of his first few months as an N.H.L. player. ''It's fun.''
HOCKEY
