COLLEGES  N.C.A.A. Names Task Force on Recruiting
Five college athletic directors were appointed to a task force yesterday that will review recruiting rules after allegations that Colorado football prospects were enticed for years with sex and alcohol. The 12-member panel, created by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, will include Jeremy Foley of the University of Florida, where a high school football star was involved in several incidents during a recruiting visit last month. The player, linebacker Willie Williams, later signed with Miami.
''We have very precise rules regarding the length of an official visit, how much can be spent on visits and other logistical issues,'' the N.C.A.A. president, Myles Brand, said in a statement. ''But the rules are less precise when it comes to behavioral issues, and that is where the focus of the task force will be.''
Athletic Directors Gene Smith of Arizona State and Debbie Yow of Maryland were also appointed to the panel. Also on the panel are Chris Plonsky, the head of women's sports at Texas; and Sonia Price, the interim director of women's athletics at Alabama State. (Bloomberg News)
WISCONSIN SUSPENDS TOP RUNNING BACK -- Wisconsin running back Dwayne Smith, the Badgers' leading rusher as a sophomore last season, was suspended from the team after being jailed yesterday in Madison on suspicion of sexual assault.
Smith was arrested with a 23-year-old man after a woman said that she had been assaulted after a party Saturday night, according to police Capt. Luis Yudice.
The woman was treated and released from a local hospital, and Smith was being held at the Dane County (Wis.) Jail, according to police Lt. Sue Williams, who is supervising the investigation. (AP)
CLAWSON MOVES FROM FORDHAM TO RICHMOND -- Richmond hired Fordham's Dave Clawson as its new football coach yesterday.
Clawson went 29-29 in five seasons at Fordham, including the 2002 Patriot League title. Clawson has also been an offensive coordinator for Lehigh and Villanova.
He replaces Jim Reid, who left Richmond after nine seasons to become the defensive line coach at Syracuse. Richmond went 2-9 last season. (AP)
AMATEUR AWARDS  Five Are Announced as Sullivan Finalists
Cleveland Cavaliers guard LeBron James and University of Connecticut guard Diana Taurasi were among five finalists for the Sullivan Award, given annually to the top amateur athlete in the United States. Also nominated were the Olympic short-track speedskater Apolo Anton Ohno, the swimmer Michael Phelps and the track athlete Philippa Raschker, the Amateur Athletic Union said in a statement. The award will be presented April 13 at the New York Athletic Club. (Bloomberg News)
BOXING  De La Hoya-Hopkins Bout Likely
The dates are set and so is the site. Now all the promoter Bob Arum needs to do is get a signature from the middleweight champion Bernard Hopkins to complete his two-fight deal with Oscar De La Hoya.
Arum said he completed a handshake deal yesterday for the MGM Grand hotel-casino in Las Vegas to hold a June 5 fight card featuring Hopkins and De La Hoya in separate bouts. If the two win, as expected, they will meet Sept. 18 at the MGM for the middleweight title (157 pounds). (AP)
