A guest at Jayson Williams's estate the night a chauffeur was killed by a shotgun blast testified on Monday that Mr. Williams began organizing a cover-up of his involvement minutes after the fatal shot.
The witness, Dean Bumbaco, said that Mr. Williams, a former star for the New Jersey Nets, had told the eight men present to tell the authorities that the victim, Costas Christofi, had shot himself. Mr. Bumbaco also testified that Mr. Williams and one of his good friends, Kent Culuko, took turns wiping the gun with a towel to remove fingerprints and then both placed the weapon, a double-barreled 12-gauge shotgun, at different places in the bedroom to make it appear Mr. Christofi had committed suicide.
Mr. Williams is charged with aggravated manslaughter, manslaughter and two weapons counts linked to the shooting, and four counts relating to accusations of a cover-up, including tampering with evidence and witnesses.
Soon after the prosecutor, Steven C. Lember, finished questioning Mr. Bumbaco, a defense lawyer, William R. Martin, began a cross-examination that became contentious. In it, Mr. Bumbaco, 37, a landscaper and casual acquaintance of Mr. Williams, admitted he did not like Mr. Williams. And he acknowledged a discrepancy between his testimony on Monday about who wiped off the weapon first and the account he gave to detectives on Feb. 24, 2002, 10 days after the shooting. Mr. Bumbaco also acknowledged under persistent questioning by Mr. Martin that his Feb. 24 statement had made no mention of the suicide story he told the jury about on Monday.
At another point during the cross-examination, Mr. Martin turned up another apparent contradiction in Mr. Bumbaco's account. Mr. Martin pointed out on Monday that Mr. Bumbaco told detectives in his 2002 statement that Mr. Williams had told his guests to tell the police the shooting was an accident. In his trial testimony on Monday, Mr. Bumbaco said Mr. Williams never discussed the word ''accident'' with his friends until the day after the shooting.
Mr. Williams's lawyers have argued for months that the shooting was a tragic accident. The prosecution contends it was a homicide because Mr. Williams was handling the gun recklessly and with extreme indifference to the value of human life in the moments before it fired.
The shooting occurred after Mr. Williams, now 36, and his friends watched a Harlem Globetrotters game in Bethlehem, Pa., and then went to a restaurant near his estate with four of the Globetrotters for a late dinner and drinks.
Mr. Christofi drove the Globetrotters to the restaurant. Under Mr. Lember's questioning, Mr. Bumbaco testified that Mr. Christofi had sat alone in the restaurant and that Mr. Williams began cursing at him at one point, asking what he was looking at and if he was a ''fed.''
Then, he said, Mr. Williams told the chauffeur he was only kidding and told him to sit down, Mr. Bumbaco said. ''Get your shine box, kid,'' Mr. Bumbaco quoted Mr. Williams as saying. During cross-examination, Mr. Martin asked about that remark and Mr. Bumbaco said it came from the movie, ''Goodfellas.''
Mr. Bumbaco also told Mr. Martin that Mr. Christofi was having a ''great time,'' taking pictures of Mr. Williams's lavish home after the party went there from the restaurant about 2 a.m. He said he was in Mr. Williams's study with four other men, including Mr. Culuko, when the gun went off in the adjacent bedroom, where Mr. Williams was with three of the Globetrotters.
Mr. Bumbaco said he hurried into the bedroom and saw Mr. Christofi on his knees. He said Mr. Christofi then fell onto his left side. He died within minutes of a massive chest wound, the authorities have said.
Mr. Bumbaco told the prosecutor that Mr. Williams began wiping the shotgun, put it on the floor and then told Mr. Culuko to wipe the gun. After Mr. Culuko did so and placed it on the floor, Mr. Williams picked it up, wiped it again and then tried briefly to put it in Mr. Christofi's hands, Mr. Bumbaco said.
When detectives questioned him hours after the shooting, Mr. Bumbaco testified, he said he had been downstairs with Mr. Williams and all the other guests and that Mr. Christofi had killed himself upstairs.
Mr. Martin, the defense lawyer, also pointed out that Mr. Bumbaco had told jurors on Monday that Mr. Williams had wiped the weapon first and that he gave a contradictory explanation to detectives two years ago, telling them that Mr. Culuko was the first to wipe it.
''I stick to the statement I gave today,'' Mr. Bumbaco said. ''I got a little better recollection now than I had 10 days after the fact.''
Mr. Bumbaco called the Hunterdon County prosecutor's office 10 days after the shooting to implicate Mr. Williams. He testified that he did so because he was troubled by visions of Mr. Christofi's death.
