''The lowest-cost jet you can buy new today is the Cessna Citation CJ1,'' said Rick Adam, the chief executive of Adam Aircraft Industries. ''The CJ1 costs $4 million,'' he pointed out. ''Our jet is at $2 million. So we're like a Lexus competing against a Mercedes. High quality, lower cost.''
Sounded good to me, but of course I am not currently in the market for a fashionable little business jet, not even at these low, low prices.
But back in December, intrigued by a developing market in small and relatively inexpensive business jets, I'd made a trip to Albuquerque to visit Eclipse Aviation, which has said it already has firm orders for 2,000 of its revolutionary new Eclipse 500 jets, with a current sticker price about $1.3 million each.
After that column ran, I got e-mail messages from business jet aficionados who insisted I had to get to this southern suburb of Denver to tour the aircraft manufacturing and assembly plant that Adams Aircraft operates on the edge of Centennial Airport, the busiest general aviation airport in Colorado.
One reason, they said, was that the privately held Adam Aircraft, co-founded in 1998 by Mr. Adam, and capitalized at a tidy $70 million, was already chugging along on three new models -- the A700 twin-engine light jet, the A500 piston twin-engine propeller plane, and the in-development A600, a single-engine turbo-prop. Another reason was that, unlike Eclipse, which is capitalized at more than $300 million but won't be able to get its new jet to market till 2006 because of unanticipated engine-design problems last year, Adam Aircraft actually has a jet that's ready to roll.
''We're hoping to deliver the first ones by the end of the year,'' Mr. Adam, an engineer and pilot, said of the little A700 jets. ''We're regulated by the F.A.A., of course, so it's ultimately their call'' on certification, ''but I think we have a really good shot at it.''
Business travelers who are not potential purchasers -- or passengers -- of light corporate jets might wonder how any of this could possibly affect them. It well may, actually. That's because the coming breed of light jets, sometimes called microjets, is envisioned by some planners and government agencies as a potentially important new cog in the air transportation system.
Urban hub airports and the skies above them are becoming ever more congested, while smaller cities lose air service as carriers jam hubs for maximum cost efficiencies. So with 5,000 under-used small domestic airports capable of handling them, inexpensive, short-range jets carrying up to five passengers are envisioned as the workhorses of a new air taxi system that would divert passengers from crowded airports they don't want to pass through anyway, while enabling travelers to get to their destinations more quickly and directly.
Operated by entrepreneurs who are planning to enter the field when the cheap jets come into production, fleets of jet air taxis would be a major component of the Small Aircraft Transportation System, called SATS, developed by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to plan for handing off more small aircraft traffic to those underused airports.
We'll follow that as it plays out later. Right now, along with Adam Aircraft and Eclipse, Cessna is developing the Mustang, a small jet for the same niche, which is expected to sell for about $2.3 million. Cessna is a unit of Textron Inc.
Mr. Adam appreciates the potential of an air taxi industry. ''We have orders from air taxi operators'' for the new jet, he said. He wouldn't name them. But his company's business plan doesn't depend on them. Instead, he said, Adam Aircraft expects to be profitable making planes that can be marketed as snazzy little jets for the executive who isn't looking to go ''heavy iron,'' which is the industry term for those high-flying, long-range big luxury jets like the Gulfstream V.
''Our basic target,'' he said, ''is a guy who might have been considering a new Citation jet for $4 million, or someone who says $4 million is a little pricey; I might buy a used one instead for $2.5 million or $3 million. We would compete for that business.''
John Hamilton, Adam Aircraft's vice president for marketing, added: ''You're not creating a new market; you're competing for a share'' at the lower end of the estimated $1 billion annual market in new and used light jets.
''To the degree that the air taxi stuff happens, and we think it will happen, that will be a new market,'' Mr. Hamilton said. ''But our basic business plan doesn't assume timing on the air taxi market. It assumes we're selling to the guys who would have bought another jet anyway.''
Unlike competitors who focus exclusively on sexy jets, Adam Aircraft is also marketing propeller planes for owner-operators. These planes include the three A500 piston twin-engine aircraft (priced at $895,000) that it already has flying.
Buyers of stylishly designed, high-end new propeller models, Mr. Adam said, include those with propeller-plane pilot's licenses among a rapidly growing number of ''small-business owners, entrepreneurs and professionals who have businesses in multiple places.'' Also, as the huge baby boom population expands into its years of prime affluence, there's a new propeller-plane market for ''people who have second homes in out-of-the-way places,'' he said.
Adam Aircraft's propeller models have interiors and airframes that look a lot like the A700 jets. That's part of the plan, Mr. Adam said. The modular carbon-fiber airframes of the propeller models were carefully designed to be easily adapted for the A700 jet.
''Eighty percent of the propeller plane systems, even the landing gear, carry over to the jet, and those are all certified already on the A500'' propeller model, Mr. Adam said, explaining why he believes he's going to meet that deadline for delivery of the jet late this year.
BUSINESS TRAVEL: ON THE ROAD
