The controversial stock sale underlying criminal charges against Martha Stewart may have resulted from a plan made weeks in advance rather than in response to a tip from a corporate insider, an executive at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia testified yesterday.
The executive, Heidi DeLuca, the Connecticut administrative business manager in Ms. Stewart's company, told jurors that Ms. Stewart's broker mentioned in November 2001 that he would discuss with Ms. Stewart whether to set a fixed price for the sale of Ms. Stewart's shares in ImClone Systems.
The government has charged both the broker, Peter E. Bacanovic, and Ms. Stewart with conspiring to hinder a federal investigation into the sale of nearly 4,000 ImClone shares by Ms. Stewart in December of that year. The government contends Ms. Stewart sold after she learned that ImClone's chief executive, Samuel D. Waksal, was trying to sell his shares. Mr. Waksal is serving a seven-year sentence on various charges, including securities fraud.
But most of the action yesterday took place outside the presence of the jury, as defense lawyers tried to lay the foundation for evidence they wanted to present. The day began with arguments that the defendants should be acquitted because the prosecution had failed to make its case.
''There has to be some independent corroborative evidence to establish membership in the conspiracy,'' Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, told the judge. What evidence there is of a conspiracy to concoct a false explanation of the stock trade ''deals with the conduct of Mr. Faneuil and Mr. Bacanovic, and very, very little of it deals with the conduct of Ms. Stewart,'' he said, referring to Mr. Bacanovic's assistant, Douglas Faneuil, who testified for the prosecution earlier in the case.
Karen Patton Seymour, a prosecutor, responded that the fact that Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic offered the same justification for the trade -- that there was a prearranged agreement to sell ImClone stock when the price fell to $60 a share -- supported the conspiracy charge, because the justification was false.
''The conscious parallel is the fact that they are both telling the same story, which the government alleges is false, does prove in and of itself that they had spoken and had conspired,'' Ms. Seymour said, adding, ''but we have more than that.''
The judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, did not decide the so-called Rule 29 motions for acquittal filed by both defendants but allowed the defense to begin its case. It started with testimony by Jeremiah S. Gutman, a lawyer who initially advised Mr. Faneuil. The questioning, which followed a short argument before the judge about what defense lawyers could ask, was brief. It skipped the question of whether Mr. Gutman told investigators in January 2003 that Mr. Faneuil had been unsure who told him to pass on a tip about ImClone stock sales to Ms. Stewart.
After Mr. Gutman stepped down, there were hours of testimony about ink on a sheet of paper showing Ms. Stewart's stock sales. The government has argued that a scribbled note next to the entry for ImClone shares, ''@60,'' was added to the sheet to suggest that the sale was prearranged. The defense's expert, Albert H. Lyter III, testified that he found ink from at least three pens on the sheet, but a prosecutor, William A. Burke, questioned him on cross-examination whether the technique used was generally accepted.
''It just hasn't been addressed,'' Dr. Lyter said.
The most contentious witness, who will resume testimony this morning, was Ms. DeLuca, who described a conversation with Mr. Bacanovic in November 2001 regarding selling Ms. Stewart's ImClone stock. The defense is expected to argue that the conversation shows that Ms. Stewart did not sell the stock in response to a tip from Mr. Bacanovic, passed by Mr. Faneuil, that Dr. Waksal, the ImClone executive, was trying to sell his shares in the company.
Mr. Bacanovic ''felt that he could set a floor price of 60 or 61, just in case the stock continued to fall, as like a safeguard,'' Ms. DeLuca said. In response to the next question from Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, David Apfel, Ms. DeLuca continued, Mr. Bacanovic ''said that he would speak to Martha personally about it.''
Mr. Apfel then tried to question Ms. DeLuca about her understanding of plans -- ''tax loss planning'' -- by Ms. Stewart to sell stock from her portfolio, including the ImClone shares, to reduce her tax liability. Time after time Mr. Apfel encountered objections from the government as he sought to elicit testimony that could be used to counter previous testimony by Mr. Faneuil that the tax loss explanation for the sale of the ImClone shares was a pretext, later replaced by an account relying on a prearranged sale agreement.
The series of objections culminated in a long and acrimonious argument, after the jury left for the day, before Judge Cedarbaum in which Mr. Apfel; his colleague, Richard M. Strassberg; and Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Mr. Morvillo, all argued that they should be allowed to question Ms. DeLuca about her understanding of the tax impact of the stock sale and what she told Ms. Stewart about that understanding. Prosecutors contended any such testimony would involve hearsay statements.
''This is improper and should not come under the rules of evidence,'' Ms. Seymour told the judge, who initially appeared to agree with her.
The defense is expected to argue that because Ms. DeLuca told Ms. Stewart that one factor behind the ImClone stock sale may have been its tax impact, Ms. Stewart later offered that explanation to investigators.
''The real question is whether you can put into evidence something that X told Y to show that when Y spoke some days later, Y was relying on that conversation as distinguished from Y's other knowledge,'' Judge Cedarbaum said.
Jan Vetter, a professor of law at the University of California at Berkeley, said that with certain exceptions, hearsay testimony is prohibited, but if a statement is to be admitted not because it is true but to show that someone heard it, it is not hearsay. ''The difficulty with hearsay is, we're asked to accept something on the credit of someone who is not in court,'' Mr. Vetter said. In this case, he said, the testimony by Ms. DeLuca might be analogous to testimony by a passing motorist about an accident. A motorist cannot testify that someone else said the light was red to show the color of the light, but the motorist could testify that because someone else said the light was red, he slammed on the brakes, Mr. Vetter said. ''You don't want to get confused by the fact that what's being testified to here is words,'' he said. ''The words are an action,'' he continued, like seeing the red light.
That is the argument made by Mr. Morvillo, using in turns a world-weary tone and then a forceful bluster. ''It is not being offered for the truth of what Ms. DeLuca said,'' he said. ''It is only being offered for the fact that she said it.''
Judge Cedarbaum urged him to lower his voice, and said before adjourning for the day, ''You are slowly persuading me.''
