With New York's primary shaping up as a make-or-break contest for John Edwards and a potential nomination clincher for John Kerry, the candidates are both working the state aggressively, if from very different ends.
Mr. Kerry has courted, and won, the endorsements of many elected officials. He took to a ballroom in Harlem yesterday, introduced by Representative Charles B. Rangel, who had been Wesley's Clark's biggest New York booster, then headed out to Queens where the Democratic organization, which had endorsed Howard Dean, heralded him as the next president.
Mr. Edwards looked to win over grass-roots support, out of either conviction or practicality, as elected official after elected official jumped on the front-runner bandwagon. And so he reached out to Ethan Geto, the veteran political strategist who served as Dr. Dean's New York campaign manager.
New York's primary falls on March 2, Super Tuesday, when 10 states will decide who gets 1,151 delegates that are at stake -- more than in all the primaries held to date. New York, with 236 delegates to be chosen on Tuesday, second only to California's 370, has unexpectedly become a battleground.
Adding to the New York dynamic was Dr. Dean's decision to withdraw. Of all the candidates, he had the broadest base of support across New York. He had elected officials. And he had tens of thousands of donors and volunteers, coordinated by Mr. Geto.
Within hours of Dr. Dean's pulling out, the Kerry campaign said it touched base with every single elected official who had endorsed Dr. Dean. Meanwhile, Mr. Edwards's surrogate, Councilman Bill DeBlasio, called Mr. Geto. ''Grass-roots organizing has been a winning formula for us,'' said Mr. DeBlasio, one of the first New York officials to back Mr. Edwards's candidacy.
The Dean strategy has yet to play out. It is certainly unclear how much the endorsement of elected officials can propel a candidacy. Dr. Dean, after all, had many endorsements and never won a primary.
But Mr. Geto did manage to build a grass-roots network in New York with, he says, 70,000 volunteers, and while it is not monolithic, it could give Mr. Edwards's cause a lift, should it break his way.
''It would be tremendously valuable for Edwards,'' said Dan Cantor, executive director of the Working Families Party, which has worked to build its own grass-roots organization. ''The Dean forces represented a coming together of both traditional progressive Democrats with this kind of younger, vervy, less experienced crowd, that if they moved in unison, if they jumped in the water together, they would make a splash.''
These days, Mr. Geto has been busy dismantling the machine that he built. The office on Lexington Avenue, once a beehive of activity, is quiet. The phones, desks, computers, all leased until after Super Tuesday, are going back early. Mr. Geto has not decided if he will help Mr. Edwards, and while he has not said anything negative about Mr. Kerry, he does not have much positive to say about him, either. It seems likely he is either going to retire from this race or go with Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Geto seems a bit bitter, as though he built the fanciest race car New York has ever seen, but the race was canceled.
''In hindsight, everyone can see what went wrong with the campaign,'' he said, his cowboy boots up on the corner of his desk. ''We saw it happening. We had terrible fights with Burlington.''
The question now is: What happens to what he built? He cannot even be sure that it will survive intact through the primary. Bits and pieces are breaking off. The Dean campaign in New York is Balkanized. There's Rochester. There's Syracuse. There's Manhattanville College.
But what if it could all come together? That is a question that some in the Dean camp are asking, hoping they can transform the Dean what-might-have-been into a powerful political force for Edwards.
Mr. Geto's deputy, Eric Schmeltzer, has started a Web site called DeaniacsforEdwards. '' I'm a part of this effort because I believe that the debate is not yet over, and that in supporting Senator Edwards on March 2 we will actually be furthering the movement for change that Governor Dean began,'' John Arceci, the head of research for Dr. Dean's New York campaign, said in a signed note he posted on the Web site.
But this is a long shot, and the Edwards people know it. ''I think the bottom line at this point is the Dean organization has so many subsets and local units with each local leader making decisions,'' Mr. DeBlasio said. ''It is very decentralized.''
People with experience in building grass-roots organizations, like Mr. Cantor, say that Dr. Dean's New York volunteer base was never tested and that it is hard to imagine that in such an infant stage it will hold together for another candidate. Chris Meyer, the executive director of the New York Public Interest Research Group, has said that grass-roots networks build up around ideas and individuals.
''It is very difficult to transfer two things at once,'' said Mr. Meyer, whose organization is one of the few in New York to consistently run door-to-door canvassing operations. ''People get connected to the issues and also to the people who got them involved.''
When Dr. Dean pulled out, Mr. Geto said, he sent an e-mail message to the 70,000 people who had been involved with the campaign, saying that Dr. Dean would be happy to have them continue to push his candidacy so that he can win delegates and have a voice at the Democratic National Convention in Boston this summer. But he also said that in all likelihood, Dr. Dean would win very few of the New York delegates at stake and therefore his supporters should think about moving on.
Mr. Geto, 60, has many years of experience in New York politics, having pushed the gay rights movement from its inception and having worked for presidential contenders, like Robert F. Kennedy and George McGovern, and local politicians like the former Brooklyn District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman and former Attorney General Robert Abrams.
In response to his e-mail message, he said, he received about 700 replies and that generally they fell into two categories: People said they would support Mr. Edwards, or would continue to fight for Dr. Dean.
'''We don't like Kerry.' That's said almost universally,'' Mr. Geto said ''They see Kerry as more a part of the Washington establishment. They see Edwards as having more of a populist message.''
He added: ''Most of the Dean supporters think Edwards is more electable against Bush. It's not just that they dislike Kerry.''
In his drive to move so-called Deaniacs toward Mr. Edwards, Mr. Schmeltzer said he was just being practical. He said he saw the possibility of Dean supporters' playing a pivotal role in the race, even giving Mr. Edwards a margin of victory in New York, despite what early polls might suggest.
''I'm still true to the cause of Howard Dean,'' Mr. Schmeltzer said. ''But in reality this campaign is over.''
