JED ALPERT is the president of a small New York company that thinks up new uses for cellphones. Right now he is excited, he said, about the growth potential of telephone karaoke.
Though his company, Rights Group-WFX, has what he calls ''a lot of licensing and intellectual property issues,'' Mr. Alpert is less excited about the lawyers he hires to work on them.
''They tend to fascinate themselves with all of sorts of trivial things,'' he said.
Linda S. Lodenkamper, a former chairwoman of a committee devoted to small business law at the Colorado Bar Association, agreed that many lawyers failed to recognize what smaller companies want.
''They're more practical and less theoretical,'' she said. ''They don't like long contracts, and they like them to be in plain English.''
Every small business will need lawyers for employment, real estate and corporate work, and most will face lawsuits as well. But there is a yawning gap between their practical requirements and the legal culture. Small companies must watch costs and focus on cash flow, while law firms can lose sight of the cost effectiveness of their work and may be driven by the perverse incentives inherent in hourly billing.
There can also be a clash of personalities.
''Lawyers for small companies take on a patronizing role,'' Mr. Alpert said. ''They will consume as much time as they possibly can and will assume as great a role in a transaction as they can.''
''You find that the whole deal is negotiated,'' he added, ''and you haven't even seen it.''
The solution, according to many executives and some lawyers, is not always easy or pleasant, but it is straightforward. Lawyers must be managed closely.
Andy Arons, the chief executive of Gourmet Garage, a Manhattan specialty food chain, said he had learned from experience that lawyers have an important but limited role. ''An attorney, to me, is like an expensive pen,'' he said. ''It's a tool. You should negotiate the business points yourself. They should document what you've negotiated.''
Defining the scope of the lawyer's role is half the job. The other half is keeping legal fees under control.
Mr. Arons recalled the sinking feeling he had upon visiting the offices of a lawyer he hired for an important dispute.
''They did a great job,'' he said, ''but I knew when I walked into a gleaming conference room with Dean &amp; DeLuca pastries that there would be problems.''
At hourly rates exceeding $500, he added, ''it can cost $20,000 or $30,000 to have a question answered and a couple of letters written.''
In-house lawyers at big companies, who hire and supervise outside lawyers for a living, say that all sorts of ground rules should be made explicit at the outset, especially for smaller matters. Here is what they recommend:
* Ask for a flat fee. If the lawyer will bill only by the hour, get a cap. Request frequent updates on how much time has accrued.
* Insist on approving all staffing. Require the lawyer you hired, rather than a green associate, to do the important work; a busy, but experienced lawyer will generally be cheaper than an underused young lawyer, even at a higher hourly rate.
* Do not allow more than one lawyer to attend a hearing or deposition. Do not pay for travel time or for ordinary overhead like photocopies and phone calls.
* If the bill contains the names of lawyers and paralegals you have never met, work you did not ask for or fees out of proportion to the problem the lawyer was hired to solve, do not be afraid to question it.
In general, Ms. Lodenkamper said, small-business owners should stay away from larger law firms.''You want either a sole practitioner or a small firm,'' she said. ''If you get into a large law firm, you're going to get a lot of theory and 70-page contracts.''
The most important thing, Mr. Arons said, is the fit between lawyer and problem.
''You don't want to hit a flea with a sledgehammer,'' he said.
It is also vital to remember that the relationship is a professional rather than social one. For some lawyers, the meter is always running, Mr. Arons said. ''If you want to talk about your kids or your vacation, don't do it with your attorney.''
GAME PLANS
