Last year when I lived in Paris on assignment, one of my neighbors in the 17th Arrondissement lived right on a busy traffic circle -- in a phone booth. No one bothered her, not even the police. One weekend she disappeared, leaving all her stuff in her makeshift home with a sign: ''Don't Touch!'' On Monday morning she was back, and no one had moved anything. I assume she had hopped a train, weekending in some phone booth in Lyon or Toulouse.
These differences in culture are the best part of travel. I learned this as a teenager at the end of a summer in Andalusia, Spain, where my mother lives. I was saying goodbye to the towel guy at the Marbella Club, who mumbled something about how glad I must be to get back to the States. ''Ah, no, señor,'' I said, ''España es mejor'' (Spain is better). His face lit up. My brother called me a traitor, but I wasn't lying: Spain does have better nightlife, climate, art history, food. As for my brother, he now lives in Costa Rica.
Understanding the other guy's country means not complaining about the lack of American-style conveniences. Abroad, they often don't even want what we think we have to have.
Take air-conditioning. I taught a summer law school class in Modena, Italy, at a centuries-old university which appears never to have housed an air-conditioner. One especially sweltering July day, a lawyer from Bari, in southern Italy, spoke to my class wearing a jacket and tie. As the temperature rose into the 90's, I got someone to turn on a creaky ceiling fan. The lawyer made a crack about the ''draft,'' and I chuckled. But a bit later he complained more sternly, and the third time he grumbled that he was catching a cold and asked me to turn off the fan.
Business travel abroad is like camping: the only way to have fun is to change your expectations of comfort. In New York, I'm almost as sensitive to smoke as Michael Bloomberg is. But abroad, I've whooped it up in the cigar-friendly bars of Havana. In Paris, I met a woman from Colorado whose company had just moved her whole family to France. She seemed glum, so to perk her up I gushed about dining out in France. But she couldn't let go of her American mind-set. ''We try to stay out of the restaurants,'' she said, ''because of all the smoke.''
Impressing business counterparts abroad means eating what they serve you. My culinary adventures include scorpions in Beijing, ant-egg tacos in Mexico City, raw turtle eggs in Costa Rica and, in Spain, spongy cubes of congealed animal blood that were surprisingly chewy.
My wife and I once stayed with American expatriates in Hong Kong, one of the world's top food cities. On our first morning, we tried to sneak off for dim sum, but our Midwestern hosts intercepted us, announcing, ''Holly just made her famous egg-'n'-sausage casserole!''
Then they showed us the city, stopping for lunch at an English pub and for dinner at the American Club. Exasperated, we mentioned we were dying for real Cantonese food. ''Oh,'' they said, ''Chinese is one thing we won't eat -- but you'll love the American Club's chop suey!''
Make sure you respect local dining protocol abroad. Years ago in Milan, I ordered a cappuccino at the end of a dinner out with some local lawyers. All conversation stopped. Everyone stared in horror. Someone actually dropped his spoon. It turns out that in Italy, cappuccino is a breakfast drink; order it after a good dinner and you might as well go to the Four Seasons and ask for cornflakes for dessert.
The lawyer next to me whispered: ''Don't worry, it doesn't reflect poorly on us. It reflects poorly on you.''
BUSINESS TRAVEL: FREQUENT FLIER
