Derek Jeter was looser than usual as he returned to work with the Yankees Monday. So loose that he stopped between fielding grounders and running sprints to amble across the field and answer questions from reporters about the five syllables that have followed him like a stray collie for several days: Alex Rodriguez.
Did Jeter accept Rodriguez's apology three years ago about Rodriguez's disparaging comments on Jeter in a magazine article? Did Jeter tell Rodriguez their friendship was solid, but then allowed a chill to blanket it? Are Rodriguez and Jeter, once friendly enough that Rodriguez compared them to brothers, still close? Or are they merely friends by familiarity and formality?
Jeter was direct, but still relaxed, as he discussed the subject that will not go away. The saga of Jeter and Rodriguez is a topic that Jeter told right fielder Gary Sheffield will probably linger for the entire season.
Rodriguez revealed on Sunday that he had driven 95 miles from Port Charlotte to Jeter's home in Tampa to apologize for telling Esquire in 2001 that Jeter ''never had to lead'' and was ''never your concern'' when facing the powerful Yankees.
Although Rodriguez said he thought the matter had been settled, he spoke in the past tense and left some doubt on whether Jeter agreed. A few minutes later, Rodriguez said that he meant the issue had been resolved between him and Jeter, but not necessarily among other people. On Monday, Jeter agreed.
''When I heard what he had to say, I was O.K. with it,'' Jeter said. ''It was basically, 'That's it.' It's over with and done with.''
Jeter declined to discuss the specifics of what Rodriguez said, but he disputed the notion that he had not returned Rodriguez's telephone call after the article was published. Jeter said the Yankees had been playing a night game when Rodriguez wanted to talk to him and he had received the message late.
Jeter said more than 20 times during the 10-minute interview at the team's minor league complex on Monday that he and Rodriguez had resolved the tensions between them. Jeter said that additional off-season demands and Rodriguez's marriage two years ago were the reasons why the players have not seen each other as regularly as they used to. He admitted that the different responsibilities have changed their relationship, but Jeter said Rodriguez's remarks were not a factor in that alteration.
''Like I said in New York, if you have a brother, you have disagreements,'' Jeter said. ''You don't have to always like what they say, but you get over it and you deal with it.''
Unlike Jeter's dour demeanor at Rodriguez's news conference at Yankee Stadium last week, his mood was more laid-back on Monday. He joked with reporters and, when Bernie Williams tried to pull him away to run sprints, Jeter did not leave before asking reporters if they were done questioning him.
Since Jeter and Rodriguez spoke about their relationship at Rodriguez's news conference in New York and again here, Jeter was optimistic that he would not have to address it anymore.
''I hope it'll be over with,'' Jeter said. ''I don't see what else we could talk about.''
Sheffield said Jeter had predicted that the dissection of everything Jeter and everything A-Rod would continue.
''I asked him, 'How long is this going to last?' '' Sheffield said. ''He said, 'Probably all year.' ''
When Manager Joe Torre was asked if he thought Jeter and Rodriguez would be comfortable with the endless scrutiny their relationship will receive, he said, ''They'll have to be, I guess.''
Though Torre was not referring to Jeter and Rodriguez, he also said that two players who dislike each other can play together and be part of a successful team. Torre added that the Yankees have had situations in which some players were not buddies and the team still prospered. One example was Jeter and Chad Curtis, who squabbled in 1999, a year the Yankees won the World Series.
The only time Jeter grew feisty on Monday was when a reporter mentioned that Jeter is so dedicated to winning that, even if he disliked Rodriguez, he would not let their problems affect what each must do to help the Yankees succeed. ''We don't have problems,'' Jeter said. ''Let's get that out there. We don't have problems, so there are no problems being put aside.''
Associates of both players have said there was a chill in their friendship after Rodriguez criticized Jeter. Jeter has said he could end friendships if he felt he had been wronged. And Jeter and Rodriguez have admitted that their friendship has evolved. Rodriguez mentioned physical distance as a factor, although both have had off-season homes in Florida for years.
On Monday, Jeter basically echoed what Rodriguez had said on Sunday: because they will be on a stage with the Yankees, it will be difficult to disguise any problems they might have. If they bicker, someone will notice.
''We're going to be together for a lot of days now, so there won't be any issues about how much time we spend together,'' Jeter said, ''because we'll be together from now until, hopefully, the end of October.''
BASEBALL
