In the minds of many, Carnegie Hall represents venerable tradition: classical music, fine old architecture, what have you. On Sunday afternoon the institution showcased a couple of traditions of its own.
In the main auditorium the Carnegie Choral Workshop, founded by Robert Shaw in 1990, united professional and amateur singers under Charles Dutoit. Downstairs at Zankel Hall two hours later, James Levine and the Met Chamber Ensemble, who have had a Carnegie series since 1998, showed their stuff. Both programs illustrated the way ''contemporary'' becomes ''tradition'': with one exception (the Fauré Requiem), all the works were written in the 20th century. Which is not to say there weren't some fine old pieces on offer.
There was a certain archaic tone to the choral concert in particular: it offered music fashioned as simply and expertly as Shaker furniture. Poulenc's short ''Litanies à la Vierge Noire'' set women's voices against strings and timpani playing with a vertical, chantlike tread, emphasizing the contrasts of light and darkness with high gentle voices against chords of cello and bass. This directness set the tone of the afternoon: Stravinsky's ''Symphony of Psalms'' is both more intricate and even more archaic, and the Fauré offers emotion that's nearly childlike in its simplicity.
It takes crack musicians to pull off such exposed music. The workshop holds competitive auditions to select singers for an intense week of preparation, and the quality of the result was clear from the start of the Poulenc, when the women's voices emerged with hair-trigger precision. It continued in a crisp and effective reading of the ''Symphony of Psalms,'' supported by the fine Orchestra of St. Luke's.
The chorus's edge only blunted in a few places in the longest piece, the Fauré, which didn't keep it from coming to a moving close with the seventh movement's aching shimmer. Two young soloists sang respectably: Nathan Berg with a warm bass-baritone that sounded slightly muted and overly obedient, and Janice Chandler-Eteme with a rounded soprano but a little too much audible sculpturing of the classically simple lines of ''Pie Jesu.''
Mr. Levine's program moved further ahead in the 20th century, contrasting two living composers -- John Harbison and Charles Wuorinen, who are pretty much traditional fixtures themselves in Mr. Levine's universe -- with two dead ones, Richard Strauss and once again Poulenc. Another contrast was that between winds (in Mr. Harbison's ''Music for 18 Winds'') and strings (in Strauss's ''Metamorphosen'').
Still another contrast was that between narrative and abstraction. In a program note Mr. Harbison rejected extramusical associations in his piece, and Poulenc's ''Le Bal Masqué'' is a setting of surrealist, quasi-nonsense texts by Max Jacob. Against these two abstractions were Mr. Wuorinen's ''Great Procession,'' inspired by incidents in Dante's ''Purgatorio,'' and of course ''Metamorphosen,'' Strauss's eulogy in response to the destruction of World War II.
With all the time they put in in the opera orchestra pit, the Met players are well accustomed to musical narrative, yet well-played though ''Metamorphosen'' was, one felt they needed a couple of more performances to get its full emotional compass under their belts, beyond simply delight in its great beauty. In the case of ''The Great Procession'' it was the piece itself that felt a little hollow, although there's no denying it is eminently well made. Mr. Wuorinen's music offers intelligent musicians much to chew on but does not necessarily transmit the full spectrum of its joys to its listening audience.
Poulenc was the only actual connection between the two concerts; although the only connection between the spare spirituality of the ''Litanies'' and the burlesque jollity of ''Le Bal Masqué'' is that both pieces do their bit to demonstrate what a delightful composer Poulenc was. Earle Patriarco, the baritone, did a fine job with the music and the spirit of its twisted texts, and the players carried the bracing energy of Mr. Wuorinen's piece into the toe-tapping élan of Poulenc's.
MUSIC REVIEW
