While many people who follow the Walt Disney Company are gearing up for fireworks at next week's annual meeting, Disney's board is focused on another important date: Sept. 30, 2006, when the contract expires for the chief executive, Michael D. Eisner.
In recent months, members of Disney's board have discussed both casually and at private meetings what to do if and when Mr. Eisner leaves, according to directors and others. Last month, Mr. Eisner gave a 30-minute presentation on succession that nonmanagement directors discussed for 90 minutes after he left the room, George J. Mitchell, the presiding director, said on Monday. Last year, directors also debated whether to split the titles of chairman and chief executive but deferred the decision for at least two years.
The campaign to oust Mr. Eisner by two former directors, Stanley P. Gold and Roy E. Disney, the nephew of the company's founder, and the unsolicited takeover offer by the Comcast Corporation have not only underscored such discussions but expedited them, said two people told about the board's discussions. For the first time in Mr. Eisner's nearly 20-year tenure, one of the people said, the Disney board is intently focused on what to do in a post-Eisner world. And that discussion, the person said, ''is uncomfortable for Michael.''
How the board proceeds has a lot to do with how many shareholders choose to withhold votes for Mr. Eisner at the annual meeting on March 3 in Philadelphia. If a large percentage of shareholders withhold votes, the independent directors could instigate discussions with Mr. Eisner about a change, said the two people told of the board's discussions. Directors have not suggested to Mr. Eisner, who has been criticized for his management style, that he should resign before 2006, the people said. Nor has the board sought to find a successor.
One director said the board would consider the effect of a recommendation by Institutional Shareholder Services, which advises big shareholders on proxy votes, on the voting. It has advised investors to withhold votes for Mr. Eisner and has called on Disney to separate its chairman and chief executive positions. Disney's board released a statement last week saying the position of Institutional Shareholder Services was unfair. The board is expecting that, no matter the outcome, the results of the vote will be contested by Mr. Gold and Mr. Disney.
Judith L. Estrin, a board member, has been most vocal in her support of Mr. Eisner and the board, saying on Monday in a conference call organized by Glass, Lewis &amp; Company, a proxy adviser, that ''the perception of weakness on behalf of the company'' was wrong.
That does not mean, though, that the board is committed to Mr. Eisner indefinitely. ''I don't think anyone on the board is going to put themselves in a vulnerable position,'' said one of the people told of the board's discussions.
Even Mr. Eisner sounded uncharacteristically tentative in an interview on ''Larry King Live'' on Friday night.
''I think I have the complete support,'' he said, when asked by Mr. King whether the entire board backed him. When asked whether he thought he personally would prevail in the face of the unsolicited bid from Comcast, Mr. Eisner said: ''I am confident, in the end of this, I will still have three great children, a great wife and the Disney company will prevail. Whether I will be running the Disney company or not is up to our board, up to my health, and up to my continuing enthusiasm, all of which, as of this moment, are there.''
Mr. Mitchell, the former senator, stressed on the conference call that while the management team in place was the best course of action for now, the board would consider any fair proposal. He said the board planned another meeting in April to discuss Mr. Eisner and succession, as well as a separate meeting to discuss the company's 10 top executives.
Mr. Mitchell also said that Ira Millstein, Disney's corporate governance lawyer, counseled the board not to separate the jobs of chief executive and chairman until at least 2006 when Mr. Eisner's contract was up. Instead, Mr. Mitchell said, Mr. Millstein suggested creating the position of presiding director (which Mr. Mitchell now holds) as an interim step.
The conference call seemed to raise more questions about who knew what, and when, about the Comcast bid than it answered. On the conference call, Disney representatives said that the board, along with Mr. Eisner, knew about the possibility of a bid from Comcast and that management had drafted a script rejecting any overture to enter merger talks. Mr. Eisner read from that script when the chief executive of Comcast, Brian L. Roberts, first called, the representatives said.
If and when Mr. Eisner leaves, the question many people are asking is who would succeed him. In the past, Mr. Eisner has said Robert A. Iger, Disney's president, could do the job.
But the name most frequently mentioned in Hollywood over lunch these days is Peter Chernin, the chief operating officer of the News Corporation. Mr. Chernin declined to comment, but according to a person who has talked with him recently, he is renegotiating his contract at News Corporation but would consider the overture if asked to run Disney.
