Late Sunday night, the Seaford High School wrestling team celebrated its sweetest moment of the season: a county championship. Teammates exulted inside a gymnasium as they posed for photographs, clutched trophies and planned a celebration at a nearby diner.
Hours later, one of the players was dead and his close friend was charged with driving under the influence of drugs, after a car carrying five players veered off Sunrise Highway in Wantagh, struck a telephone poll and smashed into two parked cars. Patrick Butler, 15, was killed instantly, three other players in the car were injured and the driver, Michael Moor, 17, was arrested, the Nassau County Police said.
According to the police, the crash occurred as Mr. Moor and his four teammates were leaving the Lighthouse Diner in Wantagh. A sport utility vehicle honked at Mr. Moor's maroon Honda, signaling Mr. Moor to turn on his headlights, but the police said Mr. Moor honked at the S.U.V. and sped up to catch it before the Honda went off the road.
The police said Mr. Moor had admitted using drugs, but they would not specify what kind. The police said that the charge was not based on any test results but that a blood sample was being examined. On Monday afternoon, Seaford wrestlers and an assistant coach on the team denied the charge and said that Mr. Moor did not use drugs and could not have done so on the night of the accident.
''I was on the team with all of these guys last year,'' said Chris Schuerlein, an assistant coach. ''None of them have ever used drugs in their entire life.''
Mr. Schuerlein and other players said team members took drug tests so they could wrestle and had spent the evening leading up to the accident together at a county championship meet, where Mr. Moor competed and placed first, earning a slot in a statewide competition in early March. Had Mr. Moor tested positive for drugs before the state tournament, he would have been disqualified, they said.
Mr. Schuerlein said Mr. Moor had been on prescription medication since early childhood. Mr. Moor's family did not return phone calls to their home Monday night, and the Nassau County Police defended the charge.
''The charge was based on the arresting officer's observations at the scene,'' Detective Sgt. Herb Daub said. He added that the case ''could go either way,'' depending on whether Mr. Moor's blood sample tested positive or negative for drugs.
On Monday afternoon, Mr. Butler's family expressed no hostility toward the boy who drove the car that killed their son. ''It was just a major traffic accident,'' said Tommy Judge, one of Mr. Butler's uncles. ''That's what it is. It's not like there's any animosity. There's no finger-pointing.''
Mr. Butler was a tall, lanky sophomore weighing 135 pounds. He played football and had a sharp mind for math and chemistry, but his family and friends said his first love was Seaford High's vaunted wrestling team. "He was a sweet, honest kid," his mother, Margaret, said. "He was on top of the world."
The hours leading up to the accident were ''the greatest day of his life,'' Mr. Butler's uncle said. Mr. Butler placed third in the championship meet, was named all-county and earned the right to wear a jacket coveted by high-school wrestlers.
After the meet ended at 11 p.m. Sunday, Mr. Butler, Mr. Moor and 15 other wrestlers gathered at the diner to eat junk food with abandon, said Russel Maltese, a teammate. According to Mr. Maltese, Mr. Moor went home after the meet to change and drove his 1988 Honda Accord to the diner.
Around 12:30 a.m., Mr. Moor, Mr. Butler, Tim Montgomery, 15, Thomas Gaebler, 15, and Patrick Donaldson left the diner in the Accord. Mr. Donaldson was in serious condition Monday night, and Mr. Montgomery, Mr. Gaebler and Mr. Moor were stable after suffering minor injuries.
''These are the best kids I've ever known,'' Mr. Schuerlein, the assistant coach, said of the five friends.
