As a Japanese shortstop and a Dominican second baseman turned double plays Monday, perfecting the game's most graceful dance, one well-traveled baseball man recalled his favorite Asian saying:
''We don't communicate with our words,'' said Leon Lee, a Mets minor league manager and a Japanese baseball legend. ''We communicate with our heart.''
Lee leaned over the dugout railing and looked out at Tradition Field, where Kazuo Matsui and José Reyes were grinning and giggling. Matsui does not know any more Spanish than the five words Reyes taught him. Reyes does not know any more Japanese than the five words Matsui taught him. Yet they are crossing the language barrier one double play at a time and providing an aging team with a fresh identity.
The Mets are so enamored with their multicultural middle infield that they would not trade Reyes to the Texas Rangers for Alfonso Soriano, whom the Yankees dealt 10 days ago for Alex Rodriguez. When reports circulated Monday that the Mets were talking to Texas about a Reyes-for-Soriano swap, Reyes received concerned phone calls from his mother and father in the Dominican Republic.
Worried that Reyes would take the reports seriously, Fred Wilpon, the Mets' owner, sought him out after a workout Monday and threw an arm around his shoulder. ''I told him that you're not going anywhere,'' Wilpon said. ''I guess it's fitting to say, 'No way, José.' ''
The Mets are still interested in Soriano and could explore the possibility of trading prospects for him. Jim Duquette, the Mets' general manager, said Monday that no one in the organization was ''untouchable'' and that ''we have the financial resources and prospects'' to make a deal.
But the Mets are too heavily invested in their double-play combination to break it up. Reyes is eight years younger than Soriano, will earn almost $5 million less this season and is a better defensive player. He has long been considered the most promising prospect in the Mets' system and he was moved from shortstop to second this winter to accommodate Matsui, the focus of a league-wide recruiting effort.
While much of the sports world concentrates on another shortstop changing positions -- Rodriguez's highly anticipated move to third base -- Reyes has quietly and rapidly picked up the nuances of second base. Less than three weeks after he and Matsui reported to spring training, the Mets are promoting what they believe could be the slickest middle infield in baseball.
''The owner said I am going to be here for a long time,'' Reyes said. ''I want to stay here.'' He added: ''I had trouble with second base at the beginning, but I'm comfortable now. Kaz is a great guy. The language doesn't even matter. It doesn't count. We joke, we hang out, he tries to speak Spanish and I try to speak Japanese.''
Every day, they teach each other one Spanish and one Japanese word or phrase. Matsui says ''qué pasa'' (what's up?) and ''mañana'' (tomorrow) and ''poquito'' (little bit). Reyes says ''doyo'' (what's up?) and ''ohayo'' (good morning) and ''akan'' (not so good).
''We don't speak the same language,'' Matsui said through an interpreter, ''but our communication level is building.''
Matsui and Reyes can seem like two children who have not learned how to speak, but know exactly how to play. They dance together in the clubhouse. They warm up together on the field. They are constantly laughing, even though it is completely unclear what they could possibly be laughing about.
No one else seems to understand them. Matsui has orange hair, likes to sprint around the field barefoot and has an odd postpractice routine in which he jumps, runs and pretends to throw on the outfield grass. He is known for bowing at opposing managers when he enters the batter's box, calling youngsters out of the stands to play catch before games, and pointing in the air after making an exceptional play.
Reyes comes across as equally unusual. He has curly black hair with blond tips that stand straight up. He usually eats by himself, in the clubhouse and in restaurants. And he prefers to sit on the floor rather than in a chair. While Matsui draws Japanese characters on his bat meaning thank you, Reyes has a patch of the Dominican flag stamped on his glove with the words La Melaza, meaning sweetness.
''Matsui draws people to him -- cameras, fans, everyone,'' said Lee, who managed against him for eight years. ''He just has that charisma. And José is the same way. It's one of the most beautiful things.''
In a sport in which superstars can appear surly, Matsui and Reyes are the new smiley-faces of the Mets. While the Yankees hope that Rodriguez and Derek Jeter will be able to coexist, the Mets believe their season will be defined by the uncanny rapport between Matsui and Reyes. They don't speak many of the same words, but according to the infield coach, Matt Galante, they know the same language -- ''the baseball language.''
''It's outstanding,'' Manager Art Howe said. ''They have great personalities and love playing the game. When people enjoy each other and like being around each other, it pays huge dividends on the field.''
Of course, it also helps that Matsui and Reyes have equally expansive range. Reyes might even have a stronger arm, but he had to move to second when Matsui was awarded a three-year contract worth $20 million that reportedly includes some unorthodox provisions: a full-time translator, eight round-trip business-class tickets from Tokyo to New York, a $25,000 relocation fee, a $25,000 housing allowance, a free car, six tickets to every game and a stipulation that prevents him from being sent to the minor leagues for any reason except a rehabilitation assignment.
Reyes, 20, has much more modest demands. He only wants to be included in the lineup and to be able to send enough money home to support his family. He should be able to reach both goals relatively easily. When Howe fills out his lineup card on opening day, he expects Matsui to lead off and Reyes to hit second.
They could soon become 1-2 in a player popularity contest as well. Although Mike Piazza is still the Mets' high-profile slugger and Tom Glavine is the staff ace, Matsui and Reyes are gleaming symbols of a new era and will undoubtedly appeal to a new generation.
Their faces are fresh. Their hair is bleached. They come from opposite ends of the world, yet they meet on the same stretch of dirt, and speak to each other from the heart.
INSIDE PITCH
Center fielder MIKE CAMERON, who signed with the Mets as a free agent, reported to spring training Monday with a bone spur in the big toe on his left foot. Cameron took batting practice and believes he will be able to participate in full workouts later this week. According to a study by the Mets, Cameron would have caught 70 balls last season that their center fielders did not. So many cameras greeted Cameron that he said, ''I feel like I got charged with a D.U.I. and and am getting out of jail.''
BASEBALL
