Few problems facing American cities are more serious than gun violence. Guns destroy thousands of lives every year and spread fear in our neighborhoods. It is much too easy for criminals to get firearms. And when a handgun is readily available, a minor argument or domestic dispute can quickly escalate into a homicide.
We've worked hard to get illegal guns off the streets, through tough law enforcement, by supporting reasonable gun laws -- and by suing gun manufacturers and dealers to get them to take responsibility for their actions. Some two dozen American cities and counties have filed similar lawsuits.
But Congress is on the verge of passing legislation that would undercut the ability of local governments to hold the gun industry accountable for its role in flooding our cities with guns. The Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act would shield irresponsible firearms manufacturers, wholesalers, dealers and trade associations from any form of civil liability in cases in which they recklessly or negligently supply firearms to criminals. The bill, which was approved by the House last April, is now being considered in the Senate.
We do not advocate suing manufacturers in all instances when an incident involving a gun causes harm or injury. But shouldn't we be able to sue manufacturers and suppliers when they act with wanton disregard for the safety of our neighborhoods?
By immunizing gun manufacturers against civil liability, the bill would remove much of their legal incentive to behave responsibly. It would encourage bad manufacturers to remain bad and good manufacturers to become lax.
Most firearms dealers are responsible business people selling to law-abiding customers. But a small minority are not, and their unlawful actions are largely responsible for the gun violence on our cities' streets. According to federal data from 2000, 1.2 percent of dealers account for 57 percent of all guns recovered in criminal investigations. Many of these guns were illegal ''straw purchases,'' a common street-gang tactic in which someone with a valid state firearms card buys large quantities of guns for resale to people with criminal records.
And yet the gun industry refuses to police itself. Gun manufacturers and wholesalers know who the problem dealers are, because when guns are recovered at crime scenes, they receive firearms tracing reports that show them which dealers sell disproportionately to criminals.
The gun industry claims it's merely seeking protection from frivolous lawsuits. But federal and state courts are recognizing the legal validity of many of these cases. Courts in several states have upheld the legal merits of these suits, and a case involving Chicago is before Illinois's highest court.
Almost 7,200 people were murdered with handguns in the United States in 2002, the most recent year for which figures are available. It is obvious that something needs to be done at the federal level. But rather than pass gun legislation that would make our streets safer, Congress proposes basically to immunize the gun industry from efforts to make it act responsibly.
All senators should oppose this bill. If they don't, they ought to explain why the one industry deserving of this extraordinary protection should be the one that makes a product that kills thousands of Americans each year.
Some of our senators and representatives might also consider serving as a big-city mayor for a day or two. They could talk, as we do, to law-abiding, hard-working mothers and fathers who are desperate to get guns off the streets so they can walk to the store without fear or let their children play in their front yards. These citizens deserve a Congress that will work to make their lives safer.
Op-Ed Contributor Michael R. Bloomberg is the mayor of New York. Richard M. Daley is the mayor of Chicago. James K. Hahn is the mayor of Los Angeles. Scott L. King is the mayor of Gary, Ind.
