They sat through the flashback in which Jesus built a table. They sat through the parts in which Jesus was captured and beaten. They sat through the part in which the stakes were driven through Jesus' palms.
They cried at times. They gasped at times. They read the subtitles, because this is a film in which actors speak in Aramaic and Latin. Then, 48 hours early, the lights in the theater came up.
''The Passion of the Christ,'' Mel Gibson's R-rated film about Jesus' last 12 hours on earth, does not open until tomorrow, Ash Wednesday. But the film, a subject of debate in religious circles for months because of concerns about its graphic violence and its portrayal of Jews in events leading to the Crucifixion, was shown yesterday at screenings in New York and New Jersey. One official of the American Bible Society said the group had spent about $8,000 on tickets, which it gave away.
So the audience yesterday at one theater, Loews 84th Street, on Broadway, was perhaps more familiar with the story Mr. Gibson was interpreting than is the average 21st-century popcorn muncher. Filling the 439 seats in the theater were members of the society's staff and members of campus religious groups from John Jay College of Criminal Justice and New York University.
Gloria Malave, who said she had worked at the Bible society until she was laid off in 1998, called the film ''great.'' Asked to rate the film in the way Ebert and Roeper would, she said, ''I'd definitely give it a thumbs up.''
Donna Lampert, who said she was laid off last year, mentioned the violence -- the beatings, the bloodiness. ''It's not for the faint of heart,'' she said.
The Bible society's president, Eugene Habecker, said he had already seen ''Passion'' once. Leaving the theater yesterday, he said, ''I found myself responding more emotionally, more viscerally.''
''I'm more shaken,'' he added before describing the film as ''compelling, provocative, disturbing.''
And the bloodiness?
''It's Mel Gibson,'' he said. ''If you watch 'Braveheart,' that's Mel Gibson.''
''Is it true in every respect?'' he added. ''I don't think so.''
One element he said had been captured correctly had to do with Jesus himself. ''It was Jesus who stayed on message,'' he said. ''His followers went off message, Caesar went off message; the Jewish leaders did nothing different than any of us would do today if our authority was threatened.''
The film has been a lightning rod for months as religious groups and commentators wondered how it would show the Crucifixion and the crucifiers. Yesterday, the Anti-Defamation League released a statement praising the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops for publishing a 110-page collection of documents about the death of Jesus. Abraham H. Foxman, the league's national director, will watch the film tomorrow, a spokeswoman said. (He saw it last month at a convention of evangelical pastors in Florida, the spokeswoman said, adding that he registered for the gathering online, using his own name.)
In the last few weeks, ''Passion'' has been the subject of a Hollywood-style barrage of publicity, with Mr. Gibson talking about it on television and in magazine interviews, but few critics saw the film until yesterday. And some religious groups, like the Bible society, have bought blocks of tickets, which will help the film's opening-week sales in a week when it has the stage largely to itself. Typically, producers and studios shy away from scheduling premieres during the week before the Academy Awards, which generate the kind of publicity few films can compete with.
But Raul Colon, a security guard who attended the screening, was not talking about the marketing of ''Passion'' as he left the theater. He was talking about Mr. Gibson's treatment of the subject.
Mr. Colon said the film made Jews ''look bad.'' But he added, ''I don't have enough information to say what I think.''
McKinley Butts, who works for the Transportation Security Administration, said he was not troubled by the film's violence.
''You see movies from 'Godfather II' to 'Reservoir Dogs,''' he said.
His fiancée, Tonya Wilder, said: ''Violence? It was the truth. I was worried about the violence. I didn't think I could make it through.''
But she did, and so did their 3-month-old son, Jaylen. In fact, she said, Jaylen slept straight through.
