IN economic terms, spring may finally be arriving for small business -- a little sooner, it seems, than for corporate America.
Because data collection and analysis can take at least a year, there are no hard statistics about the state of small business today, said Chad Moutray, chief economist for the Office of Advocacy of the Small Business Administration.
And economic observers are wary about predicting growth after a series of false starts followed the 2001 recession.
Nevertheless, a general sense of optimism seems to prevail among small-business owners, one that is far greater than a year ago, said William C. Dunkelberg, chief economist for the National Federation of Independent Business, a small-business advocacy group in Washington that conducts a monthly survey measuring such things.
Moreover, Mr. Dunkelberg said, many small businesses -- defined by the Small Business Administration as those that employ fewer than 500 workers -- also reported plans for increased capital spending and investment in inventories.
Perhaps even more significant is that job growth among small businesses is ''strong in every industry, including manufacturing,'' Mr. Dunkelberg said, although federal payroll statistics show overall job creation to be anemic at best. But those statistics do not always pick up hiring at small businesses and start-ups at the beginning of business upswings, economists say.
Others also see the trends in small business, including Mark Zandi, the chief economist of Economy.com, a research company. ''Broadly speaking, small businesses have fared better than large or midsize businesses over the last few years,'' he said, largely because many are service businesses that ''tend to consumers.'' And they remain ''well-positioned to do well this year,'' he added.
Jeffrey A. Joerres, the chief executive of Manpower, the temporary employment company, agrees. He called 2004 ''a real pivotal year for small businesses,'' and not only in the service sector, predicting steady job growth based on, among other measures, Manpower's own quarterly employment survey.
In interviews, owners of three very different businesses backed up that perception. Jerry Miller is president and co-owner of Accurate Fabrication of Columbus, Ohio, a maker of kitchen exhaust hoods, computer cabinetry and other products. The company just had its ''strongest January in three years,'' Mr. Miller said.
Things are also looking up for Greg Labelle. He is the plant manager for Innovative Office Products of Easton, Pa., a maker of mounts and arms for computer monitors and medical equipment, among other things. The company has about 100 employees, an increase of 17 or so from a year ago. ''Our growth has been exploding since November,'' Mr. Labelle said.
That is also the case for Susan Sano, the co-owner of the Discovery Center, a preschool in Bend, Ore. Ms. Sano said that the opening of a new building had led to a doubling of enrollment this year, and she expected it to increase again next year because of ''a growth trend in our community.''
That certainly was true for Mr. Miller. Last year, he cut the number of employees to 38 from 48 in 2001, when his business was at its height. He now has 43 employees, up from 40 in December.
BUT not everything is rosy. Sales for many small businesses are still slower than their owners would like. And, despite some cuts, many complain that taxes are still too high.
There is also the price of health and other insurance, pushed constantly higher by post-Sept. 11 jitters and soaring medical costs. The expense and availability of insurance is the biggest problem cited by small-business owners responding to Mr. Dunkelberg's survey.
Insurance costs certainly have affected Mr. Miller. He remains cautious about expanding, taking a wait-and-see attitude in large part because of coverage worries.
''My general liability insurance went up 30 percent in the last year,'' Mr. Miller said. ''And medical insurance goes up by 16 to 18 percent every year, even though we've increased out-of-pocket expenses for employees.''
As for Ms. Sano, who does not offer medical insurance to employees, she, too, complained that the rates she must pay for liability coverage, workers' compensation and property insurance are too high.
''We are able to absorb it now,'' she said. ''But later on it might be a question of affording insurance or hiring a new teacher.''
Then there is the issue of foreign competition, which compounds the difficulties caused by insurance woes.
Take the case of SeamCraft of Chicago, a maker of custom-sewn accessories for the products of other companies. SeamCraft's president, Stephen S. Stack, said that last year he lost several big customers -- some 40 percent of his sales -- largely because they found cheaper labor abroad.
For example, the cases for lumbar cushions sold at retail by a large manufacturer used to be made by SeamCraft. Now the manufacturer has gone to China, he said. SeamCraft also used to make the bags for jacks and tool sets for Mazda and Ford vehicles, Mr. Stack said; now, that business has also left, in this case to Mexico.
Why? ''Our labor is 20 to 25 percent more,'' Mr. Stack said. ''Workers' compensation is up, health insurance is up.''
He is also hurt by the big companies that ship jobs elsewhere, he said: ''The big businesses that used to feed smaller manufacturers like me are all going overseas.''
Still, even Mr. Stack sees some rays of sunshine. He has found some new customers and his backlog is improving, he said, though it is not as strong as it was.
And while his company has had to endure some significant layoffs -- it cut back to 32 workers last summer from a high of about 47 employees -- even he is hiring again.
''I just brought four people back,'' he said.
THE OUTLOOK
