If you're in danger of losing an election, change the rules.
With shareholder approval of AXA's planned takeover of the MONY Group in doubt, the companies moved Monday to sweeten the terms of the deal ever so slightly, and to both delay the shareholder vote and change who gets to vote. The sweetener, an extra 10 cents a share, will come out of money that otherwise would have gone to MONY executives.
AXA, the French insurance giant, had vowed that it would not raise its $31 a share offer, but this move will give MONY the ability to raise the effective offer by a dime a share.
The shareholder vote on the deal had been scheduled for Tuesday, but it was temporarily delayed last week after Judge Stephen P. Lamb of Delaware Chancery Court asked MONY to provide more details on $90 million in payments that executives of the company are to receive if the merger is completed. MONY said those payments would be cut by $7.4 million, giving the company enough money to pay shareholders the extra 10 cents a share before the merger is completed.
In a court filing, MONY conceded that it did not have the votes to win approval of the merger, although a majority of the votes cast so far had been in favor of it. But approval requires a majority of all shares, and MONY said that a significant number of shares had not been voted.
MONY asked Judge Lamb to allow it to reschedule the shareholder meeting for May 18, with voting limited to those who own shares as of a new record date, April 8. That would enable investors to buy shares over the next several weeks and vote them on the merger, which could significantly change the profile of shareholders who would be allowed to vote. The company noted that volume in its shares had been heavy in recent weeks and said that it wanted to enable those new buyers to vote.
Several large institutional shareholders have opposed the merger, which calls for AXA to pay $31 a share to MONY shareholders, who would also receive dividends of 33 to 35 cents a share from MONY, with 10 cents of that representing the increase announced Monday.
Those shareholders claim the price is too low, and some have sent out letters to shareholders urging a vote against the merger. MONY went to federal court in New York in an unsuccessful effort to keep one such investor, Highfields Capital Management, from sending copies of the company's proxy cards to investors, thereby making it easier for shareholders to change their votes.
Highfields has asked Judge Lamb to refuse the company's request for a new record date, instead forcing it to allow the merger to be voted on by the shareholders of record in January.
MONY did not disclose how the executive payments will be reduced. The payments would be made under change-of-control provisions that the company adopted after it converted from a mutual company to one owned by shareholders in 1998.
The extra money may not change many votes. ''A dime does not change our view that people should vote this down and encourage the board to get a new management team,'' said Michael Lehmann, a portfolio manager at Third Avenue Management, one of the opponents of the deal.
Because MONY is incorporated in Delaware, shareholders who oppose the deal have the right to demand an appraisal process in the Delaware courts, which could result in payments of more or less than the merger price. MONY said that 13.7 percent of the shareholders had already done that, and that AXA had agreed to amend its merger agreement, which had given it the right to walk away if more than 10 percent made that demand. Under the new agreement, it can walk away if more than 15 percent make such a demand, and it must decide whether to do so within five business days after all other conditions for closing the merger are met.
If the record date is extended, investors in an unusual kind of bond issued by AXA could play an important role. That bond was issued to effectively sell shares to complete the transaction. Owners of it will receive one AXA share if the deal is completed. But if it is not, they will receive the original price of the bond, plus interest. With AXA shares up sharply since the deal was announced, owners of the bond will make a profit if the deal is completed.
''By changing the date, they are manipulating the vote from real long-term owners,'' said Richard L. Grubman, managing director of Highfields Capital Management. ''I am hopeful that our legal system will see through this latest sophisticated development in long-term shareholder disenfranchisement by entrenched management and stop it.''
He said long-term investors ''are being disadvantaged in favor of arbitragers with the French bond position'' and forecast that owners of the bonds might buy shares in an effort to ensure that the merger was approved.
In its filing with the court, MONY dismissed that argument, saying that investors who had sold the bonds short -- betting they would decline in price -- might buy shares to vote against the merger.
Mr. Grubman said the votes that it was aware of were running 2-to-1 against the merger, but MONY said that count reflected only votes cast through brokers and that other votes were in its favor. In any case, if the record date is extended, all those votes will be canceled, and new ballots sent out.
MARKET PLACE
