The Nuclear Regulatory Commission staff has apparently decided that the two Indian Point nuclear reactors in Westchester County pose no special risk of having their emergency cooling systems clog with debris in the first few minutes of an emergency, despite an Energy Department study that singled them out as especially susceptible to such a failure.
The commission staff reached its conclusion in a draft of a report written in response to a petition by two nonprofit groups critical of Indian Point's safety, the Union of Concerned Scientists and Riverkeeper. The groups had asked that the plants, in Buchanan, N.Y., be shut down and fixed promptly.
The report is marked ''proposed'' because it has been sent to the two groups for their comment, but one of the three members of the commission, Edward McGaffigan, said it was ''the staff's best description so far of their position.'' The plant's owner, Entergy Corporation, has said that the reactors are safe.
Eight years ago, the commission recognized the problem cited by the two groups: that in case of a major pipe break, the leaking water or steam would scour off pipe insulation and even paint. That debris, engineers fear, would wash into the sump in the reactor basement, then clog the pumps that are supposed to draw in the leaked water and recycle it back into the cooling system to prevent a meltdown.
In February 2003, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, acting as a contractor to the commission, studied the problem and said the Indian Point reactors were among those t in the nation likely to face the hazard.
But the commission staff's new report argues that that study ''did not model individual plants in sufficient detail to provide information for drawing conclusions about the operability of a particular sump.'' The staff said that data in the report was not verified with the plant operators, and Entergy had said that the pumps would not draw in the spilled water as fast as the Los Alamos study assumed. The plant also has design features that the Los Alamos study did not consider, the staff said.
David Lochbaum, a nuclear expert at the Union of Concerned Scientists, said Monday in a telephone interview that in the absence of a plant-by-plant analysis, there was no basis for concluding that Indian Point or other reactors were safe. He said there had been plenty of time in the last 20 years, since the problem became obvious, to conduct such studies.
The commission expects that by 2007, the problem will be analyzed at all reactors and fixed where needed.
Mr. Lochbaum pointed out that the Davis-Besse reactor, near Toledo, Ohio, analyzed the possibility of debris clogging its sump after it was shut down in March 2002 because the top of its reactor vessel had corroded nearly all the way through. If the top had ruptured, the water inside, pressurized to more than 2,000 pounds per square inch, would have blown the thermal insulation off the top of the vessel, experts say.
Davis-Besse's operators concluded that the water-intake opening for their pumps was too small, and installed an opening that was 25 times larger, he said. But Davis-Besse ranked as one of the safer plants in the Los Alamos study.
