It is to be a long and sleepy 10-year journey, but if it succeeds, a spacecraft called the Rosetta will be the first to witness a dark, dead comet come to life under the warming rays of the Sun.
The ambitious Rosetta mission, to begin this week, is an international effort to gain a deeper understanding of comets and their role in the formation of the solar system and, perhaps, even the origin of life on Earth.
The 8,000-pound robotic spacecraft is to be launched on Thursday by the European Space Agency from Kourou, French Guiana, on the northeastern coast of South America, by Europe's most powerful rocket, the Ariane 5.
Two hours after the spacecraft enters Earth orbit, an upper stage will send the Rosetta off on a roundabout decade-long journey through the solar system on a mission to find and chase Comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
The Rosetta will have to travel hundreds of millions of miles on a path that requires four planetary flybys to build momentum and eventually sling it to a point 420 million miles from the Sun for a rendezvous with the small incoming comet, around May 2014.
By August 2014, the spacecraft is to go into an orbit 15 miles from the nucleus of the two-and-a-half-mile-wide comet. Three months later -- after surveying the chunk of ice, dust and other debris for suitable sites -- the Rosetta will move within a couple of miles of the surface and release a 270-pound craft, Philae, that will try to make the first landing on a comet.
Because the comet is so small and its gravity extremely weak, the lander has to drift down and touch the surface at a speed of no more than three feet a second or it could bounce away, researchers said. To hold it down, Philae's three legs have special shock absorbers to cushion its touch. Each is fitted with ice pitons that quickly bore into the surface. The lander will immediately fire a harpoon into the ground to anchor it.
''This is certainly one of the most difficult interplanetary missions ever attempted, one full of many things that could go wrong,'' Dr. Gerhard Schwehm, project scientist for the European Space Agency, said in an interview. ''However, if it is successful, we will obtain an unprecedented amount of information about comets.''
The project draws its name from the Rosetta Stone, the slab of rock whose carved inscriptions in three languages finally allowed scholars to decipher hieroglyphics, the pictorial language of ancient Egypt. Philae is named after an Egyptian obelisk that provided clues for translating the stone.
All the European agency's 15 member states have contributed experiments, equipment and other support to the Rosetta project, which is projected to cost $1.25 billion.
Scientists will use a suite of 21 instruments, some never flown on a deep-space mission. The instruments, 11 on the orbiter and 10 on the lander, will seek to measure the comet's composition, age, temperatures, interaction with solar radiation and other characteristics as it approaches the Sun.
The United States has contributed three instruments and critical components of a fourth, representing a $35 million investment, said Dr. Claudia Alexander, project scientist for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. The instruments include a microwave device to measure temperatures on and near the comet that was supplied by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. This is the first time such a device has been used on an interplanetary mission.
''This gives us a great opportunity for international collaboration on a subject we have a lot of interest in,'' Dr. Alexander said. ''We really know very little about comets. But that should be changing rapidly in the next few years.''
For most of its journey, the Rosetta will hibernate, with most of its instruments turned off and generating just enough power to keep vital components from freezing. The spacecraft is designed with enough artificial intelligence to monitor itself, keep track of its position and perform necessary course changes to stay on target.
The Rosetta, whose course will take it out to almost the orbit of Jupiter, will also set a solar-power record. Rather than rely on nuclear power, which traditionally provides energy for deep-space missions, Rosetta will generate electricity from two vast solar panels that stretch out 45 feet on each side. The panels are to generate 395 watts of electrical power when farthest from the Sun and 850 watts when closer. The mission will be the longest trip away from the Sun for a craft relying just on solar power.
Comet Churyumov-Gerasimenko, which orbits the Sun once every 6.6 years, should be mostly inactive when the spacecraft arrives and when the lander puts down on its surface, Dr. Schwehm said. The Rosetta is to study the comet for up to two years, monitoring changes as it makes its nearest approach to the Sun at speeds up to 85,000 miles an hour, and stay with it as it swings back out to the colder recesses of space.
The orbiter is to make observations as close as 1.2 miles from the surface. But as the icy body becomes more active and spews particles that could damage the craft, the orbit may have to be pulled back to 30 miles or more to protect it, he said.
''We want to study what distinguishes the active from the inactive areas,'' Dr. Schwehm said.
Scientists study comets because they are believed to be materials left over from the formation of the solar system, more than four billion years ago. The clusters of frozen gases and dust, which linger on the outer fringes of the solar system beyond the planets, are thought to be virtually pure samples of primordial material.
Some of the material is nudged out of place by gravitational disturbances, perhaps from passing stars, and falls toward the Sun in the form of thousands of comets. As the frozen matter nears the Sun, heat vaporizes some of it, producing volatile plumes of gas and dust that create a cloud called a coma around the center nucleus. The pressure of solar radiation can stretch out the material in the coma to form a tail that can extend thousands of miles.
When Earth was in its early formation, evidence suggests that numerous comets and other bodies smashed into the young planet. Some scientists theorize that comets may have been a source of water on Earth and may have carried complex organic chemicals that could have contributed ingredients to the formation of life.
Another reason to study comets is self-defense. Researchers think that understanding them better may lead to ways to deflect or destroy those that might collide with Earth.
Several spacecraft have flown by comets since a flotilla of probes studied Halley's Comet on its return in 1986, including the Europeans' Giotto, which returned the first close-up pictures.
On Jan. 2, NASA's Stardust craft came within 155 miles of Comet Wild 2, collecting dust samples that will be returned to Earth in 2006. Next December, another American mission, Deep Impact, is to blast off for a July 2005 date with Comet P/Tempel, when the spacecraft will fire a heavy projectile into the nucleus to study the material ejected.
Just starting Rosetta's voyage has been a journey. The mission had originally been scheduled to lift off in January 2003 for a different target, the comet Wirtanen. But the launching failure of another Ariane 5 rocket caused a delay that resulted in remapping the entire mission and finding another target.
To reach Churyumov-Gerasimenko, the mission had to be reprogrammed for three flybys around Earth, in 2005, 2007 and 2009, instead of one, and to get a slingshot assist from Mars in 2007. The looping path also requires the Rosetta to cross the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter twice. Scientists will take this opportunity to study asteroids along the Rosetta path.
''It has not been simple,'' said Dr. Schwehm, an original member of the project, who started conceiving it long before it was approved in 1993. ''But we are happy to be finally on our way.''
