On May 26, 1980, I drafted a memorandum for Ronald Reagan and his advisers. Mr. Reagan's position as the Republican candidate for president was by then secure, but his official nomination would not come for almost two months, at the Republican National Convention. The title of the memo was ''Strategy for the Doldrums.'' Here is a brief excerpt:
''We now face a period of approximately six weeks of no political contests -- a period of the political doldrums. Even though the political winds will blow with little force until the convention, we can, nevertheless, effectively use this period to steer our campaign considerably closer to its goal of electing you the President of the United States.
''During the doldrums, we face the risk of the media picking, willy-nilly, its own stories (some of which will be very negative). Or we can, given the press focus on you now as the nominee, write to some extent, our own media script.''
The doldrums are upon us again, and the candidate who best manages the apparent break in the action will gain considerable advantage heading into the conventions. While this period poses risks for President Bush, it is Senator John Kerry (or, possibly, Senator John Edwards) who has the most to lose in the coming months.
If, as now appears likely, Senator Kerry all but clinches the Democratic nomination in next week's primaries, he will be a sitting duck from mid-March to the beginning of the Democratic National Convention in July. He will be in a position not unlike Ronald Reagan's in 1980.
But worse. For the Democrats, the political doldrums will be unusually long this year. In order to build unity and complete the nominating process quickly, the party scheduled its primaries early; most of the largest ones will be over by the middle of March.
What then? With the primary fight over, the nominee's image will come into sharper focus (the Democrats have long had the media spotlight, but there have been too many contenders for voters' attention). For a time, impressions of Mr. Kerry will remain malleable -- but only for a time. Once views are crystallized, it will be difficult for him to redefine himself. President Bush's standing is somewhat less subject to change; his biography is well known and his record well established.
It is imperative for Mr. Kerry's campaign, obviously, to devise a strategy to counter the doldrums. For Republicans, in contrast, the doldrums present an extraordinary opportunity. If the Bush campaign can succeed in introducing John Kerry to voters in terms of its own choosing, then the president may be able to reverse the downward trends seen in some recent polls.
These numbers have caused anxiety among some Republicans. But Mr. Bush must surely remember where his father stood after the primaries when he, too, faced a politician from Massachusetts. In May 1988, Michael Dukakis was polling well ahead of George H. W. Bush, in one survey by 16 percentage points. George H. W. Bush was able to turn the tide with aggressive advertising.
So what issue is most likely to chase away the doldrums? Security, in all its varied meanings, will be the common thread of the 2004 presidential campaign: in the tug-of-war political battle of the next few months, it will be the candidate who can position his opponent furthest from the American voter on the issue of security, broadly defined -- economic as well as international.
Developments after the conventions will undoubtedly influence each candidate's level of support, of course. But by then, attempts by either President Bush or Senator Kerry to redefine themselves will require that they paddle against the political currents.
As Mr. Kerry comes ever closer to the greatest triumph of his political career, he is also at a moment of maximum political danger: the doldrums have becalmed many a candidacy. For Mr. Bush, the danger is no less real: the window of opportunity to position himself for re-election is drawing near. What each campaign does during the battle of the doldrums may tell us much about its candidate's chances for victory come November.
Op-Ed Contributor Richard B. Wirthlin, Ronald Reagan's strategist and pollster, and Wynton C. Hall are writing a book about Ronald Reagan.
