Far be it for New Yorkers to plan ahead when they can simply sally forth and figure it out along the way. Despite two months' notice and a day for a trial run, many were still caught unprepared during yesterday's morning rush with all four subway tracks in use over the Manhattan Bridge.
Blame it on procrastination, folly or that special brand of hubris that seems to afflict many of this city's residents.
''I haven't been reading the papers,'' said Robert Stewart, a federal job-safety inspector, poring over one of the miniature subway maps handed out by transit workers at the DeKalb Avenue station in Brooklyn. ''It caught me off guard.''
But these are New Yorkers, and Mr. Stewart and others found their way soon enough, often without any help. As a result, the morning rush, the first since the subway map was rescrambled to send more trains over the bridge and give most Brooklyn residents a faster ride to Midtown, went smoothly, except for some minor delays, according to transit officials, although there was still plenty of subterranean confusion to go around.
''I don't think you're fully focused on things until your morning commute,'' said Gene Russianoff, a lawyer for the Straphangers Campaign, a transit advocacy group whose volunteers spent the morning surveying how New Yorkers did at eight critical stations. The survey backed up the claims that the rush hour went smoothly, although he said it found some problems with inadequate announcements on trains and inaccurate information given to riders.
Confessing complete befuddlement, Ivan Parmar, 21, a real estate agent from Borough Park, Brooklyn, stood at the downtown B and N platform at Herald Square yesterday morning, next to a Metropolitan Transportation Authority poster that read in part, ''Sometimes you have to go backward to go forward.''
The message summed up Mr. Parmar's experience. He had ridden the D from the Fort Hamilton Parkway station in Brooklyn, expecting it to stop at 23rd Street, but found himself at 34th Street, one of the most confusing stations in the system after the changes, having to double back.
''I have no idea how to get there,'' he said. Before, he had simply taken the W train. ''Now it's a D, which is running on the old B line,'' he said, staring at a map. ''I don't even know where the W is now.''
It is not as if people like Mr. Parmar were not warned, transit officials pointed out. The first signs came out in December, part of a million-dollar ad campaign. The detailed brochures -- 3.3 million in all -- followed in early January. And over the last few weeks, transit workers have plastered stations with 17,000 posters. Disembodied voices at platforms also intoned again and again: ''Ladies and gentlemen, please plan ahead''
''For the most part, people got the message,'' said Paul Fleuranges, a spokesman for New York City Transit. ''It's the people who didn't read.''
Many did follow the instructions to plan ahead. Howard Skrill, 41, an art professor at Bronx Community College who lives in Park Slope, said his 12-year-old son, Jonathan, a train buff, spread a new subway map on the kitchen table for his parents yesterday morning to point out what routes would be best for them.
''We were talking about it all morning,'' he said. As a result, he was ready at the Pacific Street station when a D train, instead of his usual W, pulled in.
In some instances, commuters were not helped by transit workers. Extra personnel were posted at 17 critical stations to answer questions, but a station agent at Grand Street told a Straphangers volunteer that he could take the B or D to Pacific Street in Brooklyn, although only the D now stops there, Mr. Russianoff said. And a worker at Pacific Street told Daniel Botting, another Straphangers surveyor, that he should take the R train to Union Square, when the N train would have been faster, skipping Lower Manhattan.
Like explorers happening upon new lands, many discovered their commuting had suddenly become shorter. Others, however, learned of a new transfer.
After quizzing a transit worker at Pacific Street, Jessica Chatfield, 27, waited for the next D train to rumble up. She used to take the Q directly to her office at 57th Street and Seventh Avenue. ''Now I guess I'll take the D, and I don't know where I'm getting off,'' she said. She did not know yet what to think about the changes. Hopping aboard her train, she said, ''I'm about to find out.''
