WHEN the corporate scandals at the Enron Corporation and WorldCom led to strict new accounting legislation to regulate public companies, a handful of small financial consulting firms realized they were facing a tremendous opportunity.
Among other changes, the law -- the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 -- requires publicly traded companies to create tight internal controls over their financial reporting process, and then to regularly assess their effectiveness.
But to prevent possible conflicts of interest, the act prohibits a company's auditing firm from doing that work. If companies wanted help complying with the new law, they would have to find it elsewhere.
That has been a boon for some smaller accounting and financial advisory firms, which have seized on the rules and quickly developed the expertise to help companies comply.
Frank Lordi, 33, the founder of Lordi Consulting in West Chester, Pa., knew he was on to something in the fall of 2002, when he and his partner started getting calls from the accounting giants PricewaterhouseCoopers and KPMG.
''They were asking us to come help their clients because they didn't want the other big firms to make inroads with them,'' Mr. Lordi said. ''We realized there was going to be a huge opportunity to be a second source to these companies.''
And, he said, it would be in a way that did not threaten their powerful auditing firms. Instead, the big-name firms have become a valuable source of new business.
''In the past, auditors would do things like write accounting policies and help implement accounting rules,'' Mr. Lordi said. ''They can't do that anymore for their clients, so the companies are calling us.''
Now the small consulting company has clients that include corporations like Cephalon, Crown Holdings Inc., GlaxoSmithKline, and Rohm and Haas, and it has grown to 36 full-time employees from 5 in 2001. The firm also draws from its other business unit -- a placement agency for accountants that merged with Lordi Consulting in January 2003 -- to provide temporary staff on some projects. Mr. Lordi said he expected the company to do about $8 million of business this year, up from $500,000 in 2001.
Most requirements for the Sarbanes-Oxley Act will take effect this June, and many companies are expecting considerable new expenses to meet them. ''The act actually states that the costs will be about $91,000 per company, and that is laughable,'' Mr. Lordi said. ''Companies are spending millions.''
According to a recent study by the trade association Financial Executives International, public companies expect to spend an average of nearly $2 million each in the first year to comply with the new rules. The group surveyed 321 companies, and found that for some larger concerns, the estimated cost was even higher.
The larger accounting firms offer Sarbanes-Oxley compliance services. But smaller firms have won a significant portion of the business by offering lower prices and specialized accountants who can focus on this particular kind of work.
David Landau, 30, a certified public accountant, projects that his firm, David Landau &amp; Associates, in Roseland, N.J., will increase its revenues by 450 percent this year as a result of new ''404'' work, which refers to a section of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act that requires companies to document and test their internal accounting controls.
Mr. Landau was a one-man operation until the middle of 2003, but now has eight full-time employees. Through relationships with some midsize firms, he borrows additional staff on a project-by-project basis.
''It's competitive out there,'' Mr. Landau said, ''but what I'm beginning to see is that a lot of the chief financial officers are reluctant to spend big dollars on this because they just see it as a compliance cost. They're looking at alternative cost situations where they can get the same work done at a better price.''
He estimates that his fees are about a third less than the big four firms.
And, he said, the larger accounting firms prefer to send their clients to him for their Sarbanes-Oxley work rather than let that business go to a competitor. So far, all of his clients for such work have been referred by big accounting firms or from his existing clients. He has not spent any money on marketing.
Harry Mumma is the director of internal audit at Crown Holdings Inc., a Philadelphia-based maker of packaging products. By hiring Lordi Consulting to do the compliance work for Crown's Americas division, Mr. Mumma said Crown saved about 50 percent of what it would have cost to hire a national firm. But he said price was only part of the reason that Lordi won the contract.
The company interviewed three potential firms: Lordi, a medium-size firm and a Big Four firm. The largest one came across as arrogant and expensive, Mr. Mumma said, but at first seemed likely to get the job.
''The midsize firm was very good and very experienced,'' he said. ''The problem is they were spreading themselves too thin. I couldn't get a top-level person to talk to.''
Mr. Mumma added, ''We were ready to go with the big firm. The company took this so seriously that we were going to pay the extra money.'' But then Lordi Consulting made its pitch.
''They had practical experience. They were already doing this with another significantly large company,'' he said. ''They focused us on the approach and how to do it, and they had already worked with our external auditors at another client, so the auditors had already signed off on their methodology.''
And Mr. Mumma said he knew that if there was a problem, he could go ''right to the top'' with Lordi. ''These guys are a little hungrier.''
BY THE NUMBERS
