Very much alive and well, an Army Reserve sergeant who is back home in Waterbury, Conn., on emergency leave has decided that divorce is the way to put her life back in order after her husband was charged with fabricating a story of her death in combat.
A lawyer for the reservist, Sgt. Betsy Valentin, said yesterday that she was flabbergasted and too distraught to talk. ''She's putting her life on the line for her country and her colleagues are dying on a weekly basis, and then this all starts when she gets a call that she's dead,'' said the lawyer, Michael Ferguson.
The tall tale came to a head on Feb. 13. The police received a call that a man, Edward Valentin, and his three children were distraught and in need of help because the family's matriarch, a sergeant in the Army Reserve, had been killed in action.
The police arrived at the Valentin home, ''and Mr. Valentin appeared to be very upset,'' said Sgt. David Jannetty, who works in the criminal investigation bureau of the Waterbury Police Department.
The local news media picked up on the story, and before long, Sergeant Valentin, busy maintaining order in Iraq, was hearing of her own death.
When informed that Sergeant Valentin was, in fact, anything but dead, the police began to investigate.
Mr. Valentin said he had received a phone call informing him of her death, so the police initially figured that the Department of Defense may have made a terrible error. But then they found out that the department informs families of deaths by sending an official and a member of the clergy to the home of the dead service member.
Suspicions then led to the theory that someone had played a cruel hoax on Mr. Valentin.
It was after police secured a search warrant for Mr. Valentin's cellphone records that the puzzlement began. Though none of the incoming calls were suspicious in nature, there was a batch of calls from Mr. Valentin to a particular woman, a family friend.
When the police interviewed the woman, whose name they would not release, she told them that Mr. Valentin had been propositioning her, but she had been telling him that she would not have an affair with a married man.
Mr. Valentin, Sergeant Jannetty said, soon told the woman that the circumstances of his marriage had changed.
Sergeant Jannetty recalled: ''She told us he told her: 'my wife died in Iraq, and my children need a woman in their life. What are you going to do?'''
Mr. Valentin's plan, the authorities said, was to tell the woman that he was a widower in order gain her sympathy before telling her it was all a big mistake.
But the story of tragedy quickly spread, ''and it snowballed,'' Sergeant Jannetty said. ''He couldn't control it and say it was a mistake. That's when it all came down around him.''
Mr. Valentin eventually admitted that he was the source of the hoax, the police said, though he claimed purity of purpose: that the public word of his wife's death would bring her home from Iraq.
Indeed, Sergeant Valentin came home, but it was not with gratitude on her mind. She apparently sided with the authorities in determining that it would take a leap of faith -- if not logic -- to believe that such a tale would be told for a loved one's benefit.
Granted a two-week leave to put her affairs in order, Sergeant Valentin arrived home on Friday, and by Monday, she had filed for divorce.
At the couple's house on a residential cul-de-sac early Monday afternoon, Diane Valentine, Mr. Valentin's mother, who spells her last name differently, answered the door and said that he was not home. ''He's very sick,'' she said. ''It's his nerves. He's at the doctor's.''
At 2 p.m., a state marshal, Domenic Jannetty, arrived at the house to deliver the divorce papers. As he was leaving, Mr. Valentin arrived in a car with another man. When he got out, the marshal told him why he was there, and Mr. Valentin answered, ''O.K.,'' before telling a reporter that his lawyer had told him not to comment to the news media.
Mr. Valentin has been charged with telephone harassment, falsely reporting an incident involving death and making a false statement. False reporting is a felony carrying a sentence of up to five years.
Mr. Ferguson, Sergeant Valentin's lawyer, said that Monday brought one more unpleasant surprise for her.
Though she had been deployed for year and though her paychecks were being deposited into the couple's bank account, Mr. Valentin, who is unemployed, had not been paying the mortgage, Mr. Ferguson said.
''They are $18,000 behind on the house,'' he added, ''and the only reason the bank did not foreclose is that she was on active duty.''
