Citigroup, the world's largest financial services company, which agreed on Monday to buy South Korea's sixth-largest bank for $2.72 billion, will be entering a crucial Asian market that offers reliable growth prospects and few rivals so far, analysts said.
Citigroup beat Standard Chartered to acquire KorAm Bank, which has about 200 local branches and more than $36 billion in assets. In joining Citigroup's operations in Korea, KorAm would become the country's fifth-largest lender in terms of revenue, the two companies said.
For Citigroup, which is based in New York, the deal is the latest in an expansion into potentially lucrative consumer-banking markets outside of the United States. South Korea is home to Asia's third-largest consumer-banking market, after Japan and China. Citigroup, which entered South Korea in 1967, was one of the first foreign banks to establish a presence here.
''We can still expect the consumer-banking sector to grow at least as much as the economic growth rate,'' said Jason Yu of Samsung Securities. ''Domestic banks have fewer products to offer consumers and lack the firepower of Citigroup in terms of the ability to develop new products.''
South Korean banks, burdened by a surge in late credit card payments in recent years, suffered tumbling profits in the final quarter of last year as they set aside huge provisions against bad card loans. Despite the troubles of overextended consumers, the government expects the economy to grow about 6 percent this year, about twice the estimated rate for 2003, as exports remain strong. Frozen consumer spending has shown signs of gradual thawing.
''Korea is a strategic priority for Citigroup,'' said Deryck C. Maughan, the chairman of Citigroup International. ''We see this transaction as part of a broader strategy to provide greater access to Citigroup's world-class products and services in attractive and growing markets.''
Foreigners have been a growing presence in South Korea's banking industry since the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, with investment funds like Lone Star Funds and Newbridge Capital acquiring controlling stakes in prominent South Korean banks. But until now, the major foreign investors were mainly private equity funds and not global banking brands. Standard Chartered and HSBC, based in London, also operate in South Korea.
In recent years, South Korean banks, formerly focused on corporate lending, have been rushing to tap wealthy private customers, offering new products and luring clientele with exclusive, marble-floored rooms in branches in affluent neighborhoods.
''Citigroup will pursue aggressive sales targeting high-end and middle-market customers,'' said Jun Lee, a banking analyst at Dongwon Securities, citing the bank's strength in private banking. ''Korean banks will emulate this, focusing more on profits, emerging from the past format that focused on size.''
The Citigroup acquisition was also seen as a precedent that could prod other global banks to look at South Korean consumer banking. Sales of large stakes in Woori Bank, South Korea's No.2 lender, and the fourth-largest player, Hana Bank, are expected this year. In the years ahead, stakes in banks held by Newbridge Capital and Lone Star are expected to go on the block.
Under the deal, Citigroup would acquire a 36.6 percent stake in KorAm held by a consortium led by the Carlyle Group, an American investment fund.
The deal also includes a tender offer for a further 43.4 percent of KorAm shares at 15,500 won ($13.14) each in cash, which would give Citigroup at least 80 percent of KorAm, the banks said. The price per share represents a 6.7 percent premium to the average closing price of KorAm stock over the past month, according to the companies.
Standard Chartered, which also bid for KorAm, has a 9.8 percent stake, and Citigroup said it was interested in those shares as well. Standard Chartered executives in Seoul were unavailable for comment.
