Vaccination against chickenpox has been routine in the United States for nearly a decade.
But outbreaks of the illness among children who have already been immunized have raised new concerns about the effectiveness of the vaccine and the age when it is given.
Now a new study is adding to the debate. Researchers at Yale Medical School reported last week in The Journal of the American Medical Association that the effectiveness of the chickenpox vaccine fades substantially a year after it is administered. The vaccine also appears to confer less immunity to children younger than 15 months.
The chickenpox vaccine has been approved for use in the United States since 1995. Some experts have questioned whether it should be used at all, arguing that immunizing children just pushes the disease into adulthood, when it is usually more severe.
The study, carried out over several years, tracked 339 children who had chickenpox and compared them with 678 children who had never had the disease.
A year after the vaccine was given, the researchers found, its effectiveness waned, slipping from an average of 97 percent to 84 in years two through eight.
For children who had the shot at 15 months or older, the protection reached 99 percent in the first year. But in children who had been vaccinated before 15 months, the researchers found, immunity in the first year was 73 percent.
Still, the children who came down with chickenpox, also known as varicella, after receiving shots mostly showed just mild symptoms, the researchers found.
''I think the evidence shows that there's no reason for people to worry,'' said Dr. Marietta Vazquez, a researcher at Yale and the study's lead author, noting that the vaccine's effectiveness stabilizes after the second year.
Dr. Vazquez suggested that lifting the age to vaccinate children from 12 to 15 months might help.
Other experts disagreed.
''It would be a shame and incorrect to start waiting until 15 months instead of 12 months to get vaccinated,'' said Dr. Edward P. Rothstein, a pediatrician in Bucks County, Pa., who helps the American Academy of Pediatrics issue immunization recommendations. ''If that happens,'' Dr. Rothstein said, ''it's more likely we're going to miss kids, because a lot of them aren't going to come back.''
Although no vaccine is ever 100 percent effective, some authorities see the findings as highlighting a potentially serious problem. If chickenpox becomes less prevalent, fewer unvaccinated children will contract it. That vulnerability follows them into adulthood, critics say, and it increases their chances of suffering severe complications if the disease does eventually strike.
Adults whose childhood immunity has worn off will also be in trouble, said Barbara Loe Fisher, co-chairwoman of the National Vaccine Information Center.
One solution, experts say, is to combine the chickenpox vaccine with the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, known as M.M.R., usually given around the same time. That would mean that children would receive a second, or booster, dose of varicella vaccine, because M.M.R. is administered twice.
''It depends on what the objective is,'' said Dr. H. Cody Meissner, chief of the Pediatric Infectious Disease Service at the Tufts-New England Medical Center in Boston. ''If the objective is to prevent all cases of chickenpox, even the breakthrough cases, then we'd consider the possibility of a second dose.''
Giving a second vaccination might become more attractive if immunity to chickenpox is shown to decline steadily as vaccinated children become adults. As it stands, what occurs beyond age 8 remains unclear.
''Up to 8 years, the protection is very good,'' Dr. Vazquez said. ''But will it hold 10, 12, or 20 years down the line? We don't know yet.''
Correction:  March 1, 2004, Monday  An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a study finding that the effectiveness of the chickenpox vaccine fades after a year referred incompletely to the views of the lead author, Dr. Marietta Vazquez of Yale Medical School. Although she suggested that raising children's immunization age to 15 months from 12 might increase the vaccine's effectiveness, she also said that she was not recommending such a change and that the benefits had to be weighed against the risks of leaving children unvaccinated for three months or of their not returning for vaccination at 15 months.
