When the boos inside Madison Square Garden subsided Sunday, the crowd began chanting for a player who was not in the building.
Keith Van Horn never drew such appreciation during his short New York stay, which ended when he was dealt to Milwaukee on Feb. 14 in a three-team deal that brought Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed to the Knicks. With Thomas in the starting lineup, the Knicks have played poorly in home losses to Utah and Cleveland. The absence of Van Horn was not lost on the frustrated fans.
''That was surprising,'' Allan Houston said Monday at practice. ''I've been in New York for a long time now, and you can always expect the unexpected. At the time it was like, 'Wow.' But then, afterwards, you're like, 'Here we go again. We're in New York.'
''One thing it did tell me is that they're knowledgeable,'' said Houston, who has been sidelined with sore knees. ''Not that that was the right thing to say, but they know the game and they know that it's an adjustment. They're upset not at Tim, but because we have a good rhythm going and we have to get that back.''
The Knicks, who begin a four-game road trip at Sacramento on Tuesday, had moved within two games of .500 after winning 10 of 13 games since Don Chaney was fired on Jan. 14. But with Houston still on the injured list, the Knicks have lost four of their last five games and two of the three since Van Horn was traded.
Van Horn averaged 16.4 points a game with the Knicks and provided a complement to Stephon Marbury. In three games with the Knicks, Thomas has struggled, averaging 9.6 points on 37.5 percent shooting. When Houston returns, he could fill the void in scoring created by Van Horn's departure.
But now, impatient Knicks fans seem to be questioning whether Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president, has made one too many moves. Houston said that if the two losses had not happened ''everyone would have been praising him again like they've been doing.''
''That's New York,'' he said. ''They didn't chant Patrick Ewing's name until he left, so I don't feel bad they ain't chanting my name right now.''
The problem for the Knicks might simply be working the new players into their system, and doing it in time to make the playoff run that the team believed it was capable of before the Van Horn trade.
''Well, we had to take a step back because we had new people here already and then you're bringing two new people in,'' Coach Lenny Wilkens said Monday after practice. ''It takes time, but today was much better. Guys were a little more comfortable. Hopefully, it will pay off for us in the game.
''I knew that it would be an adjustment period,'' Wilkens said. ''As a coach, you're always optimistic. You're hoping it doesn't go as long as you know it might because we had been playing pretty good. You take a step back and hopefully you take two forward.''
Thomas, who grew up in Paterson, N.J., shrugged off the chants.
''I understand the fans here in New York want to win,'' he said. ''I'm from Jersey, so I'm used to it. I know what it's about. When you're winning, the fans love you. When you're losing, they hate you. It's that way everywhere you go, overseas, New York, it doesn't matter.
''It's not about me getting more familiar with Stephon, me getting more familiar with Allan Houston. I mean, it's not about that. It's about all of us. We're all in this together, so I mean the more time you get to be around each other on the court, off the court, it's going to make things a lot easier.''
Marbury dismissed the notion that the Knicks had taken a step back, but added: ''It's New York, man. There ain't no patience here. I don't have patience. You don't have patience. We're just not where we want to be. We would like to be further than where we are right now.''
REBOUNDS
ALLAN HOUSTON accompanied the team on the trip, but he will probably not play. Houston said that he needed to practice; the team will probably not practice again until Saturday. ''After the break I felt good,'' he said, referring to the All-Star Game break. ''I pushed myself really hard and it got really sore. So now it's feeling good, but I don't want to, I'm hesitant. I'm cautious about how I progress because I don't want it to go back to where it was. When I can practice and scrimmage and go 100 percent, then I'll be ready.''
PRO BASKETBALL
