Setting the stage for a potential political battle, the two houses of the State Legislature on Monday adopted separate visions for remaking New York's aging election system.
The Help America Vote Act, which Congress enacted after the 2000 presidential election, authorizes each state to overhaul its election system and decide how to spend its share of federal money to do so. New York stands to receive about $235 million, according to state officials.
The federal law says the states must use the money, up to $3.9 billion in total, to replace outdated polling machines, train poll workers and set up a statewide database of registered voters, among other things.
As a practical matter, in New York there will be two major shifts: the bulk of first-time voters, who register by mail, will now be asked to show some form of identification before voting, and all voters will have to master new electronic voting machines that will replace the state's 19,843 pull-lever machines.
''From the voters' perspective, that is what they will see,'' said Blair Horner, the legislative director of the New York Public Interest Research Group, who is backing the Assembly's plan for making the changes. ''That is the tangible experience.''
But plans to overhaul the election system have become mired in bitter partisan politics. And how and when the changes will be made will largely depend on how quickly the state's two top legislative leaders and Gov. George E. Pataki can come to agreement, analysts and lawmakers said.
On Monday, the two houses issued separate packages of five bills each to address the voting changes, with significant differences. Joseph L. Bruno, the Republican majority leader of the State Senate, and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, left open the possibility to form conference committees to find compromises.
The Legislature must move quickly to meet federal deadlines. The federal act requires that a statewide database to streamline voter information in New York be in place by January 2006, and that the pull-lever machines be replaced with electronic models by the fall of 2006, in time for the next race for governor, said Lee Daghlian, a spokesman for the State Board of Elections.
''Speed is of the essence in order to meet the deadlines required,'' he said. ''We don't want to take a chance of not being able to meet these deadlines and lose the money.''
