There is a sense of dependable sameness in the day-to-day life of some working-class suburbs. One house resembles the next. Churches fill and empty on schedule on Sundays. Hangouts hum with activity in the evenings. Neighbors know one another, sometimes for generations. In recent years, however, some of these communities have found their routines disrupted by waves of undocumented immigrants who have bypassed the cities as they look for work.
That has been the story in Farmingville, a Suffolk County community in the middle of Long Island, which, as it happens, is a perfect encampment for undocumented immigrants looking for day jobs in landscaping and masonry, or other difficult manual labor that teenagers and other residents don't want to do themselves. In the 1990's, more than 1,500 such immigrants -- most of them Mexican -- arrived in Farmingville, where the population was 15,000.
What began as a curiosity turned into an annoyance as workers gathered daily along roads to be picked up by contractors. Residents began to complain that homes in their midst had effectively been turned into dormitories by dozens of workers who could not otherwise afford housing. After two Mexican workers were severely beaten by two young white men in the summer of 2000, two filmmakers, Carlos Sandoval and Catherine Tambini, turned on their cameras.
Their documentary, ''Farmingville,'' recently won a special jury prize at the Sundance Film Festival and will be shown on PBS stations in June. It has already made an impact on the island and on its namesake town in particular. Paul Tonna, a county legislator who displays a sensitivity to immigrant issues in the film, says the film has forced a kind of community introspection. Brian Foley, a legislator who tried to establish an off-the-street hiring site for the workers, says that with the notable exception of the firebombing of a Mexican family's home last year, local reports of immigrant-related trouble have quieted, at least for the moment.
Mr. Sandoval and Ms. Tambini say their goal was to produce an honest and balanced piece by listening to all sides. When a local opponent of the workers welcomes extremists from California and elsewhere, the ensuing anti-immigrant rally is long on chest-pounding speeches that echo, almost literally, before a largely empty hall. But quieter moments resonate with humanity. The workers have an almost stoic sense of purpose as they go about stomach-churning and dangerous jobs, including cleaning a crawl space strewn with toxic trash. One tells of hearing a small child he left behind in Mexico speak for the first time -- by telephone. Others try to collect from a cheating contractor. A resident named Louise rejects being labeled a racist as she gives a heartfelt and reasoned assessment of what she sees as a diminished quality of life since the workers arrived. All of this is presented in vérité style, unvarnished by little beyond the voices of the subjects.
A film cannot solve the problems of illegal immigration, nor does it try to. But ''Farmingville'' is a primer for anyone -- whether lawmaker or citizen -- who cares to better understand the usually unseen cost of America's appetite for cheap labor.
CAROLYN CURIEL
Editorial Notebook
