ABC's onetime powerhouse game show ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire'' returned to glory Sunday night, scoring big ratings in its new format, in which contestants can win up to $10 million.
''Super Millionaire,'' as the show is now called, pulled in 17.5 million viewers, the most on any channel Sunday night. It also was the night's leading program among viewers ages 18 to 49, the ones that ABC says it most cares about.
ABC executives said they hoped the momentum would continue throughout the show's five broadcasts this week. They said they hoped to gain a further boost from the show that was to be broadcast last night. In that edition, taped on Sunday, a contestant -- only the second to make it on the air in this incarnation of the show -- managed to win $1 million. That barrier took much longer to crack when the show first appeared in 1999.
In the new format, once again with Regis Philbin as host, guests can win $10 million and have additional ways to get help on an answer, including being able to call on a panel of ''three wise men,'' experts in several fields.
The early success is prompting ABC to make plans to bring the show back as a regular attraction in sweep months, when ratings are monitored to determine advertising rates. That would mean the show would be on at least three times a year: November, February and May.
''I've already got the show penciled in for this May, assuming we continue to do well this week,'' said Lloyd Braun, the chairman of ABC Entertainment and the executive most responsible for bringing the show back to the network. ''In success I could see us using it a fourth time, probably at the start of the television season in September.''
But Mr. Braun emphasized that no matter how well ''Super Millionaire'' fares, ABC has no intention of overusing it, as the network did four years ago when it broadcast the original ''Millionaire'' as many as four times a week.
That show burned out. The last time ''Millionaire'' played on ABC two years ago (another version runs in syndication), it attracted only 7.5 million viewers.
Michael Davies, who remains the show's executive producer, said, ''We've just got to protect it now.'' He said Sunday's ratings were especially gratifying. ''We had very little notice in the media. All the attention was going to 'Sex and the City.' ''
The finale of that HBO comedy hit ran opposite ''Super Millionaire'' at 9 p.m. Eastern time. Its ratings will not be available until today.
