Needle Trades Provide Therapy
Several weeks ago, when Alicia Welsh joined a sewing class in downtown Manhattan, she found she had stumbled on a novel form of psychotherapy. Ms. Welsh, 26, an advertising executive at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, derives a Zen-like satisfaction from making clothes. ''You are concentrating on something you are building, not thinking about the trials of your work or your personal life,'' she said.
The class is taught by Sheila Walker at her studio on Duane Street in TriBeCa. Ms. Walker, 39, is well qualified to teach the arcana of placket insertion and blind stitching. She designs and manufactures a line of lingerie and swimwear, sold under her She She label at stores like 30 Vandam in New York. The rest of the time she acts as a sort of occupational shrink, her classes a refuge for frazzled New Yorkers.
The sewing circles draw all sorts: actors, stay-at-home mothers and students, male and female, many already juggling a full course load at New York University or Columbia. There are lawyers hoping to change careers and, more frequently than Ms. Walker could have predicted, Wall Street professionals seeking an hour of respite from the frenzy of the trading floor.
Students sign on for a six-week course in basic sewing or alteration, at a cost of $425. They come to learn the craft, of course, but also for the sense of community that the classes, with no more than five students each, provide. ''You're sitting around with other people and telling each other your stories,'' said Ms. Welsh, the advertising executive. ''It feels good.''
Another student, Vinh Diep, 27, a showroom manager for a Manhattan interior design company, took up sewing in part to relieve stress. ''Working with my hands is therapeutic,'' he said. ''It's absolutely soothing.''
There are other attractions, including bachelorette parties, at which students make their own boy shorts or thongs, and knockoff classes, as Ms. Walker calls them, in which students learn to copy garments by their favorite designers. Why not, said Ms. Walker, who takes a subversive delight in tweaking Seventh Avenue. ''That's what I believe the big industry is all about, bringing in samples and knocking them off.''
Ms. Welsh, for one, plans to run up her own version of a Marc Jacobs dress from his fall 2003 Mod collection. She has already bought the brown wool and red silk trim she needs. Her total cost for fabric and frills is $50. ''I can't wait to wear it,'' she said.
Like a Movie Set for Shoes and Bags
It is not that Dante Ferretti has grown bored with his day job. It is simply that he warms to a challenge. Mr. Ferretti, a six-time Academy Award nominee, has designed lavish film sets for Franco Zeffirelli, Neil Jordan and Martin Scorsese, including Mr. Scorsese's ''Age of Innocence'' and ''The Aviator,'' his coming film about Howard Hughes. This month, the designer turned his mind to the creation of a compact quasi movie set: a showcase for shoes and bags by Tod's, the Italian luxury brand.
Mr. Ferretti undertook the project at the urging of Tod's owner, Diego Della Valle, who holds a stake in Cinecittà Studios, where Mr. Ferretti builds his sets. He is to unveil his installation on Thursday during Fashion Week in Milan. A labyrinth interspersed with handbags, gloves and shoes, it was inspired by the Renaissance gardens of Tuscany. A contemporary-art gallery, called In the Pac, will house the work, the cost of which Tod's would not disclose.
The project required Mr. Ferretti to squeeze dozens of statues and a forest of greenery into a space of about 7,200 square feet. ''Space was a challenge,'' he said. Time was another one. Mr. Ferretti constructed his set in only 10 days, a fraction of the many weeks involved in building a movie set.
As with most such projects, the work will be dismantled within days of Fashion Week's end on March 1. The prospect caused Mr. Ferretti to sigh. ''If it has a big impact, people will remember it,'' he said. ''If not, sometimes it's better to forget.''
Front Row
