A doctor I know maintains a fairly typical relationship with the pharmaceutical industry.
He deplores its influence on medical practice and worries that his colleagues' prescribing habits are increasingly swayed by omnipresent drug advertisements and sales agents pumping new products.
Regarding his own independence and integrity, though, my friend has no doubts. He feels that, as a man of science, he is trained to recognize an advertisement when he sees one, and to file it away in that corner of his brain reserved for potentially biased information.
The facts stored there have no influence on his professional judgment, he believes.
In fact, he says, it amuses him to take advantage of everything the drug companies have to offer -- the free pens and flashlights, the free lunches, the expensive dinners, the occasional all-expense-paid jaunt to a balmy resort to participate in a focus group and depart with a generous check.
He shrugs.
''I need the money,'' he says. If the drug companies are naïve enough to imagine that their largess will buy his loyalty, then so be it -- it is their gamble, and their loss.
In fact, he points out that if a 21st century doctor is too principled to participate in pharmaceutical-sponsored education, that doctor winds up without much education at all, since so much of it is now financed by industry.
Studies show that most doctors feel the way my friend does, and not only the ones who are hard up for cash. Travel to any medical meeting and you will see the most eminent medical minds in the country taking full advantage of pharmaceutical generosity.
Some just sip the odd cup of free cappuccino, while others bed down in free hotel suites. Some influential specialists make a point of accepting consultant fees and gifts from as many companies as possible, to emphasize their impartiality. On surveys, almost all doctors affirm that their clinical judgment is unaffected by such activities.
But the pharmaceutical industry is not known for its naïveté, and is unlikely to continue providing their treats without getting something big in return.
Relatively few researchers have investigated the question of exactly what that something big is. Among other considerations, it is one of the few research topics in medicine that will not attract drug company financing.
A handful of studies have looked at the common practice of giving doctors free drug samples and have shown that it unquestionably induces them to prescribe drugs they would otherwise avoid. The other gifts also appear to bring a nice return. In one clever 1992 study published in the journal Chest, Cleveland researchers surreptitiously tracked doctors' use of two drugs before and after all-expense paid educational jaunts to sunny resorts. They found that drug prescriptions more than tripled, an effect that persisted for more than a year, while the use of equivalent drugs remained stable.
It is all quite deplorable, my friend says. He used to add routinely that none of this data was applicable to him, but a recent series of events may have changed his mind.
A new AIDS drug was introduced into the marketplace a while ago, with some interesting features that set it apart from older drugs. For one thing, it was a new class of drug whose potency was not altogether certain; for another, it was a long-acting drug that could be taken once a day -- a wonderful and liberating detail for patients otherwise tethered to a twice- or thrice-daily schedule.
The drug was released into the marketplace with a minimum of published information on its success in patients -- not an unusual occurrence in these days of rapid drug approvals. The pharmaceutical company's representatives outdid themselves, introducing their new product with lunches, dinners and far-flung focus groups.
My friend, a little skeptical of the drug, took full advantage of these opportunities to learn all about it. After many conversations with the drug representatives, a half-dozen nice meals and a few trips to warm, sandy beaches, he had plenty of information.
Time passed. More studies were done. The new drug seemed to perform somewhat less effectively than had been hoped. Advisory bodies began to warn that in some situations, the new drug should not be used at all: it was so ineffective it could get patients into trouble.
My friend, nothing if not conscientious, went through his list of patients to identify those with H.I.V. infection who were on the new drug, so that he could contact them and change their pills.
The next time I ran into him he was a little subdued, newly conscious of the power of subliminal advertising.
''It turns out I had an awful lot of people on that silly drug,'' he said. ''I honestly can't imagine how that happened.''
ESSAY
