A Manhattan financial corporation was convicted yesterday of illegally receiving and transferring billions of dollars from shell companies, private investors and exchange houses to offshore accounts, cheating the government out of millions of dollars in taxes. Prosecutors called it the largest scheme of the sort to be uncovered in New York City.
The corporation, the Beacon Hill Service Corporation, was found guilty in State Supreme Court in Manhattan of four counts of operating as an unlicensed money transmitter, a felony, in violation of state banking laws. Beacon Hill shut down in February 2003 after officials from the Manhattan district attorney's office said they had obtained a search warrant and found that the company had been illegally transferring money abroad for years.
From 1997 through early 2003, wire transfers alone in about 40 of Beacon Hill's accounts totaled more than $6 billion. Banking laws require companies transmitting money to be licensed by the state and to keep records, like cash transaction reports, that list who is sending money and where it is sent.
Prosecutors said Beacon Hill, which did business on East 54th Street in Manhattan, received and moved money by check deposits, wire and drafts. When Beacon Hill was indicted in June, Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan district attorney, said it did not keep records in an attempt to shield clients, who paid fees for the company to deposit money in accounts in countries with strict corporate and banking secrecy laws.
''Offshore banks in secrecy jurisdictions and illegal money transmitters are used by those who wish to conceal the proceeds of a variety of criminal activities,'' Mr. Morgenthau said in a statement released yesterday. ''Increasingly, these facilities are being used to cheat the city, state and federal governments of millions in badly needed tax revenues.'' Mr. Morgenthau has begun a forfeiture action and has frozen more than $13 million left in Beacon Hill's accounts when it closed. The corporation also faces fines at sentencing, which is scheduled for March 15. Officials have not revealed any sources of the transfers, and the investigation is continuing.
