In a surprisingly blunt criticism of the law he is charged with enforcing, the director of the state's lobbying commission said on Monday that the existing lobbying statute was ''a pretty weak law'' that may be unconstitutional.
The official, David M. Grandeau, the executive director of the Temporary State Commission on Lobbying, also said he would recommend that all civil penalties in cases pending before the commission be suspended.
''That effectively makes us a toothless tiger for some period of time,'' Mr. Grandeau said. His remarks came only three days after a judge here ordered that the commission postpone its hearing scheduled for Wednesday with the hip-hop impresario Russell Simmons and others. Their lawyer had gone to the courts arguing that his clients' right to due process had been violated, and the judge ruled that more time was needed to consider the evidence.
Mr. Grandeau's comments placed the state's attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, in an odd position, since he acts as the lawyer for the lobbying commission. Mr. Spitzer is forced to defend a lobbying law even after Mr. Grandeau, who is charged with enforcing it, has publicly called it into question.
''The law is a good one; it has proven its worth time and time again,'' said Darren Dopp, a spokesman for Mr. Spitzer. ''If it is struck down, it will not be a good thing.'' Mr. Dopp said that because Mr. Spitzer was obligated to act as Mr. Grandeau's lawyer, it would not be appropriate for him to speak specifically about Mr. Grandeau's comments.
The tensions between the two men over the Simmons case go back at least to last fall, when Mr. Grandeau said the attorney general was not defending the lobbying commission's legal position.
Mr. Simmons, who has helped lead a campaign to soften the state's Rockefeller-era drug laws, has been fighting attempts by the lobbying commission to fine him for not declaring lobbying expenses. Mr. Simmons has contended that he was not lobbying but simply expressing his views in a public forum.
The judge has yet to rule on that larger point, but James Featherstonhaugh, a lawyer for Mr. Simmons and the others challenging the fines, filed a separate motion with the state Supreme Court in Albany to suspend the lobbying commission hearing, arguing that they had not had time to prepare a proper defense and were not properly informed about the details of the hearing.
In a radio interview Monday morning on WROW, Mr. Grandeau said he thought Mr. Featherstonhaugh had a good case and that he does not want to be put in the position of enforcing an unconstitutional law. In an interview later, he said, ''I think there is some real concern about the due process that we afford people.''
He added: ''There are going to be people out there who say I am doing this just to get a new law. They are not all wrong.'' He said he believed that if his comments helped compel the court to throw out the existing law, his impact could be positive.
''Then we have a situation where we have a blank slate and a great opportunity for the governor and Legislature to get together and write a law that is a model for the rest of the nation,'' he said.
Asked what would happen if the law is declared unconstitutional but a replacement is not enacted, Mr. Grandeau said, ''Shame on them.''
Blair Horner, the legislative director for the New York Public Interest Research Group, said his group has been seeking to broaden the state's lobbying laws for years.
Currently, the law requires that anyone who is paid or spends more than $2,000 a year to influence legislators or the governor on a bill must register as a lobbyist and disclose expenses, fees and payments every two months.
Without the ability to levy fines, Mr. Horner said, the lobbying commission would basically be powerless.
He was hopeful that if the current law is ruled unconstitutional, it would force lawmakers to pass a better law requiring more disclosure and restrictions.
''The public has a right to know who is getting paid big bucks to lobby politicians,'' he said.
He added that if the law was to be struck down and nothing done to replace it, ''there will only be disclosure requirements with no enforcement. It would be a law designed for angels.''
