HEALTH insurance is not the only kind of insurance giving small-business owners fits these days.
Over the last three years, workers' compensation premiums have risen by an average of 50 percent nationwide. The increase has been even greater in California, where Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger has threatened to use a ballot initiative to push proposed caps on medical costs and benefits if budget-reduction legislation is not passed by March.
Small-business lobbyists have aggressively pushed for such changes, arguing that smaller businesses are having a particularly hard time staying competitive while absorbing soaring workers' compensation costs. But advocacy groups have tended to remain quiet about a trend that regulators and experts agree is adding to the problem -- the growing number of small businesses that evade requirements to carry workers' comp insurance.
In every state except Texas, laws require most employers to carry workers' compensation coverage, which is no-fault insurance that provides injured workers with medical care and lost wages and protects employers from civil suits brought by employees.
It is small employers in lower-wage blue-collar industries -- like restaurants, construction and janitorial services -- that are most likely to go without coverage or understate payrolls to secure lower premiums, experts say.
Robert P. Hartwig, chief economist at the Insurance Information Institute, a trade group in New York, called the practice ''endemic, especially in contractor sectors of the economy.''
''It's a multibillion-dollar problem in the aggregate across the country,'' Mr. Hartwig said.
Workers who are injured while employed by companies with no insurance or insufficient coverage can still file claims -- costs that are usually passed along to companies with insurance, which pay higher premiums as a result.
For Richard J. Lawson and his brother Frank, whose family formed the Lawson Roofing Company in the wake of San Francisco's 1906 earthquake and fire, that cycle has had two harmful effects. Lawson Roofing, which has 88 employees, has seen its injury rates drop but its workers' compensation premiums increase by 100 percent since 1999, to 92 cents in premiums for each dollar of payroll. At the same time, Richard Lawson said, it has opened a cost gap that has made it harder to win new contracts.
''We're being undercut by uninsured competitors,'' he said. ''When we tell someone, 'It will cost $14,000 to replace your roof,' and someone else says, 'I'll do it for $9,000,' you can talk about insurance all you want, but you're going to lose the job.''
In a recent survey, the Roofing Contractors Association of California found that nearly 70 percent of roofers in the phone book were either underinsured or ''going bare,'' operating with no insurance. And a 2001 study by the California Department of Industrial Relations found that up to 25 percent of employers in the state were uninsured.
Some states have begun to take a closer look at employers who do not pay their fair share. The New York State Workers' Compensation Board set up an employer fraud task force in 2001 that has filed more than 20,000 liens and collected more than $26 million in fines from uninsured employers. Antifraud units in Florida, Ohio and Texas have also been actively pursuing business owners.
But John F. Burton Jr., a professor at the School of Management and Labor Relations at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J., said that enforcement was difficult precisely because of the nature of the perpetrators.
''By the time you catch up with small employers, if you can catch up with them, you can't get any assets from them,'' Professor Burton said.
Similarly, California's insurance commissioner, John Garamendi, said in a recent interview that he was ''very, very interested'' in enforcement. But he cautioned that it would take time to redirect resources and train investigators.
''These cases are not your usual stick-a-gun-in-their-face-and-steal-their-wallet cases,'' he said.
INSURANCE
