New small businesses start every day, and fail just as frequently. About 34 percent of businesses with 500 or fewer employees close within two years of opening, and 50 percent fold after four years, according to the Small Business Administration. The reasons vary, but the failures often carry valuable lessons for the owners and administrators.
LAURA RANDALL
Mark Mitchell  BUSINESS: Mitchell &amp; Company, an advertising agency.  LOCATION: Toledo, Ohio
Mark Mitchell, 54, started his agency in the mid-1980's. In 2001, a year after losing his biggest client, Owens Corning, Mr. Mitchell closed the company, declared personal bankruptcy and opened a much smaller agency called Interrupt. Last year, he took a job as president of another Toledo advertising agency; he also operates his own company out of that office.
Owens Corning had been my client since the mid-1970's. I located my office a block from their headquarters in Toledo. About three years before Owens Corning went bankrupt, they signed a contract with me in which they gave me a guaranteed percentage of their business. I had to grow to serve that business.
At our peak, we had 42 employees and were doing about $4.5 million in sales annually, and $3 million in gross profit. Every month I would make more than the month before, so I would not see an end in sight. I probably didn't spend the money as wisely as I should have. I would send employees to personal development seminars. We had a kitchen in the office and would look for excuses to have a chef come in and make lunch. We had a person come in once a week and give massages.
Then we started to get these rumblings that Owens Corning had asbestos liability problems. You hear these rumors, but you can't really act on those. We kept moving forward and then, boom, we got the message that they'd gone bankrupt. A couple of days later they said you're fired and we're going to consolidate our business with one firm. The first thing that hit me was I could not pay the debts to suppliers and others. The amounts were just too staggering.
I put my best face on it and thought I could call on Owens Corning's competitors. They gave me work, but not at the volume that was going to enable me to keep the staff and retire $600,000 in debt.
I worked at it for a little over a year, then made the choice in 2001 to close Mitchell &amp; Company, and file personal bankruptcy. The bank had the right to all of the assets. I started a new advertising agency called Interrupt, but business wasn't great. I was going to have to let the last couple of people working with me go.
Then I met Bill Tailford, who has a successful advertising agency in Toledo, and we decided to start working together. I still have my agency, Interrupt, which is just me and a few freelancers, and I'm president of Tailford &amp; Associates. We decided to find a way to date before we get married. If it does work, we'll probably merge things into one.
When I look back, I think I expanded my company too fast. When times were good, I didn't take money and put it away for when times would be bad. I would like to say that I wouldn't have put all my eggs in one basket with Owens Corning, but I enjoyed working with them so much. I knew they could get along without me, but I probably naïvely put too much importance on my value.
Magda Halgash  BUSINESS: Angels in the Attic, an antiques and home décor shop.  LOCATION: Leesburg, Va.
After Magda Halgash, 43, lost her job as a manager at a video company in 2002, she and a friend opened Angels in the Attic in Leesburg, 35 miles from Washington, in April 2002. A year later, Ms. Halgash closed the store after a string of setbacks, including the sniper attacks that paralyzed the Washington area for weeks in late 2002.
One of my best friends had also lost her job, so we thought, ''Why don't we open our own business?'' We had worked together in the past so we knew each other's work ethic. We found a place to lease in Leesburg, which is a big antiques area. The rent was a bit steep, so we decided to have some other people come in and rent some space to help cover it. My partner was going to run the business since it was 10 minutes from her home, and I would be there two or three days a week. I live in Falling Waters, W.Va., which is an hour's drive from Leesburg.
We opened April 1, 2002. We had a good opening weekend. We advertised in local papers and also got a little bit of business from Washington. We were very pleased. People liked the idea that we were giving local women a place to showcase their products. I had a woman who did hand painting on porcelain, and she did beautiful work. Another woman hand-painted furniture, and she sold hand over fist out of the store.
In May my partner got married, and by November she and her family had moved to North Carolina. I took on a little bit more financial burden than I had anticipated. I paid her a partial lump sum, then I was going to make payments once the business started making money. We thought we should have no problem.
By the fall of 2002 I was driving every day to the store. It was a lot of time and gas and wear and tear on my vehicle. Then, in October, we had the sniper shootings; business was terrible. Northern Virginia was just deadlocked. Nobody went out. We had several snowstorms, a lot of school closings, a lot of ice. There were problems with just getting the store open and getting people to come in.
We also had expenses that we hadn't anticipated -- a water heater leak, a leak in a toilet that we didn't notice until we got the water bill. We were very cautious about spending, but when you don't have a reserve to fall back on, it makes it very difficult.
We tried to establish a line of credit with our bank, but everybody wanted a personal guarantee. We purposely incorporated so that our personal assets wouldn't be involved if anything were to happen. We got to the point where the store was breaking even other than my salary, but I needed an income. After some discussions with my husband and a lot of heartbreak, I decided to close.
I had a lot of stuff left over that didn't sell. I ended up taking space at an antique mall in Hagerstown, Md., closer to where I live. I work full time at a bank because I need an income, and I'm keeping my fingers in the antiques because I love it. My goal is to pay off the debt from the store and maybe someday if the economy gets better to open a shop again.
Lucinda Duncalfe Holt  BUSINESS: Destiny Web Solutions, which provided software and services to financial institutions.  LOCATION: Conshohocken, Pa.
Lucinda Duncalfe Holt is the former chief executive of Destiny Web Solutions. The dot-com implosion, the economic slowdown and changes in the competitive landscape contributed to the company's demise, and it was liquidated near the end of 2002. In January of this year, Ms. Holt started a company that offers antispam technology.
Destiny Web Solutions was originally called Destiny Software. It was founded in 1994. By the end of 1998, we were decently well-positioned, but in that last quarter the behemoths all entered our market -- Microsoft, I.B.M., BEA Systems. It was unbelievable. We looked down the barrel of all those guns and said, ''O.K., it's time to find something different to do.''
We decided to switch courses and become a consulting company. The company grew from about 30 employees to over 100 in a six-month period. In the second quarter of 2000, we were showing terrific profitability. We had big customers -- Citigroup, Mellon, Bank of America, Bank of New York. The dot-com bubble burst and we saw no immediate impact, but we weren't getting new clients. We finally saw the downturn in the second quarter of 2001. Current customers started cutting back. Citigroup, which was about 70 percent of our business, outsourced all the stuff we were doing to India. We couldn't get our feet underneath us. I likened it to being on a muddy slope. At the end of 2001, we liquidated the company and returned the capital to our investors. It took a year to complete.
In the process of looking for new opportunities, I founded a new company with someone I knew before I joined Destiny. It's called TurnTide and it offers an antispam router. We founded the company on Jan. 7, we're up to 12 employees, and it's off to the races again.
Michelle Dow  BUSINESS: Bookpeople, a wholesale bookseller and distributor.  LOCATION: Oakland, Calif.
Michelle Dow, 58, is chairwoman and publications editor of Bookpeople, an employee-owned company, which filed for bankruptcy in August and is in the process of liquidating its assets.
Bookpeople was founded in 1971 when employees of a book distribution business pooled their resources and bought out the owner. The interest initially was to support independent publishing and bookstores. The titles that really put us on the map were the ''Whole Earth Catalog'' and ''How to Keep Your Volkswagen Alive.'' We had exclusive distribution and everybody in the world wanted them. By 1974, we had 30 employees, stocked 7,000 titles and grossed $3 million in sales.
The company was incorporated under a formula where each employee could purchase equal shares of stock, but had to sell it back at no appreciation in value if they left the company. I think that attracted people who were self-motivated and interested in working in alternative business situations. The work here isn't glamorous. You're taking orders, you're filling orders, but if you love books then you're seeing things all day long that are of interest to you.
We had ups and downs, certainly, but weathered them all. We always sort of felt that books were recession-proof. This time, it turned out not to be the case. The marketplace changed rapidly. The superstores were moving in and the independents would just disappear. Bookstores went bankrupt on us.
We were already struggling, then 9/11 happened and there was a shutdown of consumer participation. The whole next spring people just weren't spending money.
I think Bookpeople's unconventional structure may have hurt us. We never had our eyes focused much on the profit motive. We had a more altruistic outlook. Now I realize we should have been plowing every cent back into retained earnings.
At the end of August 2003, we declared bankruptcy because we had a lot of debt. December came, the high-water mark of the wholesaling year. We did respectably, but we didn't have a great month.
In January, it became evident that we should close. We were getting some pressure from the creditors committee in our bankruptcy case. We also had to prepay for all our orders and we could only afford to stock what we guessed would sell. That's an untenable way to continue business. What we're trying to accomplish now is a very managed liquidation of the assets.
OUT OF BUSINESS
