THE hiring spree by Fine Point Technologies in the last six weeks sounds at first like a story from another world, a happy one that existed five years ago. Top executives at the New York City software company recently signed up an outside investor and increased the work force by 25 percent.
But the scale of the increase -- from 40 to 50 workers -- and the anxiety that accompanied it make it clear this is no boomtime bubble-chasing.
The company did not make the hires lightly, said its chief executive, John O'Keefe. After laying people off in 2001, Fine Point waited until it was clear that 2004 would be much busier than previous years, and spent the last six months building a financial cushion.
''We actually have a couple of very large sales taking place,'' Mr. O'Keefe said. The investor, he said, is for additional support if necessary.
For Fine Point, as for thousands of other small businesses, there may be no trickier question than this: how big should your small business be? And there may be no trickier time to decide than early in an economic recovery whose strength is uncertain.
Interviews with a sampling of small businesses indicate that the reasons to expand -- or not -- are as varied as the companies themselves. The decision may be driven by anticipated customer demand, fear of the competition or an owner's desire to remain at a manageable size. Some businesses must grow constantly to sustain themselves, while for others -- a tiny graphic design company, for example -- small can be an asset.
The Small Business Administration classifies as small any company with fewer than 500 workers. Such businesses, roughly 23 million, account for more than 99 percent of all employers, and more than half the people working in the private sector, according to the agency.
Size matters, because small businesses can reap different benefits, depending on revenues and the number of employees. In New Jersey, for example, companies employing fewer than 100 people are exempt from some antipollution regulations, according to the National Federation of Independent Business, an advocacy group in Washington.
There are more classifications that provide benefits to companies in particular industries, from furniture wholesalers with fewer than 100 employees to state banks with less than $100 million in assets, the federation says.
Fine Point Technologies has always been on the small end of the spectrum. Even in the late 1990's, it did not follow the traditional, rapid growth model eagerly pursued by numerous dot-com and other technology companies.
Instead, it grew ''organically,'' Mr. O'Keefe explained. ''Organic means not having venture capital or any type of influx of cash from investment,'' he said. ''You're building your business off your sales.''
The company started with 10 people working in Mr. O'Keefe's apartment in 1997. They had developed software that Internet service providers (like Verizon) gave consumers so they could access the Internet. The software worked by using dial-up connections.
Fine Point grew to about 25 employees in 1999, but was hammered the next year by the dot-com collapse, the meltdown of the telecommunications industry and the new focus on high-speed, broadband Internet access that did not use dial-up connections. Mr. O'Keefe was forced to cut expenses -- to $30,000 from close to $200,000 each month -- and to lay off more than half of the employees. Then came Sept. 11.
''We were two blocks away from the World Trade Center,'' Mr. O'Keefe recalled. A period of down time followed, and the company's technicians worked on developing software that performs the same function for broadband connections. Then business began to improve slowly, he said, as cable and telephone companies battled to sign up more broadband customers over the last year and a half.
Recognizing that an opportunity to ride another wave might be coming, the company decided last July to pursue venture capital financing; over the course of six months Fine Point found a partner, and began hiring. Now about 50 people are working in its new offices in Chinatown, leased from a dot-com company that can no longer fill the space.
Trying to gauge future demand presents a challenge for companies of all sizes. The differences lie in the consequences of the hiring.
At Falcon Plastics Inc., a manufacturer of plastic parts in Brookings, S.D., a rise in customer demand of 10 to 20 percent would probably not affect overhead costs, like information technology or human resources staff, the company president, Jay Bender, said.
Distinguishing overhead costs from production costs is important in his business, Mr. Bender said, because a production staff turns over much more quickly. ''If I hire an extra person or two on each shift in the production area, within six months I may have some person who's leaving,'' he said.
Other positions are more problematic, for two reasons. First, higher-quality staff do not want to work at a company if they think their jobs are short-term; and second, once in those jobs, people do not want to leave. ''We're not as quick to do that,'' Mr. Bender said. ''We want to see that the need is going to be there for the long-term.''
Falcon Plastics has around $20 million in annual revenue and about 200 employees -- about half in production and half in maintenance, customer service and sales, accounting, warehousing and other necessary functions. The plan is to double the revenue over the next three to five years, Mr. Bender said, but because of greater automation, probably without doubling the work force.
When companies invest in new plants, they generally need fewer people to run them. Last August, Pine Hall Brick, an 82-year-old manufacturer based in Winston-Salem, N.C., completed a plant in Georgia that added only 35 employees.
''In a new plant you are typically going to invest in state-of-the-art technology right from the start, to go ahead and make that plant as automated as you can,'' the company president, W. Fletcher Steele, said. ''In an existing plant, it's a different investment decision.''
Mr. Steele outlined a simplified cost-benefit analysis used at his company to determine whether a particular investment in new equipment is worthwhile. He will add up the cost of a job -- wages paid and benefits provided -- over three years.
''We will typically say that we can spend $100,000 to $150,000 on a capital improvement that will reduce the labor by one person,'' Mr. Steele said. The company has grown fairly quickly, he said, with sales rising to around $100 million and 400 employees from $40 million and 275 people 10 years ago.
One reason for Pine Hall's growth is its goal of maintaining a dominant position in production of brick for pavement, Mr. Steele said, citing a classic reason that companies expand capacity: to deter potential competitors.
For Gracious Home, a purveyor of upscale household goods in Manhattan, growth is important but for slightly different reasons. The company has more than 400 employees and operates stores on the Upper East Side and the Upper West Side.
''We need to raise the volume because of overhead,'' the company vice president, Nancy Wekselbaum, said. Salaries and rent, for example, are always increasing, she said. In choosing where and when to expand, she continued, the company considers the cost of space, data on population density in different parts of the city, data on income earned by a neighborhood's residents and other factors.
In some cases, investment decisions reflect the owners' ideas of what the appropriate size of their company should be. Emily Oberman and Bonnie Siegler, the co-founders of Number Seventeen, a graphic design company with eight employees in Manhattan, said they did not want their business any larger.
''This way we still get to do some design work every day,'' Ms. Siegler said. If the company were to grow, she continued, the two women would probably have to spend more time on administrative tasks.
''You grow because you're successful doing this one thing,'' she said. ''You get so successful and you don't get to do that one thing anymore.''
As companies employ more people, they face other hurdles because they become subject to more regulatory requirements. These are important for companies to consider, said Patrick J. Cleary, senior vice president for public and external affairs at the National Association of Manufacturers, a trade group in Washington.
The Family and Medical Leave Act, for example, kicks in when a company has more than 50 employees. ''Once you cross that 50 threshold, now all 50 employees get 12 weeks of unpaid leave, which is daunting for a small employer,'' Mr. Cleary said. So growing to 51 from 49 becomes significant; a company could choose to hire not just one employee but a few in anticipation that some may take a leave, or not to hire at all to avoid that possibility, he said.
Another rule requires companies with more than 15 employees to allow those who lose their jobs to keep their company-provided health insurance for several months, if the employees pay the premium, Mr. O'Keefe of Fine Point said.
He said his company had grown and shrunk so many times that it had crossed that 15-employee line more than once.
''There are certain things, as small companies, that you don't have to offer your employees,'' Mr. O'Keefe said. ''Small companies don't think of that. As we've been growing, we've never thought about 401(k)'s. As we're growing, we're realizing how important these benefit packages are to maintaining employee loyalty.''
SIZABLE DECISIONS
