Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, in a whirlwind, previously unannounced trip, flew here on Monday for a day of discussions with American occupation authorities and military commanders about the transfer of sovereignty to Iraq and the stubbornly persistent insurgency.
Just hours after a car bomb exploded outside a police station in Kirkuk, Mr. Rumsfeld met with new Iraqi Civil Defense Corps troops and police cadets to express America's continued support for putting an Iraqi face on internal security.
''The success of Iraq is in your hands,'' he told civil defense troops on the eastern outskirts of Baghdad.
He received an enthusiastic greeting at the Baghdad police academy, where Ahmed Ibrahim, the deputy interior minister, led several hundred recruits in a chant in Arabic. ''Long live the new Iraq!'' Mr. Ibrahim shouted. ''Victorious, oh, Baghdad!'' cheered the cadets.
An official theme of Mr. Rumsfeld's visit was the transition of sovereignty to a new Iraqi government by July 1. On Sunday, Iraq's interim leaders said that they could not negotiate a formal ''status of forces'' agreement with the American military on maintaining troops in Iraq, and that the task must await the next sovereign Iraqi government.
In an interview on Monday with Pentagon correspondents, L. Paul Bremer III, the American administrator in Iraq, said Iraqi forces would be unable to deal with security threats completely on their own by July 1, and described what he said was a clear consensus among the Iraqi leadership that occupation military forces should remain.
Senior Defense Department officials traveling with Mr. Rumsfeld said Pentagon and military leaders had not been counting on a detailed status of forces agreement by July 1. Instead, they said, the Bush administration is likely to seek a document that would endorse the status quo military relationship between Iraq and the occupation. The details would be worked out after a new government is in place, they said.
In comments to reporters here, Mr. Rumsfeld issued warnings to the Iranian and Syrian governments about foreign fighters crossing into Iraq from their countries. ''Let there be no doubt, the powers that be in Syria and Iran are not wishing the free Iraq people well,'' he said.
Mr. Rumsfeld said he had witnessed a trend toward stability, despite the continuation of bombings like the one in Kirkuk on Monday.
''On each one of my now many trips to Iraq, I see improvements,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.
