Katherine Dunham made her New York debut there in 1937. Pearl Primus was discovered there in 1943. In 1954 a new company directed by a youngster named Robert Joffrey danced its first performance there. And in 1960, when Alvin Ailey's ''Revelations'' was performed for the first time, after the curtain fell the work was greeted with a silence so profound that the shocked dancers were totally unprepared for the cheers that followed.
The importance of the 92nd Street Y as a modern-dance crucible is little known today. Martha Graham, Doris Humphrey and other leading figures helped to build the Y dance center, teaching and performing there in the 1930's. The Y helped to validate the young art of American modern dance by providing its best- and least-known practitioners with professional-level productions and rehearsal facilities. Even more, it brought black American ballet, modern and ethnic dance performers and choreographers to the fore at a time when they were often unnoticed or looked down upon.
Agnes de Mille called the Y ''the veritable cradle of the modern dance movement.'' And that history will be saluted in a special two-week installment of ''From the Horse's Mouth'' celebrating the Y dance program's 70th anniversary. The series of dance stories and performances opens tomorrow at the Duke on 42nd Street. Dancers and choreographers of all ages will perform for a few minutes and tell anecdotes about their lives in dance. The stories and performing have accumulated since 1988, when the series was begun by Tina Croll and Jamie Cunningham, to create a vivid crazy quilt of New York dance history.
Presented by the 92nd Street Y Harkness Dance Project, as the dance program at the Y has come to be known, ''From the Horse's Mouth'' will offer the usual complement of ballet, modern, ethnic, tap, hip-hop and Broadway dancers and choreographers. There may even be a stripper or two this year. But more than half of the 75 men and women taking part have played a role in the Y's rich chapter of New York's dance history.
Mary Anthony, 87, remembers stabbing herself accidentally with a prop dagger when she auditioned to perform a solo about Lady Macbeth at the Y in the 1950's. ''Too realistic,'' said Louis Horst, the formidable dance theorist, who was one of the judges. Sally Hess, 62, who will also appear in the series, recalls how her mother fell in love with dance at a performance at the Y, moved the family to a home closer to the theater and enrolled Sally, then 3 years old, in classes that would occupy most of her days for the next 13 years. ''The Y was not for children. It was a home for Jewish culture for adults. But I had a corner in the library, and I did my homework there. The truth of the Y was that if you entered into the spirit of the culture of the arts, you belonged there.''
Chris Elam, who at 28, laughingly refers to himself as ''one of the ponies'' of ''From the Horse's Mouth, talks of ''the gorgeous studios'' at the Y, where he rehearsed recently at scholarship rates and savored the luxury of space so big he could ''stand back and look at a full group piece.''
Ms. Croll performed at the Y in the early 1960's with the Bennington Dance Group. ''It was my first time to perform in New York,'' she recalled. ''It was totally thrilling. It was a wonderful place. The place to perform then, the place where everything started. It had this whole attitude of openness, of accepting and honoring dance.''
The Y dance program began in the mid-30's as a home for modern dance, though other forms of dance were also presented there. Founded in 1874 by German Jews to provide young Jewish men with a proper gathering place, the Y had moved uptown to Lexington Avenue and 92nd Street by the time its administrators decided to add to the arts and educational programming ''a new activity in the form of dancing of a sort that is done in recitals,'' as a 1930 institutional report put it.
The first dance director, a performer and choreographer from the Habima theater group in Moscow named Benjamin Zemach, left soon after when he was denied an opportunity to present a dance concert or two a year. In 1934 an educator named William Kolodney arrived at the Y. His greatest love was poetry, followed by music, and he established the Y's renowned Poetry Center and a strong chamber music program. But his mission was also to bring together Jewish and non-Jewish artists and audiences, and he recognized a love for the new art of modern dance in young Jews, particularly the women.
Years later the writer Walter Terry would talk of Kolodney's having fallen in love with dance after reading Isadora Duncan's sexy autobiography as a student. Terry was probably teasing, for Kolodney was a deeply religious family man who had somehow simply figured out how to work with artists in this alien field. ''He was a kindly, very dignified man and kind of gung ho for the arts for everyone,'' Ms. Anthony recalled.
Kolodney was also an imaginative administrator. Faced with establishing a dance program, he consulted the leading dance writer of the day, John Martin of The New York Times, who in turn brought in stars like Graham and Humphrey. But ballet was welcome at the Y, too. Lincoln Kirstein's Ballet Caravan performed there. And Jewish choreographers found an especially warm home at the Y, where classics like Anna Sokolow's ''Rooms'' and Sophie Maslow's ''Village I Knew'' were first performed.
Regular dance performances ended in the late 1970's. in part because of changing dance fashions. The center revived in 1992 with the advent of Joan Finkelstein, the former dancer who directs the center today, and although it no longer produces at the Y it offers classes, lectures and informal showcases there.
Today there are theaters scattered through downtown Manhattan that serve as crucibles for new dance talent. But there was nothing like the Y for decades.
''It was the mecca,'' Ms. Anthony said. ''It was the only place that dancers could afford to be. You went to as many performances as you could. And they started on time.''
For a young dancer, Mr. Elam said, connecting with modern dance history means a lot. ''So many artists have benefited from the Y's generosity,'' he said. ''Given all the changes in the environment, it's taken a very generous organization to stay committed to a field for that long.''
