Ending a heated dispute between telecommunications companies, AT&amp;T has agreed to drop its claim that WorldCom defrauded it of tens of millions of dollars in telephone fees, the two companies said yesterday.
Under the settlement, the two sides have agreed to drop multimillion-dollar claims against each other in a separate matter, WorldCom's Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings. The proposed settlement is subject to the approval of the federal bankruptcy court overseeing the reorganization of WorldCom, which plans to change its name to MCI.
Some analysts said they were surprised at the relatively quiet resolution to a dispute that had the parties at each other's throats just six months ago. AT&amp;T was among the major telephone companies that ''brought out ammunition to try to destroy MCI in bankruptcy,'' said Patrick Comack, an analyst with Guzman &amp; Company. ''Now they're settling it like nothing happened.''
AT&amp;T sued WorldCom in September, accusing it of fraud and racketeering, in Federal District Court in the Eastern District of Virginia. But in October, the bankruptcy court -- the Federal Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York -- stayed the lawsuit pending the resolution of WorldCom's Chapter 11 status.
The settlement does not put an end to all accusations that WorldCom was involved in a broader scheme to defraud rival telephone companies over nearly a decade. Federal prosecutors are continuing to investigate WorldCom's practices, which its competitors say allowed it to disguise long-distance calls placed by its customers as local calls to avoid paying certain access fees to other phone companies.
The local telephone giants SBC Communications and Verizon Communications both say that WorldCom owes them money.
But unlike AT&amp;T, neither has filed a lawsuit.
Both are cooperating with the criminal investigation and say they are watching it closely.
Industry analysts said that the accusations of fraud might be difficult to prove because of the arcane way telephone calls are routed and the complexity of standard industry practices.
Scott Cleland, chief executive of Precursor, a research firm, said AT&amp;T's decision to settle its claim against WorldCom reflected the expense and risk for both sides of litigating the issue.
''This settlement is an honorable backing away by both parties,'' Mr. Cleland said. The issue of telephone access charges is ''not a black and white area.''
''It's very gray. It would be difficult for a court to settle it.''
The controversy surfaced in July, when people involved in the federal inquiry said that prosecutors were looking at whether WorldCom had routed telephone traffic in a way to avoid paying access charges to its competitors. Those charges accrue when one telephone company originates or terminates a call over the network of another company.
The amount of those charges differs depending on whether the call is local or long distance, with long-distance calls generating higher access fees. The accusations against WorldCom asserted that it was fraudulently passing off the access charges to other companies. AT&amp;T also accused WorldCom of routing calls onto the AT&amp;T network, costing it millions of dollars.
WorldCom has maintained that it did not act outside the industry's standard operating practices and that telephone companies reroute calls all the time to cut access fees.
AT&amp;T and WorldCom issued a joint statement yesterday announcing the settlement. They declined to comment further.
As part of WorldCom's bankruptcy filing, made in July 2002, it asserted that AT&amp;T owed it $220 million for activities like carrying voice traffic on its network. AT&amp;T asserted that WorldCom owed it $100 million for similar services.
The settlement wiped away those claims. In addition, AT&amp;T agreed not to revive its fraud and racketeering lawsuit against WorldCom.
Several Wall Street analysts said that while the lawsuit involved claims of tens of millions of dollars, it would have had a relatively limited impact on the practices of the long-distance industry.
Other companies said they were not ready to concede that WorldCom's practices were above board. ''We continue to believe they owe us significant amounts of money, and we are working with them to resolve it,'' said Selim Bingol, a spokesman at SBC. ''We don't think it is at all standard operating procedure to misrepresent the origin of these phone calls.''
TECHNOLOGY
