Every moment, in forests everywhere, a vast biological bombardment is going on unseen by human eyes.
Leaves, scientists are discovering, are chock-full of microscopic fungi and are pummeled by them daily. A single leaf in a tropical jungle, in fact, is battered by more than 10,000 spores a day, each aiming to penetrate and take up residence.
While biologists became increasingly aware of the great diversity of fungal species crowded inside leaves, researchers remained stumped as to what, if anything, these invaders were doing.
Now scientists studying the cocoa tree, whose beans are used to make chocolate or cocoa, say these fungi, which many had suspected were parasites, are actually powerful protectors able to fend off plant diseases. The study was published online in December in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
For cocoa tree farming, an enterprise that has moved from country to country to escape the diseases that plague the vulnerable plant, the new findings provide hope for inexpensive and environmentally agreeable ways to protect the trees.
But the work has implications far beyond chocolate, scientists say, suggesting a huge and until now unrecognized world of mutually beneficial biological interactions. The discovery has already begun challenging longstanding theory about how those interactions evolve.
''They clearly confer benefits,'' said Dr. A. Elizabeth Arnold, a tropical ecologist at Duke University and the lead author, speaking of the fungi. ''We're very excited.''
The fungi are known as endophytes from the Greek endo, or in, and phyto, or plant, because the fungi are found inside plant tissue where, scientists believe, they live off nutrients leaking from plants' cells.
Dr. Keith Clay, a plant ecologist at Indiana University, who was not involved with the study, praised the new work.
''There's been a lot of debate about what these things are doing,'' Dr. Clay said. ''This is the best and clearest demonstration yet that these endophytes are playing a role in the defense of the host plant.''
The team, which included American and Panamanian researchers, carried out their studies on the cocoa tree, also known as cacao, at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Panama. Young leaves, the researchers found, at first are free of fungi and can be kept free of endophytes if they are kept dry. So researchers were able to raise plants that, unlike those in the wild, contained no endophytes. They could then inoculate a subset of those with endophytes of their choice.
Researchers then exposed plants with endophytes and without them to a devastating disease known as Phytophthora.
''It's a dramatic difference,'' Dr. Arnold said, noting that leaves without endophytes were three times as likely to die and lost twice as much leaf tissue, showing large, brown lesions. ''When the endophytes were there, the damage just never went anywhere.''
Dr. Arnold said the endophytes also showed promise for protecting plants against a disease called frosty pod rot, which like Phytophthora, is one of the three most devastating diseases of cacao.
Dr. Allen Herre, an evolutionary ecologist at the tropical research institute, and his colleagues in Panama are now working on ways to grow large amounts of the beneficial fungi cheaply and easily in the field to allow farmers to bolster the defenses of cacao with these naturally occurring, readily available organisms.
The new study has also provided a possible answer to a longstanding mystery. Young leaves of tropical trees are like chemical armories, loaded with substances that deter attackers. But older leaves have far less protection. Why, researchers have long wondered, do these leaves not maintain their chemical defenses?
Dr. Arnold said endophytes might be the answer. ''Leaves don't contain any endophytes at first, but as they mature, they accumulate more and more,'' she said, suggesting that plants may stop investing in chemical arsenals once endophyte protections begin to kick in.
While little is known about the endophytes of most plants, one group of fungal endophytes -- also beneficial but very different from those in cacao -- is well studied. In grasses, these fungi are passed from generation to generation through the seeds. These grasses, sometimes known as sleepy or drunk grass because of their effect on cattle, induce wooziness in animals through alkaloids, chemicals produced by the fungi that defend the plant.
(In fact, Dr. Arnold said, it has been hypothesized that the bizarre actions of women accused of being witches in Salem may have been induced by such alkaloids, inadvertently introduced into bread through fungi in the grains used to make flour.)
With the lives of the grass and fungi so tightly entwined, it was no surprise to researchers that these partners would evolve their mutually beneficial relationship in which the fungi provide numerous benefits to their hosts.
In contrast, the fungi found in cacao float about as infectious spores among many other diverse fungal spores in the tropical forests, all seeking to infect whatever green leaves they may drop onto, with different types of fungi often invading leaf tissue.
Under such circumstances, theory predicts that the fungi -- many of them close relatives of disease fungi -- should race with other invaders to exploit their hosts mercilessly.
''It's really a challenge to understand why these things are not wreaking havoc on the plant,'' Dr. Herre said. ''What's keeping these things from being bad, is unclear. This challenges a lot of paradigms, so it's very exciting.''
Whatever researchers learn about these benevolent fungi though is likely to be far-reaching for the botanical world.
''These endophytes have been found in every major group of plants looked at,'' Dr. Arnold said. ''There are a lot out there, and we keep finding more.''
