Rupert Murdoch wants to take on ESPN -- again -- with his own national sports cable network.
An industry publication reported yesterday that Murdoch is in preliminary discussions with cable operators and the National Football League to create a new network.
''We'd have to proceed very carefully,'' Murdoch told the publication, Television Week. ''We'd certainly do it with partners. We want to consider the capacity of pay television subscribers to pay for two ESPNs.''
It's not a new idea, but one that has been worked on for a couple of years, said David Hill, chairman of the Fox Sports Television Group, who has been asked by Murdoch to analyze the creative end of such a venture.
''It's something we've talked about, the same as we talked about Speed Channel and Fox News Channel before they got started,'' Hill said. ''But we've also talked about things that haven't gotten done.''
Spokesmen for Fox and the N.F.L. declined to comment.
Murdoch tangled with ESPN in the late 1990's when Fox Sports Net had a national Major League Baseball package, a nightly news operation that made a splash by hiring Keith Olbermann, and a variety of other programming. But the strategy eventually flopped -- national programming was subservient to local baseball, basketball, hockey and college sports on Fox's network of regional sports channels -- and FSN retrenched.
''Attempts made in the past were doomed to fail,'' Hill said.
But as successful as FSN has been in carrying regional sports, the strategy is currently under siege in cities like Chicago, Denver and Houston, where teams are starting their own networks and breaking their local ties to Fox.
Murdoch is more powerful than ever. His News Corporation recently acquired control of Hughes Electronics and its DirecTV satellite subsidiary, with its nearly 12 million subscribers, making it the second-largest cable or satellite service, after Comcast, which has 21 million.
DirecTV's jewel is the Sunday Ticket package of N.F.L. games, which 1.5 million subscribers pay $200 each to buy.
The pre-Murdoch DirecTV signed a five-year, $2 billion deal with the N.F.L. to keep Sunday Ticket exclusive to its satellite subscribers through the 2005 season. For 2006 and 2007, it could be made available to cable systems, which lust for it.
Of the $400 million a year from DirecTV, $20 million is going to finance the fledgling NFL Network.
With all those pieces in place, here is how Murdoch could craft competition against ESPN, according to several industry executives.
He could get a piece of the NFL Network in exchange for relaxing DirecTV's exclusivity on Sunday Ticket and selling it to cable systems, including Comcast. But Comcast would eliminate itself from any role if it succeeds in acquiring the Walt Disney Company, whose subsidiaries include ESPN.
''There are many things we could do together,'' Murdoch said about Comcast to Television Week.
If Murdoch were to let the N.F.L. sell Sunday Ticket to cable operators, he would be giving the league a powerful tool to accelerate distribution of the NFL Network, which is available to DirecTV but has limited cable distribution.
If it wanted Sunday Ticket, the argument goes, a cable operator would have to take the NFL Network, which does not carry games.
Making such a deal now would give the NFL Network more than two years to get the type of traditional analog distribution on basic cable it would not not get without Sunday Ticket as leverage. It would also provide time to transform the NFL Network into a multisport channel that Fox could program into an ESPN competitor.
The advantage to selling Sunday Ticket to cable operators is obvious for the N.F.L., making it available to more than 80 million subscribers, not just satellite customers.
If the NFL Network isn't a player in this plan, Fox, in partnership with DirecTV and cable operators, could start a new channel on their own. But the leverage of Sunday Ticket would be gone; the N.F.L. wouldn't likely be a partner in a network that would compete with its own.
''ESPN has been a huge success and has a strong and loyal audience, but if there's one competitor I'd fear, it's Fox, DirecTV and a cable consortium led by Comcast,'' said Neal Pilson, an industry consultant.
Asked if a network could spend what's necessary to compete with the ubiquitous and potent ESPN, Hill said, ''Over time, yes.''
But there is an inherent risk: do cable operators want another costly network after years of squawking about ESPN's rates, or would its fees fall if there were a strong competitor? If Comcast is not a player -- an enemy, if it acquires Disney -- would the network be worth starting? And how long would cable operators have to wait for a new network to develop into something ESPN-like, with a full slate of programming?
TV SPORTS
