Bill Clinton gave new meaning to the phrase ''I feel your pain.'' But the results of a recent study may now give the words some scientific weight.
Seeing a loved one endure a slight electrical shock, researchers have found, activates a brain region that processes pain, pointing to a possible neurological basis for empathy.
The same area lighted up on brain scans when the subjects themselves were zapped. As people watched their companions suffer, their brains appeared to recreate the unpleasant experience, in effect allowing them to feel their partners' pain.
Empathy has long been considered part of the social glue that holds together society, the force that drives a mother and child to connect or that prompts one person to hold the elevator door for another.
But whether it is a raw human emotion as basic as anger or a mental skill as complex as language has baffled scientists. The question has also led to a debate over whether other animals are capable of empathy and, if so, how they express it.
In a study published in the Feb. 20 issue of Science, British researchers used imaging techniques to peer into the brains of people who were experiencing empathy. The study looked at 16 couples. The women were hooked up to an M.R.I. machine, while their husbands or boyfriends sat nearby.
Each woman could see just her companion's hand, which, along with her own hand, was hooked up to an electrode that delivered short bursts of electricity. A computer screen indicated whose hand would be zapped and whether the shock would be mild or somewhat severe.
When the women were shocked, brain scans picked up the activation of a vast pain network spread throughout the brain. Several regions showed activity, including the somatosensory cortex, where touch is perceived, and the anterior insula and anterior cingulate cortex, two areas that help control the emotional experience of pain.
When a woman watched her partner being stung, the sensory cortex was quiet. But emotional centers sprang into action, indicating that she was reliving the experience without the physical stimulus or sensation.
''It's rather surprising that we tune into the experiences of others so quickly and with an emotional response, not just with a cognitive perspective,'' said Dr. Tania Singer, a research fellow at the University College London and the lead author of the paper. ''The fact is that we really do put ourselves in another person's emotional shoes. It's automatic.''
Dr. Marco Iacoboni, an associate professor of psychiatry at the University of California, Los Angeles, who was not involved with the shock experiment, said the finding did not surprise him. In an experiment last year, Dr. Iacoboni asked people to observe different facial expressions and, in some cases, to imitate them.
''What we found was that those who actually imitated the expressions showed a boost in activity in emotional centers like the amygdala,'' Dr. Iacoboni said. ''The way we understand other people's feelings is by simulating in our brain the same activity we have when we experience those emotions.''
The latest study points to the same underlying mechanism, Dr. Iacoboni said. But whether empathy is genetically programmed remains unclear, ''because the people the subjects showed empathy toward were loved ones, not strangers.''
Dr. Frans de Waal, a primatologist at Emory University who has studied empathy in animals, said he believed that humans were inclined to empathize with others but make decisions to act on their feelings based on the closeness of their relationships.
''You may know children are starving in some parts of the world and not act on it, but that doesn't mean you don't understand their experience or feel empathy,'' Dr. de Waal said ''You're controlling that impulse. If you know someone in your family is starving, however, you're going to act on it.''
Like many other emotions, Dr. de Waal said, empathy may have gradually evolved into a more complex response, but at its roots it is simple and shared with other species. Monkeys, for example, stop eating if they see that pressing a lever for food will cause a second monkey to be shocked, studies show.
''It's clear that empathy doesn't necessarily rely on complex cognitive representations that are exclusive only to humans,'' he said. ''Just ask any dog owner how their pets react to them getting sick or injured.''
