The crew of the International Space Station is making final preparations for the first two-man spacewalk from the station this week, NASA officials said Monday.
Unlike the previous 26 excursions from the station, Thursday's 5-hour 45-minute spacewalk will not have a crew member inside tending the station.
The space station has had just two astronauts, instead of its normal complement of three, since the shuttle fleet was grounded after the loss of the Columbia on Feb. 1, 2003. The reduced staffing, instituted to conserve supplies, has resulted in two-member crews' being rotated to the station every six months, using Russian Soyuz spacecraft.
At first, some NASA officials were uneasy about leaving the station unmanned for spacewalks, but Russia said the walk to be done this week was necessary to maintain some outside scientific experiments and to examine the exterior of the station. Russian officials also noted that they had made 50 spacewalks from their previous space station, Mir, with no one left inside.
James Hartsfield, a NASA spokesman in Houston, said Monday that preparations for the spacewalk were going well and that the agency was comfortable with the operation.
On Monday, The Washington Post, citing NASA documents, reported that last summer some space station managers and officials had opposed the exercise as not worth the added risk, suggesting that it be put off until the crew was at full strength.
Mr. Hartsfield said: ''There were potential issues with a two-person spacewalk that were identified upfront, and that started a methodical procedure to assess them and ways to mitigate them. We took these initial reservations as a strong point of the program, something we should consider and work through, not a weak point.''
Mr. Hartsfield noted that the two station astronauts -- C. Michael Foale, the American commander, and Aleksandr Y. Kaleri, the Russian flight engineer -- are seasoned spacewalkers experienced with the Russian Orlan spacesuits and equipment that will be used Thursday. Both have taken part in unstaffed Mir spacewalks.
The astronauts, who have been aboard the space station for four months, have also practiced many of the procedures for the spacewalk in the last two weeks.
Mr. Hartsfield said the walk would provide valuable experience in case of an emergency at the station. He also said that the next crew to come aboard the station in April would have two spacewalks on its schedule, to prepare the outpost for future operations.
