President Bush kicked off his general election campaign on Monday night, shedding his above-the-fray posture to deliver a robust defense of his record and begin an assault on the Democratic front-runner, Senator John Kerry.
Facing declining poll numbers and concerted Democratic criticism, and urged by many Republicans to accelerate his timetable for partisan engagement, Mr. Bush used a speech here to assert that the election would present a clear choice between his steady leadership and Democrats who could not be relied on to make the tough decisions necessary to deal with the economy and the threat from terrorism.
''It's a choice between keeping the tax relief that is moving the economy forward, or putting the burden of higher taxes back on the American people,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It's a choice between an America that leads the world with strength and confidence, or an America that is uncertain in the face of danger.''
Without using Mr. Kerry's name, the president mocked him as a politician whose positions changed with the wind. The Democratic field, Mr. Bush said, is ''for tax cuts and against them. For Nafta and against Nafta. For the Patriot Act and against the Patriot Act. In favor of liberating Iraq and opposed to it. And that's just one senator from Massachusetts.''
The speech, delivered at a fund-raiser to benefit the Republican Governors Association, was billed by Mr. Bush's campaign as the start of a more aggressive phase of the race after months in which the president, to the growing consternation of some in his party, had remained largely on the sidelines.
Much of the speech was forward-looking. It sought to position Mr. Bush as optimistic and steady in the face of serious challenges to the country and relentless attacks by Democrats who, he said, have failed to say how they would deal with the challenges the United States faces at home and abroad.
''Our opponents have not offered much in the way of strategies to win the war, or policies to expand our economy,'' he said, sounding a theme similar to one his aides tried out when it appeared that Howard Dean would be the Democratic nominee. ''So far, all we hear is a lot of old bitterness and partisan anger. Anger is not an agenda for the future of America.''
But his message that his party was taking the high road was undercut by a member of his cabinet, Rod Paige, the education secretary. In remarks to the nation's governors at the White House earlier in the day, Mr. Paige called the National Education Association, a longtime ally of the Democrats, a ''terrorist organization'' for resisting provisions of the education bill Mr. Bush signed into law in 2002.
Mr. Bush, who has told Republican officials in recent weeks that he was eager to begin defending himself, was himself biting at times in his portrayal of his opponents. Alluding to Democrats who have criticized the war but agreed that the world is better of with Saddam Hussein out of power, Mr. Bush said, ''Maybe they were hoping he'd lose the next Iraqi election.''
In an indirect slap at Mr. Kerry, who in a 1970 interview suggested that the United States military should be deployed only under the auspices of the United Nations, Mr. Bush said he would never ''outsource'' national security to other governments. Mr. Kerry has since said his views have changed.
Mr. Bush's political advisers said the speech was likely to be as close as the president comes to formally declaring his candidacy. Mr. Bush decided to go ahead with it, they said, after getting bad reviews from even some of his own supporters in two recent high-profile appearances: his one-hour interview this month on the NBC program ''Meet the Press'' and his State of the Union address last month.
Even before Mr. Bush delivered his speech, Mr. Kerry tried to pre-empt him. In an appearance in New York, the Massachusetts Democrat said he had Mr. Bush ''on the run'' even before Democrats settled for certain on their nominee. He said the president had failed on the economy, had pursued a ''reckless'' foreign policy and was practicing ''crony capitalism and crony government.''
In a statement issued after Mr. Bush's speech, Mr. Kerry said: ''George Bush's credibility is running out with the American people. They want change in America and I'm running because I am determined to bring that change and put America back on track.''
While, Mr. Bush never mentioned Mr. Kerry by name, his campaign openly said it was now focused on him as its probable opponent and spent much of the day trying to exploit his long record of votes in the Senate to paint him as weak on national security.
In focusing exclusively on Mr. Kerry as an opponent, Mr. Bush's aides risk making a mistake should Mr. Kerry falter and the Democrats nominate Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
In a statement, Mr. Edwards said the election was ''not about John Kerry's past or the president's past.'' He said, ''This election is about the future, and the new ideas we have that will change American so that it works for all of us.''
Mr. Bush invoked the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks several times in casting the election as a big choice for the American people. He sought to dispel rumors that he might drop Vice President Dick Cheney from the ticket, joking that he had again put Mr. Cheney in charge of his vice-presidential search and that Mr. Cheney had come up with the same recommendation he made in 2000.
The speech got rousing applause at several points from the audience of Republican donors and governors, including the president's brother, Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida, and the newest Republican star, Arnold Schwarzenegger of California.
Mr. Bush has gradually become more involved in the day-to-day decision making in his campaign. The campaign's advertising team went to the White House two weeks ago to film him for appearances in television commercials. One senior White House official said Mr. Bush had been having a ''rolling conversation'' with his political strategists in recent weeks about how to proceed as Dr. Dean's candidacy collapsed and Mr. Kerry emerged as the front-runner.
Mr. Bush's media team has moved forward with plans to purchase advertising time, asking stations about rates in 17 swing states, the vast majority of which were decided by five percentage points of the vote or less in 2000. Among them were Florida, New Hampshire and Wisconsin.
Campaign officials have said that Mr. Bush's first advertisement will focus on his accomplishments, and that it would not attack Mr. Kerry.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
