The Nassau County Legislature's Rules Committee voted early Tuesday morning to end a series of hearings into government scandals, leaving many questions unanswered and the Republicans charging the Legislature's Democratic majority with a cover-up.
Closing with the same partisan rancor in which they began a month ago, the hearings included testimony from about 25 witnesses in eight sessions totaling about 64 hours.
The inquiry covered accusations of waste, corruption, sexual harassment and other irregularities in the agencies run by Peter T. Sylver, the former deputy for economic development who resigned under fire three months ago. The Legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, a Democrat, said that the legislators had gained enough information to draft reforms and saw no need to prolong the hearings. ''We have examined and re-examined every area'' in Mr. Sylver's former agencies, she said.
The vote to end the hearingsafter a late-night session, was 5 to 4.
The issues remain under investigation by the United State attorney, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and the Nassau County district attorney, Ms. Jacobs said.
But the Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter J. Schmitt, called the adjournment ''a cover-up'' to protect the Democratic administration of County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi. His spokesman, Edward Ward, said, ''We were just turning a corner'' with new evidence, ''and now they're shutting us down.'' The Republicans said that they had a list of 15 witnesses yet to call.
Exactly what changes may emerge from the hearings is unclear. The Legislature's bipartisan budget review office is preparing a report based on the evidence taken. Ms. Jacobs said, ''Without question there must be comprehensive rules, regulations and policies in place for these offices.''
The Sylver scandals turned into a major detour for Mr. Suozzi, who was elected on his promise to clean up mismanagement and had succeeded in transforming Nassau's budget from deficits to surpluses.
The first issue to draw attention was questionable charges on Mr. Sylver's county credit card, including $707 to tint the windows of his county car, restaurant meals and a $3,400 trip to London.
But soon the accusations against him multiplied to include using a falsified application to obtain the credit card, conflicts of interests, nepotism, cronyism, consultants hired without bidding, a forged document, civil service violations, federal funds misused to pay for county workers, political favoritism, poor supervision of the agencies under his control, inadequate accounting and work records, and sexual harassment of his executive assistant.
Mr. Sylver has denied any wrongdoing and reimbursed the county several thousand dollars in disputed charges. On the witness stand, he declined to answer most questions by invoking his constitutional right against self-incrimination.
The Republicans have focused on a mysterious $239 bill from the luxury Garden City Hotel, a few minutes' drive from the county offices. The bill was charged to Mr. Sylver's county credit card but then rescinded when he claimed that the room reservation was not used. The Republicans have asked why the room -- a penthouse with a fireplace and dining space for 10 that normally rents for $1,800 a night -- was needed at all and, if no one showed up, how the charge included a $44 room service bill for breakfast for two.
Another unresolved issue involves Robin Pellegrini, whom Mr. Sylver eventually fired as director of housing and intergovernmental relations. What appears to be her signature approving the London trip is a forgery, she testified.
She also testified that in Mr. Sylver's first days on the job, he improperly pressured a developer, suggesting that if he helped Mr. Sylver's brother, a construction contractor, then the developer would get favorable treatment on a proposal that was pending county approval.
Ms. Pellegrini discussed the incident with a fellow official, Robert Benrubi, she said. She also told Mr. Suozzi's communications director, Bruce Nyman, who seemed concerned and said he would look into it, she said. But Mr. Benrubi was not questioned about this at the hearing, and Mr. Suozzi and Mr. Nyman were not called as witnesses.
