WHEN it comes to buying technology, it's easy for a small business to go wrong. Take a company that Frank Muehleman encountered recently. Mr. Muehleman, the senior vice president and general manager of Dell's small- and medium-business division, found that the company, a wholesale distributor, ran its e-mail, Internet connection and even its print server applications on the cheap, using a castoff PC as its server. The machine was running Windows 95, an older version of the operating system that was no longer supported by Microsoft. Worse, there was no antivirus software installed on the PC.
It was, on one level, admirable, showing how much a business can do with so little. But, in practice, Mr. Muehleman said, it was a disaster because the company was barely getting by with its cobbled-together network. And when a virus struck the central computer, the collapse was total.
''They lost a lot of their business,'' he said.
Computing can be a hard road for small businesses. Large companies have computing experts, and have the option of running their technology operations themselves or outsourcing them to experts at other companies. Small-business owners are often on their own.
Judy Smolski, vice president for global marketing for small businesses at I.B.M., said small businesses were starting to invest in technology again, lured by an improving economy, tax breaks and increasingly powerful equipment. But they must learn, she said, that the cost of a computer is not just what the sticker says. ''It's total cost of ownership,'' Ms. Smolski said, which includes the costs of training employees and fixing problems, just for starters.
''People should not buy more or less than they really need,'' she said.
Jim Browning, the vice president and research director for the small- and midsize business research group at Gartner, said many small businesses ''underestimate the resources and the support costs.'' A business might, for example, decide that laptops have become powerful and inexpensive enough to be used instead of desktop machines. But laptops present security problems, Mr. Browning pointed out, and many companies have to create a security system known as a virtual private network so that employees and trusted business partners can enter the company's network securely. And laptops, he said, ''can be stolen, they break, there are warranty issues.''
Mr. Browning suggested that a company thoroughly plan its technology purchases so that each contract is clear and understood. Instead of buying high-end one-size-fits-all computers and software for everyone, find the right amount of technology, and price, for each employee, he said. ''Not all of your users are created equal,'' he said.
Buying the right amount of technology can take resourcefulness, said Rich Jacobs, the owner of CompuDoc Computer Services in Millburn, N.J., who works with consumers and small businesses in the suburbs. ''Everybody reads the Dell ads at $399 and $499, thinking it's real,'' he said. ''It's not.'' Buying monitors, warranties, network equipment and other extras that make computers useful raises the price significantly. Careful shopping can keep costs down.
Mr. Jacobs recently outfitted a small nonprofit organization with two computers -- a powerful model for an executive and a less powerful one for an assistant -- and kept the price of the package under $1,500 by buying refurbished machines from Dell.
Security, Mr. Browning said, is among the last things considered, and should be among the first. The entrepreneurs know that they need protection like antivirus and firewall systems. But, he said, ''they've got 30 bucks left'' after buying the computers and network equipment.
Gregor Freund, the chief executive of Zone Labs, a computer security company in San Francisco, said that small-business owners tend to think they are too small to be attacked, and do not understand that today's automated computer attacks do not discriminate by size. In addition, attacks like the recent MyDoom program can go undetected.
''It's not like they come in in the morning and they have a broken window,'' Mr. Freund said. ''They have no idea what happened to them.'' Because viruses like MyDoom open backdoors, allowing access to computers by hackers, the results of infection can be as dire, he said, as if someone had rifled through the file cabinets for customer information.
Another essential, said Frank Muehleman of Dell, is to have a disaster recovery plan; a good backup tape storage drive can do the job for a few thousand dollars.
Dell, like other technology companies, offers help to small businesses in areas like network design and installation. ''There's a need out there,'' Mr. Muehleman said, ''because it's getting more complicated.''
GAME PLANS
