For more than a century, the Mantero family has been making fine silk beside the famous lake here, and the whirl of activity at the enormous plant on Thursday afternoon reflected the expertise and reputation the Manteros have painstakingly developed.
Smocked technicians huddled over pitchers of dyes, the carefully calibrated results of constant experimentation. Long, broad sheets of silk moved along conveyor belts that paused regularly so that layer after layer of pattern could be pressed onto what would soon become Ferragamo ties and Gucci scarves.
The Mantero company produces clothing or accessories for both design houses and many more, offering a degree of craftsmanship and history of proven quality that cannot easily be found outside Italy.
''If this were just a matter of pressing a button on a machine, anybody could do it,'' Carlo Mantero, the company's director of innovation, said of making fine garments.
Like the Mantero company, Italy has long excelled at that enterprise, which is largely why designers like Giorgio Armani and Miuccia Prada use the runways of nearby Milan, as they are doing this week, to unveil their women's collections for fall.
But the hum at the Mantero plant and the shimmer of the Milan catwalk shows belie a more complicated and troubling reality for the making of clothing and accessories in this country. While Italy remains a world leader in producing luxury apparel and accessories, much of its textile industry has moved to Asia, Eastern Europe and northern Africa for cheaper labor and lower costs.
Alarmed at that trend, Italian clothing and accessory makers have had to rethink what they do and to promote aggressively the idea that something made in Italy cannot really be replicated anywhere else.
Those efforts recognize more than just the importance of the textile industry to Italy's economy, which has performed poorly over the last few years. They also speak to national identity and pride, which is made clear in the way government officials, company executives and industry representatives talk about Italy's place in the fashion world.
''The textile industry is something that is so traditionally, typically Italian,'' said Mario Furlan, a spokesman for the Italian Fashion System, a national trade group. ''It comes from Italian history and a taste for elegance and living well. It's part of Italians -- it's something we have. It's not part of China, Turkey or even the U.S.A.''
The Mantero company's evolution over the last decade is emblematic of Italy's recent experience -- and of the country's adjustments. Moritz Mantero, the company's chief executive, said in an interview here that Mantero's roughly $144 million in gross revenues in 2003 was about 30 percent lower than its gross revenues about a decade ago. The company has about 950 employees now, he said. It had more than 1,150 then.
Mr. Mantero said that the decline in the luxury goods market over the last three years was partly to blame, but that there were other factors.
''China has hurt a lot,'' he said, referring to that country's ability to churn out garments quickly and cheaply.
Chinese workers earn about $2 an hour. Their Italian counterparts earn more than $16 an hour, according to Italian textile industry experts. Chinese workers also put in significantly longer weeks.
So Mantero simply phased out the making of lower-end silk shirts and other products that do not require the kind of technical finesse to which Italian companies still lay special claim. Many other textile and garment makers have done likewise. Still others have moved production operations abroad or subcontracted out small parts of the process to firms in countries with less rigid, cheaper labor markets.
Increasingly, those countries are also catching up to -- and in some cases matching -- what Europe can offer in sophistication and technology.
Benetton, which is based in the northern Italian city of Treviso, has work done in Croatia, India and Turkey.
Another northern Italian company, Marzotto, which owns 51 percent of Hugo Boss and 100 percent of Valentino, does high-end tailoring in Italy but much of its basic textile production elsewhere.
''Ten years ago we did all of the production -- everything -- in house, for everyone,'' said Luca Caserta, a spokesman for Marzotto.
''Now, 50 percent of our wool is made in Lithuania and the Czech Republic,'' he added. ''Sixty to 70 percent of our linen is made abroad.''
According to the Italian Fashion System, the Italian clothing industry went into a slump over the last four years with the global turndown and the exodus of many manufacturers to poorer countries with cheaper labor markets.
The industry generated about $62 billion in gross revenues in 1990 and about $61 billion in 1995, compared with $53 billion last year.
In 1990, the industry employed 780,000 Italians, according to the trade group. The group's preliminary figures show that by the end of last year, that number had dropped to about 687,000 Italians.
Trade group representatives and company executives said in interviews that the worst of the decline may be over. They said that while more manufacturing of midrange products may leave Italy, high-end apparel and accessories were safe here.
But they are not taking any chances.
On the theory that wealthy, style-conscious customers put stock in where their clothes are stitched together, they are pushing to give legal heft and protection to the ''Made in Italy'' label.
Neither Italy nor the European Union requires origination labels on apparel, and many Italian companies advocate new laws to change that.
Companies are also tracking European Union proposals for a ''Made in Europe'' label. They want to make sure that no such legislation would override or eliminate ''Made in Italy'' tags.
''It's very important,'' said Diego Della Valle, chief executive of Tod's, the Italian footwear maker.
Mr. Della Valle said that all of his shoes say ''Made in Italy'' even though, he added, ''When you put the shoes on your feet, your feet understand that they are made in Italy.''
Several Italian companies, provinces and regions are extolling, more loudly than before, the generations of experience that they bring to the cobbling of a shoe, the tailoring of a sweater or the tinting of a fabric.
After seeing many local wool makers unravel, business and government officials around the Alpine town of Biella, Italy, began a marketing campaign, including a Web site.
Mantero is investing in new digital technology, doing research on new fabrics and making sure that the Italian designers who commission work from Mantero see early samples right away. That is a way to remind them of the advantages of keeping production at home.
''If we are able to get at the essence of the needs of fashion designers -- luxury designers -- in a short time, this will fuel our longevity,'' Moritz Mantero said. ''This is Italy's secret.''
