Seeds that are supposed to be free of genetic engineering routinely contain biotechnology traits anyway, a public interest group said yesterday.
The group, the Union of Concerned Scientists, said it had detected tiny quantities of genetically modified seeds in most of the bags of unmodified corn, soybean and canola seeds it tested.
If seeds do contain the traits, the group said, it would be virtually impossible for farmers to grow crops that are completely free of genetic modification. That could mean disruption of crop exports to countries that do not allow genetically engineered foods. It also makes it harder for organic farmers to supply customers who will not accept even tiny degrees of genetic engineering.
''The door to seed contamination is wide open,'' said Margaret Mellon, director of the food and environment program at the Union of Concerned Scientists, who added that her group's study was the first to systematically look at the issue. In a conference call with reporters, she said the genetically engineered seeds might have come from a mixing of seeds by farmers or seed companies or from pollination of seed crops by genetically engineered crops.
Representatives of the seed and biotechnology industries said the findings were not surprising and did not pose any health risk because the genetically modified seeds detected are approved and widely grown already.
''Low levels of biotech traits present in conventional seed is not new and is something that has been around for eight years or so now,'' the president of the American Seed Trade Association, Richard Crowder, said.
Mr. Crowder said it was not possible to ensure that a bag of seeds was completely pure. Regulations allow a bag of corn seed to contain, in some cases, up to 5 percent of varieties different from the one on the label. So it is not surprising to find some outside presence of genetically altered seeds in bags meant to contain nonengineered varieties.
The Union of Concerned Scientists bought six varieties each of corn, soybean and canola seeds and sent samples to two commercial laboratories for testing. One laboratory detected genetically engineered seeds in three of six varieties of the corn and soy samples and some in all six canola varieties. The other laboratory found genetically engineered traits in five of the six varieties of each crop.
The genetically modified seeds were found in low levels, ranging from 0.05 percent to 1 percent. The traits detected were the ones used in widely grown genetically engineered crops -- herbicide tolerance and insect resistance.
Dr. Mellon said a bigger health risk would occur if genes now being tested to produce pharmaceuticals from crops were to get into seeds for food crops. Her group could not test for such genes because in general their identity is not known. ''If the door to the seed supply is open to contamination,'' she added, ''it is likely that drug genes will be able to pass through it, right to our breakfast tables.''
But seed and biotechnology industry representatives said that was unlikely. The crops used to produce pharmaceuticals will be grown on much smaller acreage than herbicide-resistant soybeans, and the regulations for isolating them from other crops will be much stricter, they said.
Frederick Kirschenmann, director of the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture at Iowa State University, said in the conference call that organic farmers were having an increasingly difficult time obtaining seeds free of genetic engineering. ''If the current rate of seed contamination continues,'' he said, ''then farmers that supply niche markets that do not allow any genetically modified materials will simply lose those markets.''
