Even if the Rangers had defeated the Montreal Canadiens last night at Madison Square Garden, their chances of catching the Canadiens for the final Eastern Conference playoff berth would have been slim.
Those chances are almost nonexistent after the Rangers lost, 4-1.
With a record of 22-29-7-4 for 55 points, the Rangers are in 12th place in the conference, 13 points behind Montreal. The Canadiens (30-25-6-2) pulled into a tie with the Islanders for seventh place.
If the Canadiens play about .500 over their final 19 games, the Rangers would probably have to win 17 of their final 20 games to qualify for the playoffs.
Since Jan. 13, the Rangers are 4-13-2-0.
Considering that the Rangers have not won three consecutive games this season, and that they last won two in a row in late December, it would take something of a minor miracle for them to qualify for the playoffs for the first time since the 1996-97 season.
''It's to the point now where we can't lose any more hockey games,'' Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, said after the loss last night.
What seems to be a more pertinent question is whether Sather will make it through the season with all or any of his jobs intact.
Sather, 60, has three more seasons remaining on the seven-year deal he signed to become the Rangers' president and general manager in June 2000. Sather's salary is believed to be $4 million a season, with another $1 million in bonuses and options.
Sather's boss, James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, will have to decide whether to take the advice of the Ranger fans, who resumed their chants of ''Fire Sather'' as soon as the game began.
What seems clear is that Dolan will have to honor the pledge he made after the Rangers were eliminated from playoff contention last season: that he would cut ticket prices by 10 percent if the Rangers failed to make the playoffs again this season.
Sather, in his role as general manager, may have to start making deals with the future in mind before the March 9 trading deadline, although he has remained adamant in his desire not to become a seller before then.
There are plenty of players Sather could move: Aleksei Kovalev, Petr Nedved, Brian Leetch, Tom Poti, Boris Mironov, Matthew Barnaby, Chris Simon, Martin Rucinsky and perhaps even the injured Eric Lindros.
All of the Rangers' starters except for the newly acquired Jaromir Jagr and Leetch were booed during the pregame introductions last night.
The Montreal captain, Saku Koivu, scored just 1 minute 31 seconds into the game. Mike Ribeiro, Patrice Brisebois and Jason Ward also scored for Montreal.
Jagr scored the Rangers' goal, on a two-man advantage at 13 minutes 28 seconds of the second period, cutting the Canadiens' lead to 2-1. The Rangers failed to score on an earlier two-man advantage.
Montreal scored when it had a two-man advantage in the second period. An unscreened 30-foot slap shot by Brisebois squibbed past goaltender Mike Dunham to restore the Canadiens' two-goal lead.
''We didn't even come close to being competitive the last two games,'' said Rangers center Bobby Holik, who was also referring to Saturday's 7-3 loss to the Devils. ''Maybe we don't have what we needed to win, to be successful, or to be competitive.''
By the end of the game last night, chants of ''Refund!'' filled the Garden. After the players skated off, the ice was littered with nesting dolls of Leetch that had been given away as a promotion.
''Whatever they have in their hands, they're going to throw if they're not happy,'' Leetch said.
SLAP SHOTS
GLEN SATHER said that center ERIC LINDROS would be re-examined today in Montreal by Dr. KAREN JOHNSTON, a concussion specialist. ''He told me today he's felt good the last five days,'' Sather said of Lindros, who missed his 11th consecutive game last night. He said Lindros told him he had not had any symptoms. ''But he also said he hasn't been riding the bike any longer than 10 minutes,'' Sather said. . . . Canadiens' goalie JOSÉ THÉODORE made 31 saves as he snapped his five-game losing streak. Théodore, the Vézina Trophy winner two seasons ago, was 0-5 with an .873 save percentage since playing in the All-Star Game. . . . Rangers forward CHRIS SIMON (flu) did not play. PAUL HEALEY was recalled from Hartford of the American Hockey League and dressed in Simon's place. Defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) missed his 13th consecutive game.
HOCKEY
