An international court opened a hearing on Monday about the Israeli barrier being built in and around the West Bank, as pro-Palestinian demonstrators here voiced encouragement in front of worried supporters of Israel.
In a three-hour presentation to the International Court of Justice, the Palestinian Authority argued that the partly built barrier of ditches, watchposts and concrete walls was a violation of international law and an attempt to annex Palestinian land.
Israel dismissed the assertions, saying the barrier was a necessary bulwark against suicide bombers and fell within the legal definition of self-defense. ''Alongside the quality of life of Palestinians, we have to weigh the right to life for Israelis,'' Daniel Taub, an Israeli government legal adviser, said in an interview here. ''And what we have to do is find the appropriate balance between the two.''
But Nasser al-Kidwa, the head of the Palestinian observer mission to the United Nations, who made the opening remarks to the court, said the barrier was blocking any chance for a better future. ''If completed, it will wall in most of the Palestinian people and will end the possibility of a two-state solution and thus end the chance of peace in the region,'' Mr. Kidwa said in an interview after the Palestinian presentation.
The legal proceedings topped an emotional day in which Palestinian and Israeli organizations carried out silent marches and noisy demonstrations here to gain ground in the court of public opinion.
Press photographers jostled to board the burned wreckage of a Jerusalem passenger bus flown in as a backdrop for the demonstrations. An El Al luggage tag was still affixed to the bus's bent and scarred frame.
Pro-Israeli organizations staged a silent march featuring photographs of nearly 1,000 victims of terrorism-related acts, including Rachel Koren Galran's husband and two sons.
All three were killed nearly two years ago in the suicide bombing of a Haifa restaurant. ''I'm here today to scream my pain to the world,'' said Ms. Galran, 50, adding that a barrier back then might have saved her family. ''If we can make peace, we can remove it,'' she said.
Pro-Palestinian organizations came together at the courthouse in the afternoon for their own rally, shouting along the way, ''This wall must fall!''
The barrier has cut off a number of Palestinians from their farms and families. ''This wall is the incarnation, the embodiment, of racism and apartheid,'' Azmi Bishara, an Arab member of the Israeli Parliament, told a crowd of more than a thousand. ''Get rid of this wall.''
The World Court is to continue its hearing for another two days.
The United Nations General Assembly has asked the court for a nonbinding, advisory opinion about the legal consequences of the barrier's construction.
Israel has filed a written brief to the court but will not appear before it, contending that the court lacks jurisdiction to rule in the matter.
''The court has been asked to pass judgment on a country's response to terrorism but not on the terrorists themselves,'' Mr. Taub said.
Signs that the proceedings were causing a stir in the Middle East were abundant. In the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, thousands of Palestinians demonstrated against the barrier, and Israeli troops pushed back crowds in several areas with tear gas and rubber bullets.
In Jerusalem, Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli finance minister and former prime minister, told a conference that the ''Palestinian terror regimes,'' not Israel, should be on trial in The Hague.
