Airline Passengers May Face Hefty Fines
That long-forgotten Swiss Army knife, or that joke that a screener deems threatening, could cost airline passengers hefty fines at airport security checkpoints under a new enforcement policy the Transportation Security Administration put in place last week.
Previously, unless they found a gun or other obvious weapon, security screeners merely confiscated most prohibited items they found in carry-on bags. In one three-month period in 2002, for example, security screeners discovered nearly 2 million knives or blades of less than 3 inches, and 3.3 million other ''sharp objects'' in passenger bags, the T.S.A. said.
The new guidelines spell out various levels of fines for prohibited items discovered at checkpoints, within secure airport areas, or on board aircraft. Loaded firearms, or those with ammunition accessible, warrant fines of $3,000 to $7,500, as well as criminal referral. For unloaded firearms, fines are $1,500 to $3,000, plus criminal referral.
For other ''weapons,'' which the T.S.A. says include ''sharp objects, club-like items and other prohibited items'' that could be used as weapons, fines are $250 to $1,500.
The guidelines chiefly ''send a message that it's no longer O.K. to say, 'I'm sorry, I forgot I had my gun in my bag,''' said Ann Davis, a T.S.A. spokeswoman. The guidelines list ''aggravating factors and mitigating factors'' in giving authorities discretion in levying fines, she said. Among those factors are a suspected violator's attitude, past violation history and level of traveling experience.
The guidelines also set fines of $1,500 to $5,000 for ''interfering with screening'' through ''physical contact,'' and fines of $500 to $1,500 for ''nonphysical'' interference. Anyone making ''false threats,'' like joking about a bomb or a weapon, can be fined $1,000 to $2,000.
The tightened procedures are meant to ''encourage travelers to be a little more aware of what they're traveling with,'' Ms. Davis said. Since the T.S.A. assumed responsibility for airport security in 2002, there have been 4,568 civil penalties assessed against passengers for prohibited items, she added.
Test of Iris ID System Under Way in Germany
A test of a biometric identification system based on iris patterns is under way at Frankfurt Airport.
Passengers stand at an electronic device that checks their iris patterns against iris patterns previously registered on their passports. Seven of the devices, developed by Byometric Systems and Oki Electric Industry, are in place at the airport. They are part of a pilot project that ultimately is expected to lead to use of iris-identification technology at airports in 18 European nations.
While the technology has not been proved a foolproof way to ensure identify, proponents say it has great promise. ''It must be guaranteed that the registered biometric characteristic can be matched absolutely correctly,'' Otto Schily, the German interior minister, said. ''The iris recognition is currently considered to be the most secure biometric system.''
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
