In Bridgeport, news that the government is no longer interested in the Comanche means economic uncertainty for hundreds of people who design and assemble the helicopters and deals another blow to a struggling city where industry has long since faded.
''This was a big project in the city of Bridgeport, not only economically but in terms of prestige,'' the city's mayor, John M. Fabrizi, said yesterday.
Manufacturing of the helicopter was in its infancy. Five Comanches were in production yesterday, according to Ed Steadham, a spokesman for Sikorsky Aircraft.
But expectations were great. ''When this program was announced in the 1980's, we were told we'd be building 5,000 of them,'' said Rocco Calo, the secretary-treasurer of Teamsters Local 1150.
The Teamsters represent about 60 Comanche production workers in Bridgeport making about $25 an hour. About 400 people work at the 200,000-square-foot plant in this Connecticut city, many of them salaried engineers, Mr. Steadham said.
An additional 300 people work on the helicopter at Sikorsky's nearby Stratford plant, and about 600 work on the project for the Boeing Company in Philadelphia.
Mr. Calo said that with the United States military still active, the Bridgeport plant might not suffer much because of the need for composite work and blade production. ''We're hoping when the president replaces Marine One, it will be with one of ours, the S-92,'' he said, referring to the presidential helicopter.
Union officials said they were told by members of the state's Congressional delegation that they would fight the Pentagon's decision, Mr. Calo said. But workers were wary.
''People are afraid they'll lose their jobs,'' he said.
Mr. Steadham, the Sikorsky spokesman, said yesterday that the company was ''surprised and disappointed'' by the decision to stop production of the helicopter.
''While we regret the Army's announcement, we are committed to working closely with our customer and will engage in further discussions to ensure we have complete understanding of the next steps for Comanche,'' Mr. Steadham said in an e-mail message last night.
