Msgr. Richard S. Sniezyk, the temporary leader of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield, Mass., said Sunday that some priests once thought sexual relationships with young men were acceptable and had no idea they would cause any harm.
But on Monday night, he released a statement apologizing for possibly distressing Catholics or intensifying scrutiny of priests.
''I did not mean to suggest, nor do I believe to be true, that sexual misconduct in any context is ever acceptable,'' the statement said. ''While it is important to note how abusers acted and how they may have escaped notice, it is more important to condemn the result of their actions, the terrible and sickening violation of children and the long-term horrific results.''
In an interview with The Boston Globe published Monday, Monsignor Sniezyk said that while a seminarian and young priest in the 1950's and 1960's he heard of priests who had relationships with young men, but no one gave the practice a second thought.
Monsignor Sniezyk said the priests were ''kind'' and ''compassionate,'' and did well by their parishioners, according to the article, but they ''had no idea what they were doing to these young men that they were abusing.''
He also told the newspaper the diocese had taken substantive steps to address abuse, including hiring a victims' advocate and a deacon with corrections experience to supervise priests removed from ministry.
The Diocese of Springfield did not return telephone calls for comment on Monday.
Monsignor Sniezyk's remarks on Sunday drew fire from victims' groups and priests.
The Rev. James J. Scahill, the pastor of St. Michael's parish in East Longmeadow, called the remarks ''unjustifiable.''
Peter Pollard of the Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests, said that he was molested by a priest at age 15 and that Monsignor Sniezyk's remarks on Sunday hit a chord because they could have described him.
Of Monsignor's Sniezyk's apology, Mr. Pollard said, ''He and whoever he worked with did a good job of coming up with a statement, but I think the truth was what he said yesterday, and I think that is the tragedy.''
Monsignor Sniezyk will lead the diocese until a successor to Bishop Thomas Dupre is named. The bishop, citing health reasons, resigned after reports surfaced that he molested two boys in the 1970's. The Hampden County district attorney is investigating the reports.
