DEALING with a corporate giant can be a piece of cake for a small business. For instance, the behemoth may come asking for help with a problem and, once it is solved, allow the small business to license the same solution to the larger company's competitors.
At least that is the way it worked for Bill Gates and Paul Allen, who became billionaires because I.B.M. paid their fledgling company, Microsoft, to come up with an operating system for I.B.M.'s personal computers and made no effort to stop them from licensing the program to other comuter makers.
But for every small venture that has soared from such a fortunate embrace, countless others have been relegated to commercial limbo by a relationship with a giant company that failed to develop.
Currently in the satellite radio market, XM Satellite Radio, based in Washington, has a huge lead over Sirius, its New York-based rival, in signing up subscribers for the new service. XM grabbed a head start by initiating nationide broadcasting of its 100 channels of music and talk late in 2001, a half a year sooner than Sirius.
The big difference, though, has been that XM received strong backing from General Motors, its major auto industry partner, which aggressively expanded the number of cars it shipped with satellite radios, while the leading Sirius partners, the Ford Motor Company and DaimlerChrysler, have dawdled. Sirius has also been unable to get the major radio equipment companies to develop innovative satellite receivers as rapidly as Delphi was introducing devices like the SkyFi boom box for XM.
There is no one-size-fits-all advice for dealing with bigger businesses because there are so many variations, said Ken Yancey, chief executive of the Score Association, a nonprofit group in Washington that provides counseling and training services to small businesses through its Web site (www.score.org) and hundreds of local chapters.
The classic case may be that of an independent small company trying to get the attention of a giant potential customer. In recent years, a different segment has developed, thousands of small companies that have actually been created by the giants in order to spin off support services like maintenance, research projects or small segments of the larger company. And many industries routinely lay off workers and then rehire them as independent contractors. Such relationships have different dynamics from those that have been at arm's length.
Academic experts who study small businesses may not be able to pick out a single biggest challenge for such businesses in dealing with large companies, but they can identify several common ones.
First, small businesses frequently underestimate how long it will take and how much it will cost to get a large company to look seriously at its service or product. ''It's not enough to put the product in front of people and say give me the order,'' said Mark P. Rice, professor of entrepreneurial studies at Babson College in Wellesley, Mass. Big companies will already be dealing with the problem in some way on a large scale and will be cautious about changing their operations, he said.
Small companies may also be mistaken about what their competitive advantage is, Professor Rice said. Rather than a superiorproduct, for example, it may be the small company's ability to respond more rapidly to orders. Not understanding that could lead the small company to fail to protect its advantage in dealing with the larger company.
It is crucial, experts say, for small companies to meet deadlines for delivering products and to enter into agreements only when they can afford to pay for the number of employees needed to make them work. Any company is at risk if a large part of its business is with a single supplier or customer, but smaller companies often have fewer resources to deal with disruptions in the relationship.
Jim Maier, president and chief executive of the RailPower Technologies Corporation, said that perhaps the most important factors for a small company to take into relationships with large ones are a well-thought-out vision of what it needs and a plan that allows it to walk away if necessary.
RailPower, based in North Vancouver, British Columbia, is selling an energy-efficient diesel-and-electric engine to help railroads cut pollution in railyards. The company is trying to convince railroads that it pays to buy the new equipment instead of using old, less-efficient engines they have retired from service.
''We know why we are there, what we want, our quality and price plans are clearly identified, and we know why we want their participation,'' Mr. Maier said of what he presents at meetings with distributors of railroad equipment, which are much larger than RailPower.
Mr. Maier's feelings are based on watching small companies negotiate with his former employer, General Electric. ''Most of the small companies did not understand big company politics,'' he said. ''About 20 percent of the time, they would have been better off if they had walked away.''
GAME PLANS
