Gov. James E. McGreevey will introduce a budget on Tuesday that sharply increases aid for child welfare programs and boosts aid to schools while taxing cigarette smokers an additional 45 cents a pack and levying heavier fines for traffic violations.
In a briefing for reporters, the state treasurer, John E. McCormac, said on Monday that without a $125 million increase in spending for New Jersey's faltering child welfare agency, the actual state spending for the 2005 budget year beginning on July 1 would be lower than that of the current year.
As it is, state appropriations would increase by about 7 percent over last year, to $26.26 billion. But Mr. McCormac, with an eye to Republican criticism about budget bloat in a Democratic administration, insisted that since the current budget listed spending that, in fact, was covered by federal aid, actual spending in 2005 will rise by slightly more than 4 percent.
The highlights of the budget that Mr. McGreevey is expected to announce in his annual address include a $273.3 million increase in aid to local school districts -- much of it to poor districts -- a $24.2 million increase in aid to municipalities to offset property taxes, and smaller amounts for colleges, universities and arts programs that have suffered under the governor's earlier austerity budgets.
''It's a good-news budget,'' said State Senator Wayne R. Bryant, Democrat of Camden, the chairman of the Senate Budget and Appropriations Committee. And after years of cuts and austerity as the state struggled with shortfalls upward of $5 billion a year, this budget enables Mr. McGreevey to deliver some positive news as he goes into his re-election campaign next year.
However, Republicans reacted angrily to the cigarette tax increases and to proposed borrowing, particularly Mr. McGreevey's plan to issue $1.5 billion in bonds for next year's operating budget against the $135 million a year the state expects from the increase in cigarette taxes and the $44 million it expects from new surcharges of up to $200 on serious traffic violations.
The current tax, the nation's highest state cigarette tax, is $2.05 per pack, up from 80 cents when Mr. McGreevey took office in 2002. The price for a pack of cigarettes ranges from about $5.25 to $6.50.
The $7 billion New Jersey is to receive under the national tobacco litigation settlement has already been pledged to pay off borrowing for earlier budgets, and the tactic of borrowing against future revenues drew scorn from Senator Leonard Lance, the senate minority leader and the state's ranking Republican.
''I believe bonding for general operation expenses is spectacularly poor governance,'' Senator Lance, of Flemington, said. ''It violates every principle of fiscal responsibility that I know.''
Mr. Lance acknowledged that past Republican governors have employed the same borrowing method to fill budget gaps, a point the state's treasurer, Mr. McCormac, made on Monday. The senator said that he had opposed the practice at those times, too.
Mr. McCormac argued that the governor's proposal differs from past practice because this time the state is providing new revenues -- the cigarette tax and traffic offense surcharges -- to pay for the new debt.
''Here we are creating the revenue to pay off the debt, and it's an important distinction over the way it was done in the past, and I think it ought to be a part of the record,'' Mr. McCormac said.
But Assemblyman Joe Pennacchio of Morris Plains, the ranking Republican on the Assembly Appropriations Committee, called the argument a ''smoke screen.''
In addition to the borrowing, the governor's spending plan relies on expectations of an improving economy, the treasurer said, reflected in the 40,000 jobs added over the past year, increased revenues from business taxes and a slight growth in income tax withholding.
In an economic forecast released on Monday, Governor McGreevey predicted that the state economy would grow by 5 percent in 2004 and 2005 and that personal income would increase by nearly as much.
''This is yet another sign of our economic strength, yet more proof that we're making the right investments to help businesses meet their goals and to create jobs for New Jersey,'' the governor said in a statement.
The new spending plan will cut the budgets of most state departments, with the notable exceptions of Human Services, which will add 1,500 new child welfare case workers, and the New Jersey State Police, which will get 200 additional troopers and an expanded vehicle fleet under the state's homeland security plan. None of the cuts will require layoffs, Mr. McCormac said.
Among the largest increases in aid under the proposed budget are $190 for general school aid, $40 million for preschool programs for mostly poor urban schools, and $15 million for after-school programs.
School spending also includes a $138.5 million increase in Social Security contributions and retirement health benefits for teachers, expenses the administration said would free local revenues for classrooms.
