JUAN CARLOS TORRES has a hard-to-find skill: he knows how to disassemble, clean, refurbish and test more than 60 models of laser printer cartridges, each with its own arrangement of gears, screws, drums and rollers. Mr. Torres, a 31-year-old Mexican who came to the United States illegally seven years ago, has been a godsend for Frank Garcia, the owner of Millennium Remanufactured Toner, a laser cartridge recycling company in the Bronx with 15 employees.
Yet when Mr. Torres renews his seasonal work visa this month, it will not be for his adeptness with laser cartridges but with horse manure.
The first time he applied to Millennium, three years ago, Mr. Garcia turned him away; he had no papers. So Mr. Torres got a job cleaning horse stalls and doing other duties through the New York Thoroughbred Horsemen's Association, an industry group whose members employ more than 1,500 assistant trainers a year through a seasonal work visa program.
After Mr. Torres began the legalization process, Mr. Garcia felt able to hire him. During the racing season, Mr. Torres starts his day at 4:30 a.m. at Belmont Park in Elmont on Long Island, just beyond the Queens line, heads to Millennium for a 9-to-5 shift as the company's manager and quality control specialist, then goes home to his wife and two children in Brooklyn.
It frustrates Mr. Garcia that a big organization like the racing association has the resources to obtain a visa for Mr. Torres, but he does not. So Mr. Garcia, who is also president of the Bronx Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, is hopeful that a temporary worker program like the one President Bush proposed last month could help small businesses like his.
''I would benefit from this law right now,'' he said. Indeed, Mr. Garcia plans to hire another 25 workers to handle millions of dollars of new contracts, the result of a full-page display in the 2004 Corporate Express computer and imaging catalog.
And he would like nothing better than to hire Mr. Torres's former colleagues who worked at another cartridge recycling plant.
''That's a constant fight,'' Mr. Garcia said. ''He wants me to hire these immigrants, who know how to recycle toner, who were exploited for years.''
But Mr. Garcia says he is ''afraid'' to hire them because of the consequences.
Like many other small-business owners, Mr. Garcia has some doubts about how the president's worker program would play out.
So far, the plan has not moved beyond a vague outline. President Bush has proposed that employers be able to sponsor immigrants, including those already in the country illegally, for three years or more to fill jobs they say they cannot fill otherwise.
How the details are filled in will largely determine the response of small businesses, according to immigration experts and small-business owners.
Mr. Garcia is worried about the potential for the program to bog down in paperwork. He fears that like the current visa programs that are beyond his resources, the temporary worker program will entail complicated legal or logistical processes. Raymond J. Keating, chief economist of the Small Business Survival Committee, an advocacy and lobbying group in Washington, said that could be true.
''Any mandate like this is going to be more costly for small businesses,'' Mr. Keating said. ''Big businesses have the ability to absorb these costs.''
The Bush proposal requires that an employer make ''every reasonable effort'' to find an interested American to fill the job. It is not clear what that means, but legislation introduced recently by Senator Tom Daschle, Democrat of South Dakota, and Senator Chuck Hagel, Republican of Nebraska, offered some details about what President Bush might have in mind.
It would require that employers advertise job openings in ethnic and trade publications as well as ''in a publication with the highest circulation in the labor market that is likely to be patronized by a potential worker.'' Major corporations might not blink at buying classifieds in a major metropolitan newspaper, but the owner of a neighborhood grocery store might find the cost prohibitive.
Then there are the potential legal bills. Mr. Garcia said he would like to see some of the $1,000 fee that the workers would pay under the Bush proposal funneled to the Small Business Administration or local nonprofit groups to assist small businesses through the process.
Many immigration advocates say the biggest potential problem with the president's proposal is its requirement that workers return home after their temporary status expires; the plan creates no new path toward permanent residence.
The general manager of a restaurant in Queens, who spoke on condition of anonynimity because most of her 20 workers are illegal, said that although she would want to obey the law, she would not require employees to enter a temporary program that could force them to leave, or remain illegally, a few years later.
She also said the law could actually have a perverse effect: if current illegal immigrants do not choose to seek legal work under the program, it could attract more immigrants from other countries who end up staying illegally after their time is up.
Mr. Garcia predicted that some businesses would use their new power to extort money from workers in exchange for their papers. ''There are going to be a lot of people in our community,'' he said, ''that are going to try to take advantage of that, charge them to get their papers.''
Then there may be others who prefer illegal immigrants because they are easier to control. Juan Carlos Torres said that described his old cartridge recycling company, where he earned $2 to $3 an hour. (He earns $12 at Millennium.) ''It's not in their interest,'' Mr. Torres said, speaking in Spanish, ''because if the law passes they would have to pay the people what they deserve. When someone is undocumented, the first thing they say is, 'We can only pay you this much.' ''
Another complicating factor is the close relationships that can develop between management and workers, which could shade personnel decisions once employers are given obvious power over immigration status. For example, Mr. Garcia is the godfather of Mr. Torres's year-old son, a relationship difficult to imagine between, say, Wal-Mart's chief executive and a cashier.
And if business owners are immigrants themselves, might they clear out jobs to legalize undocumented relatives (and friends) or bring them in from abroad in a sort of immigration nepotism?
What if Abdul Mannan, a Bangladeshi businessman with a five-employee halal meat shop in a heavily South Asian area of Queens, wants to bring in a cousin from Bangladesh? He could run an ad that says: ''Wanted: Bengali-speaking butcher with at least 10 years experience, 12-hour days, $400/week.''
How closely would overstretched authorities look into failure to find an American?
In fact, Mr. Mannan wants nothing of the sort. It turns out he would hesitate before hiring a temporary worker. Not only would he have to constantly train new employees, he would lose people that he had become attached to.
One worker, Pedro Sanchez, has been there for five years, has become very skilled at cutting up a chicken and has learned enough meat-related Bengali to serve non-English-speaking customers. Replacing Mr. Sanchez would be a ''very big difficulty,'' Mr. Mannan said, but not because of his Spanish-Bengali-butchering skills. Mr. Sanchez, he said, is family: ''If he goes, then I feel maybe one of my two hands is gone.''
ON THE JOB
