Secretary General Kofi Annan said Monday that credible national elections could be held in Iraq by the end of this year or early in 2005, but only if planning a framework for them began immediately.
In a report to the Security Council that portrayed Iraq as a country in deepening crisis, Mr. Annan said his special envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, and a team of United Nations elections experts had determined during a one-week trip there that it would take until May to set up that framework and then at least eight months from that point to organize the elections.
His report, written by Mr. Brahimi, said it was urgent that the Iraqis establish an independent election commission to come up with the technical and legal rules and structure for a national vote. The current American plan had envisioned full elections by the end of 2005.
While Mr. Annan said it was important to hold to the agreed June 30 deadline for the occupying powers to hand over power to Iraq, he pointedly did not make any recommendation on what form of caretaker government ought to be created by that date. He said defining the mechanism for transferring sovereignty would be up to the Iraqis themselves.
Reiterating in his presentation that the report's conclusions were based on the ''Iraqi consensus,'' he pledged United Nations assistance throughout the entire elections process. Mr. Brahimi is expected to return to Baghdad next month.
Mr. Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister who recently completed two years of service as the United Nations envoy to Afghanistan, described Iraq darkly as a country of growing ethnic tensions that, unless urgently addressed, ''could fuel the existing potential for civil strife and violence.''
Outlining the stark dimensions of the problem, he said, ''After more than three decades of despotic rule, without the basic elements of the rule of law, a ruined economy, a devastated country, the collapse of state institutions, low political will for reconciliation and distrust among some Iraqis, conditions in Iraq are daunting.''
He said the political class was increasingly fragmented, communal politics were polarized and the political process ''remains limited to a few actors, with varying credibility.''
Some actions by the Iraqi Governing Council are serving to increase rather than relieve tensions, Mr. Brahimi said. He cited one in particular, a decision placing family law under the jurisdiction of religious doctrine. He said women saw the move as ''an ominous indication of what might be coming.''
In the report, Mr. Brahimi listed a number of alternative suggestions for a caretaker government that he had heard from Iraqis, without indicating which, if any, he might favor.
They included enlarging the 25-member Iraqi Governing Council to between 150 and 200 members and having it serve as the interim authority, calling a national conference of respected figures from across the country or establishing a small round-table group that would affirm a process of protecting human rights and drawing up a constitution.
In a conclusion that was reported last week on the United Nations team's return to New York, Mr. Annan said it was not feasible to hold direct elections before June 30, as several influential Iraqis had requested. At the same time, he dismissed the American-inspired caucus-based selection process for choosing a transitional government as one that ''does not appear to enjoy sufficient support among Iraqis to be a viable option any longer.''
It was complaints about that plan from local politicians and spiritual leaders that caused the United States to ask Mr. Annan last month to send his people into the country to assess possibilities and recommend alternatives.
The report did not explicitly call for a new Security Council resolution -- a step the United States would like to avoid at the moment to keep nations that were critical of the war, like France and Germany, away from the political process. But Mr. Annan did speak of the need for ''clear and unambiguous support of a united Security Council'' for the United Nations actions on the ground, and officials said it was likely that there would be formal Security Council reconsideration of the United Nations role in Iraq sometime later.
The mission to Iraq, from Feb. 6 to 13, and the resulting report on Monday, marked the active re-engagement of the United Nations in Iraq, six months after its Baghdad headquarters was bombed, costing the lives of 22 people, including the mission chief, Sergio Vieira de Mello.
Mr. Annan had been a vocal opponent of the war, and the Security Council last spring turned aside efforts by the United States and Britain to pass a resolution authorizing military action. The United States had consequently excluded the United Nations from planning for the political transition until last month, when critics of the American arrangements made it clear that they would not take directions from people they viewed as occupiers and would respect only alternatives approved by the United Nations.
The new report was delivered Monday while Mr. Annan was in Tokyo on a five-day Japanese trip. Briefing reporters here, Carina Perelli, the director of the United Nations Election Assistance Division, said that the security situation in Iraq was very bad but that the United Nations had conducted other elections in similarly turbulent places. She cited the vote in East Timor in 1999 as an example.
As for the threats posed in Iraq by people who are set on blocking a vote, she said, ''Every time you organize an election, you are gambling on the fact that people will do two things -- first, prefer ballots to bullets and secondly, the silent majority of people who are fed up with death and war will take over the groups that aren't.''
