The increase in the use of radiation after mastectomy has forced plastic surgeons to rethink their approach to reconstructive surgery of the breast and has generated a debate about which techniques yield the best (and worst) results.
Radiation also limits the choices available to women seeking reconstruction and raises the risk of complications and poor cosmetic results. Some women are left with no good reconstruction options.
''The increase in radiation has huge implications on breast reconstruction, and a lot of plastic surgeons have been debating that topic,'' said Dr. Neal S. Topham, chief of plastic surgery at Fox Chase Cancer Center in Philadelphia.
For women who want breast reconstruction, the radiation factor has made a difficult decision even more complex. They must choose when to have it and what type is most appropriate.
The first issue is the matter of timing -- whether to do the reconstruction immediately or to delay it until radiation therapy is completed, typically six to nine months after a mastectomy. Because radiation damages the skin and tissue of the reconstructed breast, most surgeons prefer women to delay reconstruction, said Dr. Scott L. Spear, chief of plastic surgery at Georgetown University Hospital.
''I tell patients if the reconstruction is going to be radiated, it will definitely change the appearance of their cosmetic outcome,'' Dr. Topham said. ''The degree to which it changes is unpredictable. It may be very mild or very severe.''
Because the change can be mild, some plastic surgeons believe that delaying reconstruction is not necessary. A few studies show low rates of complications with immediate reconstruction, but they represent a minority.
Research suggests that women fare better emotionally if reconstruction is performed at the time of the mastectomy, so the trend toward delayed reconstruction is viewed with some alarm. ''People took a long time to get away from delayed reconstruction, and now we're going back to it, which seems to be a big step backward,'' said Dr. Abram Recht, deputy chief of radiation oncology at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston.
If reconstruction is delayed, using an implant is out of the question for most women, Dr. Spear said.
The first step before inserting an implant is stretching the skin with a tissue expander, a process made more difficult when skin has been damaged by radiation. Research shows that when implants are inserted after radiation, there is a high rate of complications like poor healing, skin that breaks and implants that protrude or stiffen.
To avoid such problems, women can have a procedure known as a tissue flap. Using it, skin, fat and muscle from the abdomen, back or buttocks are taken to form a new breast. Experts tend to agree that having delayed reconstruction with a flap provides the best results.
Flap surgery, though, is more complicated and can take up to six hours. It requires surgery to excise the tissue to be used, a process that carries a small risk of weakening the muscles at that site. And recovery can take up to two months, leaving more scars than implant surgery.
Some women do not want to have additional surgery, and others, particularly thin women, may not be candidates for tissue flaps, because they do not have extra skin and tissue to donate to their breasts, unless they gain weight.
''My first gut feeling was that I want to keep everything else I have where it is,'' said Karen Hagopian, 28, of Brooklyn, a cancer patient who had immediate reconstructive surgery with an implant last year.
Ms. Hagopian's surgeon, Dr. Peter Cordeiro, chief of plastic and reconstructive surgery service at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, advocates using implants before radiation, though many other doctors shy away from the procedure.
But Ms. Hagopian has had no complications and is very satisfied with the results, she said, though she added a caveat. ''It's never going to be what it was,'' she said.
Many surgeons are avoiding implants altogether because of the risks. Studies have shown that inserting an implant before radiation comes with a high rate of complications: the scar tissue around the implant may contract, distorting it. The risk of contracture in women who have radiation is four times as great as it is for women without radiation, Dr. Topham said.
A study by Dr. Cordeiro in the March issue of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery demonstrates mixed results with implants. Of 687 women who underwent reconstruction with implants, 81 received radiation after the implants were inserted, Dr. Cordeiro said. Eleven percent of the radiated implants had to be removed because of complications compared with 6 percent of implants that were not radiated.
Thirty-eight percent of women who received radiation rated the cosmetic results as very good to excellent compared with 69 percent in the control group. Two-thirds of the patients receiving radiation, however, were satisfied, and 72 percent said they would choose the same form again.
Another study, to be published soon in The International Journal of Radiation Oncology, found low complication rates in women treated with immediate reconstruction -- either with flaps or implants -- followed by radiation.
Amalia Rigoni, 45, of Olympia Fields, Ill., decided to have an immediate flap reconstruction three years ago when she had a mastectomy. The radiation, she said, did not have any negative effect on the reconstructed breast. Because radiation tends to shrink the tissue, her surgeon at the University of Chicago had molded a slightly larger breast so that when it shrank, her breasts would appear symmetrical. ''When I look in the mirror, it is about 95 percent like the other one,'' Ms. Rigoni said. ''It bounces, it's soft. I couldn't be any happier with the reconstruction.''
Surgeons tend to have their preferences, but so do women. Some want their breasts restored as quickly as possible, and others do not mind waiting until their cancer treatment is completed. Some do not want to put implants in their bodies; others do not want to damage their bodies further or have more surgery.
''There are patients who prefer to have immediate reconstruction, but as long as that patient understands the risks, we'll do it,'' said Dr. Geoffrey Robb, chairman of the department of plastic surgery at the University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center.
