After years of administrative turnovers, chronic deficits, canceled performances and crippling labor disputes with the chorus and orchestra, the English National Opera was all set for a grand re-emergence. On Feb. 7 this self-described people's opera, whose very existence seemed threatened two years ago, was to commence a new era with a new Peter Sellars production of John Adams's ''Nixon in China.''
The production would signal the company's return to the London Coliseum, the city's largest theater, built in 1904, which had been closed for seven months to complete a four-year, $76 million renovation. And a promising new artistic director and chief executive, Seán Doran, who took charge last April, had brought a sense of stability to the reeling institution and had balanced the current season's budget.
Then, three weeks before the scheduled opening, the company announced that construction delays had forced a postponement of ''Nixon in China'' to last Saturday. Soon after came word that the opera's entire run was canceled, costing the company more than $513,000 in lost revenues, in addition to artists' fees. Mr. Doran pledged at least to open the doors to the public on Saturday with a reception and an inaugural concert.
But from outside the Coliseum on Friday morning, 32 hours before the opening, I could not believe it would be ready on time. Masons on scaffolding were patching the exterior terra cotta walls, maintenance men on cranes were washing the curved glass over a new balcony lounge, and painters and carpenters were carrying power tools and buckets of semigloss paint into the building.
Inside, workers and canvas dropcloths were everywhere. The components of unassembled sliding doors for new lounge areas were still wrapped in cardboard. Plumbers were hooking up sinks and ice machines in service bars.
Somehow, though, the army of laborers made the Coliseum presentable for Saturday night's ceremony. The reception and the performance -- a semistaged scene from ''Nixon in China'' -- went on as planned. And the refurbishment job is stunning.
What had been a dingy main entrance is now a gloriously restored foyer with polished marble and mosaics. A wide staircase that had been sealed off for decades has been reconnected to the main corridors. Patrons going to the inexpensive balcony seats no longer have to enter the building like shamefaced interlopers through a side entrance.
Frank Matcham, the architect who designed the Coliseum (as well as 82 other theaters, including the Hippodrome and the Palladium in London), had wanted the public to congregate in the spacious corridors of the Coliseum, originally a variety hall called the People's Palace of Entertainment and Art. But social protocols of the time dictated that the patrons of the pricey stalls not mingle with the public.
The Coliseum now boasts 40 percent more public space. The views of Trafalgar Square from the spacious lobby in the upper balcony are the best in the theater. The most tangible symbol of the restoration is outside: a new revolving globe of steel, based on Matcham's original, slowly spins atop the theater's tower with ''COLISEUM'' spelled out in lights.
Though the National Opera has a beautifully restored theater, uncertainty hangs over it. The first fully staged performance is now scheduled for Friday: a new production by Phyllida Lloyd of Wagner's ''Rhinegold,'' performed in English in accord with the company's mission to present opera in the language of its audience. This is to be the first installment of a complete ''Ring'' cycle, which is to culminate in 2005 with ''Twilight of the Gods.''
The debacle of the canceled ''Nixon in China'' will be hard to live down. Anyone who has ever had a kitchen remodeled knows that such projects almost always take three times as long as anticipated.
How could the company not have known months ago that a Feb. 7 opening looked dicey? The inauguration of Zankel Hall in New York was delayed by nine months, but Carnegie Hall officials announced the postponement a full year before the scheduled opening. As recently as mid-February, I was assured that the Saturday presentation of ''Nixon'' would definitely take place.
In an interview Mr. Doran said the company was at the mercy of builders who had issued absolute timetables. ''We set an ambitious deadline four years ago,'' he said. ''It was a colossal project, and there are no fingers to be pointed. Everything your eye sees in the theater we've done since June.'' The restoration came in on budget and only a few weeks late, he added.
The larger question facing the company concerns its artistic mission. Mr. Doran, born in Northern Ireland, a former conductor and the director since 2000 of the Perth International Arts Festival in Australia, remembers attending productions at the English National Opera as a graduate student in the 1980's, when it offered ''the best theater in town.'' He said he believed it should remain a national house, cultivating an ensemble of British and English-speaking artists committed to opera as an involving theatrical genre.
Presenting work in English remains ''absolutely the point of the company,'' he said. This means not only performing works in translation, he added, but also fostering a repertory of English-language works from Purcell to Britten, and commissioning living composers.
Performing opera in the language of the audience was once standard practice. A composer like Verdi expected that his works would be presented in translation outside Italy. This still-worthy practice has been undermined by the introduction of titling systems into almost every opera house. Even when an American company performs an English-language work, titles are typically employed to help the audience follow the text.
As Mr. Doran points out, there is nothing like the dramatic immediacy resulting from hearing singers perform in your own language, if only you can understand the words.
Though the theater has good sightlines from every level, with 2,364 seats it is a large space with patches of less-than-ideal acoustics. (The renovation did not include any acoustical adjustments.) Audiences have complained that they can not understand enough of the words. Mr. Doran gets heated letters from patrons every week demanding a titling system, something the company has resisted. But all options are on now the table, he said.
Veteran London critics assert that when the company, then called Sadler's Wells Opera, moved to the Coliseum in 1968 (the renaming occurred in 1974), singers were more adept at projecting English clearly. Today's artists, knowing that audiences have titles to rely on, have become increasingly careless about diction, as Saturday night's performance of the ''Nixon'' banquet scene made clear.
This scene recreates the state dinner that President and Mrs. Nixon attended in Beijing in 1972 on, coincidentally, Feb. 21, the same date as this performance.
Not officially for review, the performance was conducted by Paul Daniel, the company's outgoing music director, and semistaged by Mr. Sellars.
The diction of the singers varied markedly. One artist sang so that almost every word was clear, proving that it can be done if singers will care a little less about making pretty sounds and focus more on projecting text.
The company could become a training ground for the cultivation of this skill. For this to happen the right successor will have to be found for Mr. Daniel, who nearly left two years ago when the general director, Nicholas Payne, resigned (or was ousted, depending upon which news accounts you believed).
The English National Opera has made promises in recent months that have not been met. Still, the company has lots of promise, as well as a magnificently restored theater. But is it the right theater for its mission?
