Jason Giambi took his physical at Legends Field on Monday, and he eagerly reported that he weighed 228 pounds. Giambi, the Yankees' first baseman, said he had been amused at reports that he had lost 20 pounds over the winter.
''I didn't catch any viruses or anything,'' Giambi said. ''I only dropped four pounds. Actually, I just weighed myself and that's what it was, four pounds between last year and this year.''
Giambi's size took on larger significance than it would ordinarily, because of his role in the steroid scandal involving the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, or Balco.
Giambi said he was excited to be part of a lineup he compared to the 1927 Yankees. But in a morning session with reporters, he spent much of the time deflecting questions about his size and his appearance before a federal grand jury investigating the sale of steroids to elite athletes.
Giambi looked far less bulky than he did at times last season, when he belted 41 homers for the second season in a row. ''He's a big guy, and he's still big,'' Manager Joe Torre said after seeing Giambi for the first time since October. ''But I didn't think it was drastic. He just looked thinner to me.''
Giambi said he had given up fast food, including his beloved In-N-Out Burger, and had worked out diligently to recover from surgery on his left knee.
''My legs aren't as big because I had to rehab them so hard,'' Giambi said. ''My upper body is pretty much the same, strength-wise, with how I lifted. It was just cleaning it up and losing a little of that excess body fat that I had.''
In December, Giambi testified before a federal grand jury investigating Balco. Barry Bonds, Yankees outfielder Gary Sheffield and other players also testified. Earlier this month, Victor Conte, the founder of Balco, and three others were indicted on charges of illegally providing steroids to dozens of professional athletes. One of the other three men indicted was Greg Anderson, Bonds's personal trainer.
Asked on Monday if he had used performance-enhancing drugs, Giambi said: ''Are you talking about steroids? No.'' Giambi said he did not know Conte, but he would not explain why he was called to testify.
''We're not even really supposed to talk about anything that goes with it,'' Giambi said of the grand jury. ''Hopefully, everything's going to be fine. I'm not really worried about it. I'm just here to play baseball.''
Sheffield, who has been working out for weeks at the Yankees' minor league complex, also reported to Legends Field on Monday and was asked about Balco. Sheffield again offered to take a steroid test to prove that he was clean.
He volunteered to urinate into a cup and added: ''If you've got a needle or syringe, I'll give you blood. What do you want? There's been a lot of things hanging over me for 15 years, so what's this going to mean? Nothing.''
Referring to Giambi and Sheffield, Torre said: ''Neither of these guys have been accused of anything. You have to keep that in mind. We'll have to wait and see what else comes out of this.''
The Yankees have told Giambi that his personal trainer, Bob Alejo, could have access to the batting cage and the trainer's room this season, as he did last year. Alejo spent more time in the clubhouse as last season went on, with General Manager Brian Cashman granting him permission to be there. This season, Alejo will not have clubhouse access.
''They told me they'd like less of that, and that's fine with me,'' Giambi said.
Alejo was the strength and conditioning coach for the Oakland Athletics when Giambi played there. After Giambi signed with the Yankees in December 2001, he hired Alejo to work for him. Giambi said Alejo's background differentiates him from Anderson, Bonds's personal trainer.
''I don't think he's even in the same category,'' Giambi said of Alejo. ''Everyone forgets that Bobby worked in baseball with the A's for like nine years. He's been in the game.
''I just brought him over here to keep me healthy,'' Giambi said. ''I think the biggest thing he showed last year was, even with myself being injured, he kept me on the field and kept me playing.''
Giambi never went on the disabled list, but his injuries hampered him severely. He was uncomfortable putting weight on his back knee, making it hard to catch up to fastballs. He said he developed bad habits and started chasing pitches out of the strike zone, leading to a career-high 140 strikeouts and a career-low .250 batting average.
Giambi's mobility was so restricted last fall that he could not start at first base in Game 5 of the World Series. But after surgery in November, Giambi said he was ready for regular duty at first base. He made only 85 starts there last season.
''I'd like to play more, no doubt about it,'' Giambi said. ''I like being out on the field.''
If the Yankees sign first baseman Travis Lee, Giambi would shift to designated hitter on the days Lee plays in the field. For now, Torre is counting on Giambi to play first so he can keep Kenny Lofton or Bernie Williams as the regular designated hitter.
''For Lofton and Bernie to be in the lineup at the same time, that has to take place,'' Torre said. ''For me, Jason is the key for other decisions that have to be made.''
INSIDE PITCH
JON LIEBER cut short a bullpen session on Monday because of a sore groin. Lieber, coming off reconstructive elbow surgery, said that his arm felt great and that he doubted that the groin injury was serious. Manager JOE TORRE said Lieber would skip his next mound session. The Yankees do not have an experienced sixth starter, but they have five days off after their season-opening series against Tampa Bay in Japan. ''If he happens to fall behind, the way the season starts, it's not going to be a big liability,'' Torre said. . . . The Yankees will have their first full-squad workout on Tuesday.
BASEBALL
