LISTEN to the Oscar thank-you speeches on Sunday night, and one thing will be immediately apparent: moviemaking is a process requiring many hands and minds.
And while the studios setting those productions in motion are big businesses, most of the workers are provided by a galaxy of smaller ones.
The number of these small independent contractors has risen as some large Hollywood studios have closed costume, special effects and other departments. As a result, a filmmaker can obtain anything that a production might require at competitive prices. Though in an industry town like Hollywood, where relationships mean everything, not all contracts are necessarily the result of the best bid.
''It's an incestuous business riddled with conflicts of interest,'' David Brookwell, a producer of ''Heart of Summer,'' a $15 million production starring Hilary Duff, said only partly in jest during a recent visit to the set at Union Station in downtown Los Angeles, where a crew of 105 was at work.
The big player in this mix is New Line Cinema, the picture's distributor. It was not that long ago that New Line itself was a small business; now it is known as the company behind the ''Lord of the Rings'' and ''Austin Powers'' trilogies.
Here are some of the smaller pieces of the puzzle:
Ed White Sound
As a teenager in Philadelphia, Edward White, the company's owner, discovered a knack for building speakers and turning acoustic guitars into electric guitars. Mr. White was hired as the ''Heart of Summer'' production sound mixer, which means he and his two regular employees record dialogue when the film is being shot on location.
''We're just chasing dialogue,'' Mr. White said, as he peered into a small monitor that showed the setup for the next scene through the main camera, 20 feet away. ''Maybe we'll get some sound effects and it'll be gravy.''
On the side of Mr. White's console was a small printed legend: ''Who the heck wants to hear actors talk?'' The remark was attributed in the 1920's, the presound days, to Harry M. Warner, an early Hollywood mogul. ''Thank goodness he was wrong,'' Mr. White said. ''What the heck would I be doing?''
JMK Entertainment
Craft service companies (the term comes from the services to the crafts, i.e., actors, set construction workers, lighting workers) provide food on film sets, much of it cooked there, from early morning till the director wraps for the day -- often in the middle of the night.
Normally, the food offered by a craft service outfit is supplemented by a caterer that provides two hot meals on the set. (Under union rules, filming halts, usually for half an hour, while everyone sits down to eat.)
Working from two trailers and a 24-foot truck equipped with a kitchen, JMK's owner, Josh Kuhn, and his lead foreman, Derek Hurd, prepare and serve a stream of dishes and snacks -- omelets made to order, smoothies, espresso coffees, salmon with broccoli -- all free (the production company pays the tab).
Some celebrities are demanding. ''Usually, a star's agent will fax you, saying you have to have so-and-so,'' said Mr. Kuhn, who has been in the business for 12 years. ''We deal with all sorts of situations, from the pretentious star who wants a magnum of Crystal Champagne to a crew person who wants soup now. They want organic milk. They want to know where's the live-culture yogurt.''
Mr. Kuhn said he worked such long hours, from 5:30 a.m. to around 9 p.m., that he hires someone to do the shopping. ''You've got to get the food to the troops,'' he said.
Motion Picture Medical
There are about 200 medics -- a term that encompasses emergency medical technicians, paramedics and registered nurses -- who specialize in working on Hollywood sets, soundstages and locations. Five of them work for Christy Powers, a registered nurse, who started Motion Picture Medical in 1996. Typically, a production company will provide Ms. Powers with a script before filming begins ''to see what problems might arise,'' she said. If a lot of stunt work is contemplated, Ms. Powers will bring in extra nurses and have an ambulance standing by.
Although the ''Heart of Summer'' script presented no such concerns, there have been several injuries -- a few falls, an elbow stress fracture and two bloody noses -- one of them caused by a vigorously waved hand.
''It's been a wild set,'' said Ms. Powers, who worked on the set of ''Kill Bill'' for nine months and knows something about wildness. ''We have tired people working 16 hours a day, and that's when accidents happen.''
Lights Up! Industries
Lights Up! Industries specializes in balloon lights -- balloons containing large lamps that are suspended above a set or concert venue to cast a soft, evenly distributed light. The balloons, some filled with helium, others with air, are made from a flame-retardant fabric and cost $4,000 to $30,000 to build depending on size -- the largest is 16.5 feet in diameter and provides 16,000 watts -- and can cost up to $1,200 a day to rent.
They are especially appealing when filming in a sensitive environment like Union Station, which has 60-year-old floors that could be damaged by the heavy equipment usually associated with more conventional lighting systems.
Roger Herren, the company's general manager, called the balloon lights ''a very flexible tool.''
''It's a time saver, a money saver and a crew saver,'' he said.
Besides, Mr. Herren said, nobody ever frowns at a balloon.
Chick Flick Productions
Chick Flick Productions was founded in 1999 by Sara Risher, a film producer, as a small production arm of New Line Cinema, in much the same way that an imprint is part of a publishing house. Ms. Risher, who has an office at New Line in Los Angeles, is free to pursue productions on her own but must submit them to New Line, which has right of first refusal over whether it will finance or distribute the picture, or both. In Hollywood parlance, Ms. Rusher has a first-look deal with New Line.
Ms. Risher works with two full-time employees and then hires as needed for specific projects. Two years ago, New Line approached her about doing a teen music film, and she set about hiring a writer and, eventually, a director and other principal players. She also formed partnerships with two other production companies, Film Engine and Brookwell McNamara Entertainment, then formed a company, Heart of Summer L.L.C., to oversee the production and its finances.
Film Engine, a seven-employee shop that specializes in brokering loans (known as presales) based on sales of distribution rights, put up $2.5 million to get the film started and land Ms. Duff. Brookwell McNamara is itself a partnership between Mr. Brookwell and the film's director, Sean McNamara.
Ultimately, New Line decided to distribute ''Heart of Summer'' only in North America. New Line also gave the producers a $5 million promissory note redeemable upon delivery of the completed movie. (In Hollywood, that's known as a negative pickup.)
''I had to convince New Line to buy this, but they only wanted domestic and Canada,'' Ms. Risher said. ''It's much easier these days to sell a $100 million picture than it is to sell a $15 million Hilary Duff movie. I couldn't get all the financing through a studio, so I had to put pieces together. I spent two years doing that. Somehow, it all shows up on the first day of shooting. It's amazing.''
LINKS IN THE CHAIN
