Now that the New Jersey Nets may be headed to Brooklyn, this question inevitably arises: What will their nickname be?
People close to Bruce C. Ratner, the developer who reached an agreement yesterday to buy the team, have said that he has not focused on the matter of a name. And should he succeed in moving the team to Brooklyn, the borough-centric owner would most likely choose a moniker more fitting of the team's new home. In fact, plenty of suggestions were already being offered yesterday.
Granted, the Fuhgeddaboudits is an awkward name for a ball club. For one thing, it communicates a sighing resignation to inevitable failure. But people in Brooklyn yesterday were resolute in their dismissal of the team's current name. To them, keeping it would be like adopting a kitten and keeping the name used by the animal shelter.
''What is a Net, anyway?'' Hamish Hamilton, 19, a student, said.
A Net, in the view of some Brooklyn residents, would simply not do, given the city's illustrious sports history. Would you call a baseball team the Bats? New York players have always worn strong names with local references, like Knickerbocker, Globetrotter and Liberty. And, of course, Dodger, which was said to stem from the characterization of Brooklynites as trolley dodgers.
''How about the Iconoclasts?'' said Mike Menser, a philosophy professor at Brooklyn College, who was smoking a cigarette and carrying on two conversations at once.
Menser explained that his suggestion was meant to refer to the attempted overthrow of commonly held perceptions of Brooklyn as secondary to the island to the northwest.
''I think Brooklyn is generating more antipathy to Manhattan,'' he said. ''We need to increase the rivalry.''
Some people, like Gunnar Dessources, 24, a graduate student, were not even ready to accept the idea of moving the team, much less of contemplating a name.
''The Brooklyn Bridges,'' he said, adding a phrase that rendered impossible the publication of his complete remarks but adequately conveyed his distaste for the whole matter.
It was that first half of the name that mattered to Marty Markowitz, the relentlessly cheery and provincial borough president.
''The name Brooklyn, as long as that's in it, that's all I care about,'' Markowitz said, adding that he looks forward to a game pitting ''the Brooklyn Whatever-They're-Calleds against the Manhattan Knicks.''
