The housing market may not be done driving the economy.
The Commerce Department said yesterday that construction began on a larger-than-expected number of homes in December, capping the best year for new housing in a quarter of a century and leading some industry analysts to raise their housing forecasts for 2004.
''Month after month, we've expected total housing starts to moderate a bit, but it doesn't seem to have happened,'' said Orawin T. Velz, a senior economist at Fannie Mae, the nation's largest buyer of home mortgages. ''With this rate in December, the decline in 2004 may not be much at all.''
That bodes well for an economy that has been relying on the building, buying and refinancing of homes even as companies cut workers and production.
In all of 2003, builders broke ground on 1.85 million homes, an 8.4 percent increase over 2002 and the best year for home building since 1978. That year, total housing starts, which include both single-family and multifamily homes, were 2.02 million.
Housing starts in December reached an annual rate of 2.09 million, the fastest rate since the 2.26 million annual pace in February 1984. December's new-construction figure represents an increase of 1.7 percent over November's figure and a rise of 15 percent over that for December 2002.
Economists polled by Bloomberg News had predicted that housing starts would fall 5.8 percent to an annual rate of 1.9 million in December from November. Economists said that while housing numbers could be erratic and were often revised, the data released yesterday may mean that 2004 will be a stronger year than had been expected, and may seem strong even compared with the last three years of extraordinary refinancing and home-buying activity.
''Combined with the unexpectedly low mortgage rates, this suggests that we may have been too conservative in our assessment of 2004,'' said Michael Carliner, an economist with the National Association of Home Builders in Washington. On Monday, the association had forecast that single-family housing starts would drop about 3 percent in 2004, to 1.45 million homes.
In fact, the annual rate of new construction of single-family homes fell a modest 0.6 percent from November to December.
''The report is still consistent with a very slight slowing in housing,'' said David Lereah, chief economist of the National Association of Realtors in Washington. But single-family housing starts for the year were at their highest since 1977. Multifamily housing starts were up for both the month and the year.
In addition, applications for building permits rose 3.3 percent in December, to an annual rate of 1.92 million, from 1.86 million in November, suggesting that builders will be busy meeting demand through at least January and February, economists said.
Mr. Carliner added that other businesses would benefit as well. ''It's going to mean additional demand for mortgages, real estate services, furniture and all types of things,'' he said.
And housing with permits requested before December could still be awaiting construction. Permits were requested for 1.86 million homes last year, 6.3 percent more than in 2002.
More important, analysts said, is that home buyers are seeing the lowest interest rates on home loans since June, when rates reached a 41-year low, according to HSH Associates, a mortgage research concern in Pompton Plains, N.J. The average rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage, the industry benchmark, is now 5.74 percent, HSH said. Just a month ago, the rate exceeded 6 percent.
In addition, more and more analysts are predicting that slow-growing employment numbers and other economic data will persuade the Federal Reserve to keep its key short-term rate at 1 percent, not only when it meets next week but also for most of the year and even into 2005.
''I think increasingly it looks like 2004 could be better than 2003,'' Mr. Carliner said. ''We certainly didn't expect to have mortgages available at 5.7 percent in January.''
Many people do seem to still be buying. The Mortgage Bankers Association said yesterday that its index of purchases rose 12.5 percent from the previous week.
Investors also seemed to believe that yesterday's housing numbers would mean better results for this year. The Standard &amp; Poor's supercomposite thrifts and mortgage finance index closed up 2.6 percent yesterday.
But some economists worried that a substantial part of the home building is speculative and could create an excess of homes, eventually leading to a decline in housing prices.
''I look at this rate of building, and to me it's just crazy,'' said Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, a Washington research group. ''Homes are being built in a way that is inconsistent with any plausible growth in demand.''
Some economists found it troubling that the increase in housing starts last month was largely a result of the rise in construction starts of multifamily homes while starts of single-family homes declined, albeit slightly. In general, apartment vacancies are high and rent prices are low, they said, so why build potential rental units?
Mr. Carliner of the National Association of Home Builders said the increase seemed to be in areas where rental units would most be needed. For instance, he noted that much of the growth in multifamily housing was in the Northeast, presumably in metropolitan areas, where demand remains strong.
