Contrary to popular belief, Brooklyn did not die when a rich man named Walter O'Malley took away the Dodgers after the 1957 baseball season.
Brooklyn is still there. From the edge of the South Street Seaport in Manhattan, gazing east, you can see a silhouette of towers, bridges, piers and steeples that would take your breath away if they suddenly loomed ahead of you on one of those endless flat American highways.
Brooklyn never went away, even when Reese and Furillo did. Brooklyn stayed, organically changing, sometimes through violence and poverty but always with the throb of life.
Nearly half a century later, Brooklyn may once again have a major league team. Last evening, a man named Bruce Ratner agreed to pay $300 million for the New Jersey Nets with the hope of moving them to Brooklyn in a few years.
This is no endorsement of Ratner or the subsidies he will surely seek to put up an arena in iffy downtown Brooklyn. Deferring tax dollars from the needy is a serious issue, not to be diluted by mawkish sentimentality from old Dodgers fans who have been having a temper tantrum since 1957.
But maybe, just maybe, Brooklyn will have a home team that will be worthy of this diverse and often beautiful borough. If the Nets make their move while Kenyon Martin, Richard Jefferson and Jason Kidd can still bounce around, the borough may have a latter-day imitator of the Boys of Summer, and that is no small thing.
Brooklyn has needed a team and the Nets have needed a home. They have roamed the earth from New Jersey to suburban Long Island and back to New Jersey, a team aching for a buzz.
Brooklyn retained the gloomy mystique of the borough that nurtured and lost Sandy Koufax; the Nets bear the dismal legend of a franchise that sent away Julius Erving.
The old Dodgers played in front of empty seats at Ebbets Field while the Nets have played in front of empty seats in the swamplands. The wisdom was that the Dodgers needed parking lots. Now the wisdom is that the Nets need a subway line. It has been insulting for New Jersey to place an urban sport beyond the reach of rail lines, almost as if it were done on purpose.
Downtown Brooklyn would definitely feel like the center of the universe to this migrant franchise. A subway stop or two away are Hasidic Jews and Jehovah's Witnesses, African-Americans and Hispanics, perhaps looking past each other but keeping the land fertile.
Now they have been followed by new waves of people with disposable income who have rehabbed old apartments and moved back into neighborhoods where you can graze for an ethnic meal and hear people speaking many languages.
A few years ago, I visited the public library in Bay Ridge to give a little talk. Half the signs in the neighborhood were in Arabic -- doctors' signs, lawyers' signs -- which is the way this city works, all five boroughs of it, always changing.
At the library, people remembered going to grade school with Duke Snider's child or shopping with Joan Hodges (who still lives in Brooklyn).
It being a warm evening in late spring, my first words were, ''Don't you feel there should be a ballgame tonight?'' Dozens of people of a certain age applauded my cheap, sentimental trick. The cheers told me Brooklyn lived.
Brooklyn is known as the borough of churches because of all the handsome steeples you can see from the B.Q.E. or the Prospect or the Gowanus. Now there are mosques and temples. I always think of Brooklyn as a holy borough, the way Iranians or Iraqis honor certain ancient spiritual sites.
What Brooklyn lacked was not energetic humanity but tangible signs of identity. The worst thing that ever happened to Brooklyn was being joined to the four other boroughs in 1898, thereby ensuring a second-rate status. Losing the Dodgers was only the second-worst thing.
Three years ago, the Wilpon family put a minor league baseball team out in Coney Island, courtesy of a great number of city dollars, thanks to Rudy Giuliani, the ball fan, who also put one in Staten Island for a Yankees farm team. I would not claim that the investment of city money was worth it, but the handsome new place in Coney Island does provide a place for Brooklynites and visitors to feel at home, to smell the sea breeze, to enjoy the bright lights after sundown.
Brooklyn draws people from all over. Watching a Saturday morning pickup soccer game in Brighton Beach a few years ago, I asked a Russian guy what he did for a living. ''Just say I am in business,'' he said with a wink.
My wife and I love the Arab restaurants on Atlantic Avenue. I used to cover meetings at the Lubavitcher Center in Crown Heights, emerge on the sidewalk at 2 in the morning and talk to people from Brussels, Johannesburg, Buenos Aires.
Brooklyn did not die. Like America itself, it takes people in. Now it may be home to the wandering Nets. In the holy borough, there is healing to be done.
Sports of The Times
