As if falling debris, unstable scaffolding and suspicious packages were not enough, New Yorkers now have something else to worry about: that the ubiquitous plates covering holes on streets and sidewalks around the city might just be electrified.
Six days after the death of Jodie S. Lane, the woman killed when she stepped on an electrified metal plate while walking her two dogs in the East Village, answers are few and questions remain as tangled as the millions of wires running under the city's streets.
On Tuesday, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg criticized Consolidated Edison for the death, adding to recent finger-pointing between city officials and the utility. ''It's just unacceptable that somebody can walk down the street and get electrocuted,'' the mayor said, dismissing Con Ed's explanation that the wires under the plate were probably corroded by street salt.
''We have salt on the road every winter,'' the mayor said while visiting the firehouse of Engine 282/Ladder 148 in Borough Park, Brooklyn. ''We've got to make sure that doesn't happen again.''
Chris Olert, a spokesman for Con Ed, said the company was investigating the electrocution, and had inspected more than 620 manholes and utility boxes since Saturday. But he added that with 90,000 miles of cable and more than 250,000 manholes and utility boxes in the New York area, it is impossible to completely eliminate such problems.
Mr. Olert said Con Ed had monitoring stations for power surges in every borough, but such stations would not have alerted the utility to the type of threat -- a corroded, frayed wire -- that electrified the plate Ms. Lane stepped on.
The density of the pipes, subway tunnels and gas lines that crowd the space beneath the city streets limits Con Ed's ability to lay the electric wires any deeper than they already are, Mr. Olert said. He noted, however, that Con Ed runs electrical wires where the city says it can.
In 2002, the company began using wires with thicker insulation, which have a greater resistance to corrosion. But Mr. Olert said that only about 928 miles of the total wiring under the city's streets had that type of insulation.
Whatever the potential for a repeat accident, New Yorkers are concerned. Calls to 311 about potential live wires have increased since Ms. Lane's death last Friday, said Jordan Barowitz, a spokesman for the mayor.
One such caller, Michael Zorek, 43, of the Upper West Side, said he contacted the city hot line on Sunday around midnight after noticing that his dog, Scooter, frantically darted past a section of sidewalk on West 86th Street near the corner of Columbus and Amsterdam.
Other neighborhood dog owners witnessed similarly erratic behavior from their pets at the same spot, he said. The next morning around 10:30 a.m., a Con Ed truck was parked at the location and the repairman explained that there indeed had been an underground short-circuit, Mr. Zorek said. ''Actually, I was impressed with Con Ed's response time,'' Mr. Zorek said. ''Then again, I have a 22-month-old son who falls down a lot, so I shudder to think what could have happened.''
Mr. Bloomberg has also faced tough questions about the incident. While visiting the Eileen Dugan Senior Citizen Center in Brooklyn, he was confronted by Celia Maniero Cacace, 68, who said that in the last two years she had repeatedly complained to Con Ed about live wires in her neighborhood, Carroll Gardens, Brooklyn.
''Salt corrodes wires, this is not some new revelation,'' she said.
Tom Cocola, spokesman for the New York City Department of Transportation, the agency ultimately in charge of street safety, said that the department's chief engineer is waiting for the results from Con Ed's investigation.
The department has a special highway quality assurance group with 108 workers responsible for inspecting sites whenever new cables or wires are laid, Mr. Cocola said. But this group, he explained, oversees ground-breaking, not the upkeep of old and already-installed lines.
Still unclear is what can or will be done to prevent the kind of accident that killed Ms. Lane last week.
''There have to be some steps to take,'' said Dr. Barry A. Farber, Ms. Lane's research adviser at Columbia University Teachers College, where Ms. Lane was a doctoral student in clinical psychology.
Ms. Lane, 30, was soon to complete a book for children who suffered from obsessive compulsive disorder, Dr. Farber said.
Christine Fernandez, 35, a close friend and classmate of Ms. Lane, said she was appalled at Con Ed's handling of the problem. ''I know it's a huge job, but they should not wait for an accident to respond,'' she said.
In a statement through a friend, Ms. Lane's family said that they would not comment on the questions raised by the accident, but they said that she loved New York City, where she lived for the last 10 years.
''She called it 'the city,''' the statement said, ''as though there was none other on the globe.''
Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  An article on Thursday about the possible electrical dangers posed by metal plates on city streets and sidewalks misstated the location of an underground short circuit repaired by Con Edison on the Upper West Side. It was on West 86th Street, between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues; those avenues do not intersect.
