The steely blue ''Gephardt President'' signs were still hanging in the campaign office here, and staff members were still consoling heartbroken volunteers. But by Wednesday afternoon, just 24 hours after Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri dropped out of the presidential race, the battle for his home state had begun.
With Missouri's Feb. 3 primary suddenly up for grabs, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark had already called Gov. Bob Holden to survey the political landscape. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts had decided to send aides here, and his media consultants had telephoned a local television station to check out rates for political advertisements.
At the Democratic Party headquarters, the telephones would not stop ringing. May Scheve, the party chairwoman who has supported Mr. Gephardt for years, was still struggling to peel the ''Gephardt President'' sticker from the back of her black Ford minivan. But she knew she had little time to mourn.
Until this week, none of Mr. Gephardt's Democratic rivals had bothered to seriously cultivate this state. But with the largest delegate count of any of the seven states voting on Feb. 3, Missouri has become one of the hottest stops in the political calendar.
''My phone has been ringing off the hook,'' said Ms. Scheve, who had endorsed Mr. Gephardt like most of the other prominent Democrats in this state. ''People are asking, 'What do we do now? Who are we supporting?' I'm like, 'I have no idea.' ''
''We were all in lock step behind Dick Gephardt, but it's a new day now,'' she said. ''Missouri is an open playing field for the candidates out there. It's a plum for the picking.''
Democrats say that little would carry more weight with voters here than an endorsement from Mr. Gephardt, who has dominated local politics here for nearly three decades.
He is closely associated with nearly every powerful politician here. Mr. Holden once worked as an aide in his Congressional office. Claire McCaskill, the state auditor, supported both of his presidential bids. Ms. Scheve, the party chairwoman, was one of his employees during his first presidential campaign in 1988.
Mr. Gephardt, who withdrew from the race on Tuesday after his defeat in the Iowa caucuses, has received calls from all of the presidential contenders, including a second call from Mr. Kerry on Wednesday. But his advisers declined to say which candidates had requested endorsements.
''He's getting called and asked, but he's not making an endorsement in the foreseeable future, certainly not before New Hampshire,'' said Erik Smith, a spokesman for Mr. Gephardt.
In the meantime, candidates are starting to lay the groundwork.
Steve Mills, the local sales manager for KTVI, the local Fox affiliate here, said that Mr. Kerry's media consultants contacted the television station Tuesday, requesting information about buying advertisements. He said Howard Dean contacted the station last week.
''We haven't got any orders yet, but we're really expecting them to come down pretty heavy here soon,'' Mr. Mills said.
In an interview with a group of television stations in eight states on Wednesday, Dr. Dean said he expected to be campaigning in Missouri soon.
Matt Bennett, a spokesman for General Clark, said in a telephone interview from New Hampshire, ''It would be campaign malpractice not to be looking at Missouri right now.''
''It's basically a free-for-all,'' he said. ''We're talking to a lot of leaders in the Democratic Party in Missouri. We've reached out to a wide variety of people to assess the situation and see whether it's worth putting in substantial resources.''
David Ginsberg, a spokesman for Mr. Edwards, said his campaign was also starting to assess its options here. ''Up until now, Missouri was not a state that was in play,'' he said. ''We're just beginning to look at it.''
Meanwhile, Dyan Ortbal-Avalos, the volunteer coordinator for Howard Dean here, has been reaching out to local politicians over the past two days. ''We're calling them and trying to bring them over to our side,'' Ms. Ortbal-Avalos said.
And Stephanie Cutter, a spokeswoman for Mr. Kerry, said that he had decided to send staff members to this state, though she declined to say how many and when they would arrive.
''John Kerry will compete in Missouri and will work hard to win as many votes as possible,'' Ms. Cutter said. ''We're in the process of moving staff to the state as soon as possible.''
Complicating matters is the fact that Mr. Gephardt's name will still be on the ballot on Feb. 3, leaving the possibility that some of his supporters will still vote for him out of loyalty.
Mr. Gephardt tried to discourage that idea this week, saying voters should choose someone who was actually going to be in the running. ''I would hope they wouldn't,'' he said. ''Make their vote count.''
At the campaign office on Wednesday, Jason Norton, the Missouri state director for the Gephardt campaign, said he and the staff here were still considering their options.
''All the candidates have strong points, and the passion to defeat George Bush is still there,'' Mr. Norton said. ''We just have to pick the best vehicle to do so.''
Then he thought about Mr. Gephardt, his boss for the last 11 years, and reconsidered his words. ''We just have to pick the next best vehicle,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MISSOURI
