A day after he reportedly agreed to become the head coach of the Oakland Raiders, Sean Payton received a contract extension Wednesday to stay on as the Dallas Cowboys' assistant head coach.
What happened? Not much, the Raiders said. In fact, Oakland team officials phoned Dallas-area newspapers to find out who was saying the Raiders and Payton had reached an agreement. ESPN had also reported that Payton was headed to Oakland and was set to sign a four-year deal.
Al Davis, the Raiders' owner, talked to Bay Area reporters on Wednesday afternoon.
''There has not been a decision yet who the new coach will be,'' Davis said. ''I don't know how these things take off and run, but they do.''
Davis spoke before the Cowboys announced on their Web site that Payton was staying.
''I don't think Sean Payton turned down the job because Sean Payton was never offered the job,'' Davis said. ''Sean Payton has a lot of good credentials, but I don't know if that's the direction we're going.''
Payton had two interviews with Davis and left on Tuesday night after the last round of meetings. None of the other candidates who talked with Davis -- the Cowboys' offensive coordinator, Maurice Carthon; Kansas City's offensive coordinator, Al Saunders; the former San Francisco offensive coordinator Greg Knapp; and the former Minnesota coach Dennis Green -- had a second interview.
The Raiders are looking for a replacement for Bill Callahan, who was fired earlier this month after a 17-18 record over two seasons. He has since been hired as the head coach at the University of Nebraska.
Payton, 40, was the offensive coordinator for the Giants for four years under Jim Fassel, who stripped him of his play-calling duties during the 2002 season. Payton joined Bill Parcells's staff in Dallas this season.
Parcells also retained another key member of his coaching staff. He had gotten the defensive coordinator Mike Zimmer to stay after he received more money and an extension to remain in Dallas.
''I'm really excited about moving forward with the Dallas Cowboys and continuing the job we started a year ago,'' Payton said on the Cowboys' Web site. ''In regards to Oakland, I was certainly flattered and fortunate to interview with them and wish them the best.''
PRO FOOTBALL
