Councilman Allan W. Jennings Jr., who has been fighting sexual harassment and misconduct charges brought against him by two of his former aides, was removed from a lucrative committee post yesterday in a move that City Council leaders said was prompted only by his poor leadership skills.
The Council voted nearly unanimously, 47 to 0, to replace Mr. Jennings as the chairman of the Civil Service and Labor Committee, a position that pays an annual stipend of $10,000. Mr. Jennings, a Democrat from Queens, and two other council members abstained from voting. It was the first time in 10 years that a member has been removed from a committee chairmanship, Council aides said.
The Council speaker, Gifford Miller, a Democrat who is widely expected to run against Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg in 2005, also increased the total amount of stipends for council members in charge of committees -- payments known informally as ''lulus'' -- over last year, when Mr. Miller proclaimed that he would reduce spending on them.
Council leaders said Mr. Jennings's removal was unrelated to the sexual harassment and misconduct charges filed against him last month with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Speaker Miller has hired a private arbitration company to investigate the charges, and the city's Department of Investigation is looking into the matter.
In ousting Mr. Jennings, council members cited his failure to hold monthly meetings, noting that he called only 11 of the 20 sessions required under Council rules during the previous two-year term. They also said that he failed to show up at a November hearing, after keeping people waiting for several hours, and was often rude and imperious to council members and staff.
''It was a collective decision of the Council based only on his performance as chairman,'' said Councilman Leroy Comrie, chairman of the Rules, Privileges and Elections Committee, which assigned all the leadership posts yesterday. ''There was no real debate. There was pretty much a consensus of disappointment.''
Nearly all 51 council members received a leadership position on a committee or subcommittee. The jobs are considered valuable perks since they typically come with a stipend that supplements a council member's annual salary of about $90,000. It is so rare for council members to lose their committee postings that the last time it happened was in 1994, when Councilwoman Ronnie M. Eldridge was removed as chairwoman of the Contracts Committee after voting against the budget.
Mr. Miller did not increase his $29,500 speaker stipend, but yesterday he increased the total amount doled out to his members. By creating a new subcommittee and turning five former subcommittees into full committees -- more than doubling the chairmen's salaries -- Mr. Miller awarded $490,500 in stipends, a 7 percent increase over last year, and a 25.6 percent increase since 1998, when there were far fewer committees for members to sit on.
Mayor Bloomberg has increased city spending but trimmed his office's budget by 37 percent since 2002. ''It is pretty out of touch for the Council to increase their bonuses during such tough fiscal times,'' said Edward Skyler, the mayor's press secretary, returning an accusation frequently made against his boss.
Mr. Jennings was replaced in his committee chairmanship by Councilman Joseph P. Addabbo Jr., a fellow Queens Democrat. Mr. Jennings, who will remain on the committee, shook Mr. Addabbo's hand after the vote and wished him well.
Mr. Jennings did not speak at the Council meeting, but suggested afterward to reporters that he was being punished for political reasons. He has been at odds with the Queens County Democratic Party, and won re-election last November after party leaders fielded a candidate against him.
''It's politics, it's pure politics,'' said Mr. Jennings, adding that he did not oppose the action out of respect for the other council members.
He defended his committee record, saying that council staff members stopped helping him after he voted against the property tax increase last year.
He said he was repeatedly told there was no room for him to hold hearings and that a lawyer assigned to his committee was tied up with other business. He did not show up at the November hearing, he said, because of a personal emergency.
Forrest R. Taylor, Speaker Miller's chief of staff, declined to respond specifically to Mr. Jennings, but said other committee heads have ''had no problems working with staff, getting the things that they need to perform their duties.''
Michael H. Reich, a spokesman for the Queens County Democratic Party, said that while party leaders had considered Mr. Jennings an embarrassment, they had not lobbied for his removal as committee chairman. ''My question is, when is Allan Jennings going to grow up and take responsibility for his own actions?''
Mr. Jennings was stripped of a committee assignment last year after he voted against the property tax increase, prompting him to liken his treatment to that of Jesus.
He also attracted attention last year after publishing a letter about racial harmony in the Chinese-language press, in which he professed his love for a dancer from China.
Two former aides have accused him of making suggestive comments, and of using them to clean his house during work hours, among other things.
Mr. Jennings has denied any wrongdoing, and said yesterday that other council members knew he was innocent.
