Marcus Dixon had it all. A 3.96 grade-point average, a football scholarship to Vanderbilt University and the adoration of many teachers and students at Pepperell High School in Rome, a largely white community in the northwest corner of the state. In a place where racial matters still provoke strong emotions, it was no small thing that Mr. Dixon, who is black, was being reared by a white family.
These days the former star of the Pepperell Dragons is serving a minimum 10-year sentence for having sex with a fellow student last February. Mr. Dixon, then one course shy of graduation, was 18. The girl, who sat in front of him in a class, was three months short of her 16th birthday. In the trial, Mr. Dixon's accuser, who is white, said she had been raped. The defense said the girl had willingly engaged in intercourse.
''I never thought I would get 10 years for having consensual sex with a classmate,'' Mr. Dixon said, in a telephone interview on Wednesday from prison. ''I thought I was going to get convicted of statutory rape and go home that day.''
Mr. Dixon's lawyers argued an appeal on Wednesday before the Georgia Supreme Court, in which they presented Mr. Dixon's prosecution as faulty and his punishment as unusually cruel. Under state law, they argued, Mr. Dixon should have been sentenced under the lesser charge of statutory rape, which carries a maximum one-year sentence.
''This man should be pursuing his education instead of sitting in jail,'' said his lawyer, David Balser.
Since his trial last March, Mr. Dixon's plight has drawn growing attention from the news media, from opponents of mandatory sentencing and from civil rights advocates who see Mr. Dixon as a victim of Old South-style injustice. Mr. Balser, a commercial litigator with one of the city's biggest law firms, donated his services after reading a newspaper account of the trial. So, too, did a prominent public relations company that does work for the law firm.
On the eve of Wednesday's hearing, nearly 100 people gathered outside the state Supreme Court here, holding candles and singing, ''We Shall Overcome.'' Speaking to the crowd, Dr. Joseph Lowery, a founder of the Southern Christian Leadership Council, did not mince words.
''If the young lady was black and Marcus Dixon was white, I don't think we would be here,'' he said, his voice breaking with emotion.
The authorities in Floyd County say they were simply doing their jobs and following state law.
''We believe her story, we believe she was raped,'' said District Attorney Leigh E. Patterson. Mr. Dixon, she said, had been reprimanded twice before for inappropriate sexual behavior -- once, for exposing himself in class and once for putting his hands down the pants of a female student. In both cases, Mr. Dixon said, he was goofing around.
''This is not about race,'' Ms. Patterson said. ''This is about a sexual predator.''
Nearly a year after the two students' encounter at the high school, most details remain in dispute. The girl, who worked as a part-time custodian, said Mr. Dixon attacked her as she cleaned an empty classroom trailer. According to the girl's testimony, Mr. Dixon restrained her, bruising her arms and cutting her lip. The student, a sophomore, told investigators she had been a virgin.
In the trial, defense lawyers presented three classmates who said they had seen the bruises days before the reported attack. The defense described the cut lip as a case of chapped lips, and although a medical examination confirmed vaginal bruises, both sides used the findings to bolster their arguments. Prosecutors said it showed Mr. Dixon had injured the girl, and the defense said such injuries were consistent with someone having sex for the first time.
In the interview, Mr. Dixon said the girl had initiated the encounter.
''I said we should go to my house, that there was no one there,'' he said, ''but she said she was afraid someone would see us leaving together.'' ''She said that her daddy was a racist and that he would kill both of us if he knew she was with a black man.''
Although a jury acquitted Mr. Dixon of rape, sexual battery, aggravated assault and false imprisonment, they found him guilty of statutory rape, a misdemeanor, and because of the girl's injuries, the more serious charge of aggravated child molestation. Bound by Georgia's sentencing laws, the judge gave Mr. Dixon the minimum 10 years. After learning of the sentence, five of the jurors said they would not have voted to convict Mr. Dixon if they had known he would spend so much time in prison.
Georgia's legislators toughened sentencing guidelines in 1995, when they categorized child molestation as one of the ''seven deadly sins.'' Since Mr. Dixon's conviction, many of those who voted for the more stringent codes have said they did not realize aggravated child molestation could be applied to consensual sex among teenagers.
Until his brush with the courts, Mr. Dixon's was a classic tale of triumph over adversity. When the couple rearing him, Kenneth and Peri Jones, first met 9-year-old Marcus, his mother was in jail, his father had vanished and the boy was being reared by his grandmother. Mr. Jones, the boy's Little League coach, said he was taken with his performance on the field and his zeal for a better life. After spending a summer at the Jones home and becoming fast friends with their own son, the boy asked if he could move in.
''With his grandmother's blessing, he became family,'' said Mr. Jones, 45, a maintenance manager at Pepperell High. ''He never gave us a lick of trouble.'' The decision to become the boy's legal guardian, however, drove a wedge in the Jones family. Mr. Jones's mother moved out of the house, and he stopped speaking to a brother who refused to accept the boy.
The Joneses, who spent their savings on Mr. Dixon's defense, say they have no regrets. Ms. Jones, an elementary school teacher, said Mr. Dixon had always made them proud. ''Marcus would never hurt a fly,'' she said. ''He may have committed a sin. But he never committed a crime.''
