The administrator of NASA said Wednesday that the Bush administration would request a 5.6 percent budget increase for his agency for the fiscal year that begins in October, rising to $16.2 billion from $15.4 billion.
The administrator, Sean O'Keefe, said the space agency's budget would continue to rise -- by 4.8 percent in the 2006 fiscal year and 4.7 percent in 2007, with a total increase of $11 billion by 2008 -- to help it get started on the Moon and Mars missions laid out last week by President Bush. The numbers assume that Congress will eventually approve the $15.4 billion for the fiscal year that began in October 2003.
Before the new directive, Mr. O'Keefe said, the plan had been for a flat $15.4 billion budget, and the agency had been told to ''take that number and get fond of it.''
At a breakfast meeting with reporters, Mr. O'Keefe said the agency would realize $6 billion more by scrapping the orbital space plane, a craft that was supposed to replace the space shuttle, and diverting money from other NASA programs.
Another craft being developed, the reusable X-37 cargo vehicle, will continue at least to the test-flight phase, in which it will be dropped from an airplane, he said. The X-37, a six-ton winged vehicle that is 27.5 feet long, was to have been sent into orbit in 2003 but has faced a variety of obstacles. One of its goals is to test new heat-shielding materials.
Mr. O'Keefe would not elaborate on details of the new objectives, saying that to do so would cut off some areas of thinking. Since the loss of the shuttle Columbia last Feb. 1, he said, NASA has learned to question every assumption and not to cut off areas of discussion.
Mr. O'Keefe said the changes his agency had been forced to confront since the accident would be helpful as it turned to designing a new spaceship to carry astronauts. ''In many ways we're probably in a better position right now than we might have been otherwise,'' he said. ''Make no mistake, the accident really, really shook the foundation of this agency. It forced us to think about these absolutes, things that we take as fact.''
The seven Columbia astronauts were lost because foam insulation shedding from the external tank on liftoff punched a hole in the orbiter's wing, something that NASA engineers had assumed was not possible.
''Not a single day goes by when we don't remind ourselves precisely what the price is for having missed it, for having done it wrong,'' he said. ''There's a lot more open-minded environment now.''
As part of the post-Columbia overhaul, he said, a team of mission managers from the shuttle program is in Pasadena, Calif., to observe counterparts at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory as NASA's second Mars rover prepares to land on Saturday.
The laboratory's controllers have made changes in the plan for deploying the parachute, firing the retrorockets and inflating the air bags, based on lessons learned in the recent landing of the first rover, he said, and the shuttle mission managers were there to learn about making decisions based on new information acquired during missions.
Later on Wednesday, Richard O. Covey, a co-chairman of a NASA panel that seeks to measure the agency's progress on post-Columbia changes said it was expanding its mission, to review how the International Space Station could be used as a lifeboat if a shuttle were damaged on liftoff.
Mr. Covey, a former astronaut, said that because NASA had talked about using the station as a ''safe haven'' for astronauts if a damaged shuttle could not be repaired in orbit, his panel would evaluate NASA's preparations to do so.
