UNTIL now, basketball in Brooklyn mostly meant schoolyard courts or the high school gyms where teenagers learned to shoot and pass, to dunk and defend. You could dream about playing for the Knicks at the Garden, but if you had big-time talent, you had to go away to a college out there in the sticks where you knew you would feel like a stranger.
Even if you went to a college close by, like St. John's over in Queens or Fordham up in the Bronx, you sometimes felt like a stranger.
Stephon Marbury, the Knicks' sudden savior out of Abraham Lincoln High School in Coney Island, had to go to Georgia Tech before his earlier N.B.A. existence in Minnesota, New Jersey and Phoenix.
Lenny Wilkens, the new Knicks coach out of Boys High in Bedford-Stuyvesant, went to Providence College before his N.B.A. travels began.
Chris Mullin, out of Xaverian High School in Bay Ridge, went to St. John's before he started hitting all those 3-pointers in the N.B.A.
But now, with the developer Bruce C. Ratner having purchased the Nets for $300 million and proposing to move this long-wandering franchise to an arena in a $2.5 billion commercial and residential project in downtown Brooklyn, the borough has a sports identity for the first time since the Dodgers departed for Los Angeles after the 1957 baseball season.
''It's eerie,'' Bernard King, one of Brooklyn's best athletes, was saying yesterday. ''The arena site at Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues has been sitting there waiting for this moment in time ever since Walter O'Malley wanted it for a Dodger ballpark that would have replaced Ebbets Field.''
King, who was bused to Fort Hamilton High School in Bay Ridge before going to the University of Tennessee, knows the neighborhood. Long before his 32.9-point average for the Knicks in the 1984-85 season led the N.B.A. in scoring, he grew up on North Oxford Street in the Fort Greene neighborhood with a basketball court on each side of his apartment house, about seven blocks from the proposed arena site.
''That's where I developed my love for basketball,'' he said. ''That's where I honed my skills.''
King, whose brother Albert played with the Nets, is an unpaid ambassador for Ratner's group.
''I want a professional arena in Brooklyn for kids to go to, to cheer for the team, to aspire to playing for the team,'' King said. ''I'm doing it out of my love for Brooklyn, my love for basketball, my love for the neighborhood. In the winter, we used to scrape the snow off the courts to play no matter how cold it was.''
As a teenager in the early 70's, King knew the names of Brooklyn's playground legends of previous years. ''You heard all the names, but Connie Hawkins was the guy,'' he said. ''The guy they called Hawk.''
Hawkins, another Boys High product, who went to Iowa, is in the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass., along with Wilkens and Billy Cunningham, an Erasmus Hall graduate who went to North Carolina before being a three-time all-N.B.A. forward with the Philadelphia 76ers and later the coach of their 1983 championship team.
Other playground Brooklyn legends were World B. Free, who went to Guilford from Canarsie, and Fly Williams, who went to Austin Peay from James Madison. Frank Layden, the longtime coach of the Utah Jazz, went to Fort Hamilton.
Red Auerbach, who coached and assembled the Boston Celtics dynasty, grew up in Williamsburg, where his first court was on the P.S. 122 rooftop enclosed by wire -- as many courts were then, prompting basketball players to be known as cagers. Auerbach was a 1935 graduate of Eastern District High School before going to George Washington in the nation's capital.
''My senior year I made second team all-Brooklyn,'' Auerbach, now 86, said over the phone from his Washington-area home. ''When I told that to my Celtics team, they laughed, but I told them, 'In Brooklyn we had more teams and better teams than the whole state of Indiana.' ''
In the early 30's, St. John's, then in downtown Brooklyn, had its Wonder Five, with Matty Begovich and Mac Kinsbrunner. In the 1938-39 season, James Madison, with Fuzzy Levane, completed an undefeated season in winning the Public Schools Athletic League title. Their team photo is in the Naismith Hall of Fame.
''I think I might be the only guy in a team photo in the Hall of Fame on three levels,'' said Levane, later a Knicks coach and a longtime scout. ''Madison, the St. John's team that won the 1943 National Invitation Tournament and the Rochester Royals that won the 1946 National Basketball League pro championship.''
Before World War II, Long Island University, coached by Clair Bee and featuring Ossie Schectman, later an original Knick from Tilden High School, won the N.I.T. at the Garden in 1939 and 1941. St. John's, which then played mostly at the Garden but occasionally at its de Gray gym in downtown Brooklyn, also won the 1944 N.I.T. under Coach Joe Lapchick.
Brooklyn basketball was soon tarnished by the gambling scandals. In 1945, five Brooklyn College players admitted accepting bribes to lose to Akron in a Boston Garden game. In 1951, the nation's top-ranked team, L.I.U., starring Sherman White, was involved in the point-shaving scandals that also smudged City College, Manhattan, New York University, Kentucky and Bradley.
Despite the scandals, Brooklyn teenagers filled the schoolyard courts and the high school gyms. One of those teenagers, a left-hander at Lafayette High who could dunk, attended the University of Cincinnati on a basketball scholarship before he signed as a pitcher with the Dodgers and departed with them to Los Angeles. You know him as Sandy Koufax.
Sports of The Times
