Just days before an official verdict on whether Prime Minister Tony Blair exaggerated the case for war in Iraq, the BBC on Wednesday broadcast a documentary that aired a litany of its own mistakes in reporting the suspected misuse of intelligence.
The clash between the BBC and the government has turned the outcome of the inquiry by a respected jurist, Lord Hutton, into a referendum on Mr. Blair's political future and the broadcaster's credibility.
The BBC, which as much as any institution created a distinct culture of worldwide news gathering and reportage, was described by its own producers as being too loose with language, too distracted to investigate charges that its reporting was wrong, and simply negligent in checking the basis of a two-minute report on May 29, 2003, that members of Mr. Blair's staff had ''sexed up'' the case to go to war with Iraq by using intelligence they ''probably knew'' was wrong.
But the 90-minute program also asserted that British intelligence chiefs were too willing to approve the sensational formulations that Mr. Blair's staff wanted to use to persuade the public that Saddam Hussein was an imminent threat.
The May report, by a defense correspondent, Andrew Gilligan, incited a strong public reaction as many Britons, already disturbed by Mr. Blair's close alignment with the war camp in Washington, learned that trust in the intelligence services might have been undermined by politicians. Mr. Blair's supporters lashed back, accusing the BBC of bad reporting and antiwar bias.
The conflict reached a tempestuous peak last July after a government weapons scientist, Dr. David Kelly, identified himself as the source of the report to the government, which soon confirmed his role publicly. Dr. Kelly, 59, was grilled by investigative committees armed with transcripts of what he had said to BBC reporters in confidence. In a vise between the news media and his own government, he slit his wrists in the woods near his home on July 17.
The suicide set off Lord Hutton's inquiry, which next Wednesday will try to settle the question: did Mr. Blair deceive the public by exaggerating the case for war, or did the BBC unfairly impugn the prime minister's integrity?
The ''Panorama'' program, created by the BBC's investigative documentary unit, appeared to be trying to distill the most unpleasant questions that its producers believe Lord Hutton must resolve.
It included previously unused film from an October 2002 interview with Dr. Kelly in which he was asked whether there was an ''immediate threat'' from Mr. Hussein's chemical or biological weapons.
''Yes, there is,'' he replied. ''Even if they're not actually filled and deployed today, the capability exists to get them filled and deployed within a matter of days and weeks. So yes, there is a threat.''
The report thus sheds new light on Dr. Kelly's views right after Mr. Blair had made his case to the British public in September 2002, including the claim that Iraq could activate chemical or biological weapons in 45 minutes and threaten British forces as far away as Cyprus.
But the documentary also sought to establish that while many intelligence professionals considered the Iraqi leader dangerous -- especially if attacked -- they were uncomfortable with political efforts to turn raw intelligence into unequivocal fact so as to portray him an imminent threat to Western interests.
Dr. Kelly, 59, was in the camp of those scientists who were uncomfortable with the political pressure exerted by Mr. Blair's top aides.
In the documentary, Sir Rodric Braithwaite, the former chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee that advises the British prime minister, said his successor, John Scarlett, ''crossed a red line'' by allowing Mr. Blair's political aides into the drafting process of the intelligence dossier on Iraq.
Moreover, the documentary explained, one shard of intelligence was sensationalized: a claim from a single unconfirmed source that Iraqis might be able to deploy short-range battlefield chemical weapons within 45 minutes and threaten British forces in the region. That claim was the focus of the May BBC report, in which Mr. Gilligan said, ''The government probably knew that the 45-minute figure was wrong even before it decided to put it in'' an intelligence dossier.
''The dossier was presented as an objective assessment of the threat, yet it did not have all the careful qualification that intelligence assessments usually come with,'' the BBC producers asserted in the documentary.
''To some, not just John Scarlett, but every member'' of the Joint Intelligence Committee ''is as responsible for any sexing up as No. 10,'' the program said, referring to the prime minister's office at 10 Downing Street.
The documentary was blunt in some indictments of the BBC's reporting.
''Trust in the BBC is an inheritance that been built up over nearly 80 years,'' a voice-over said. ''It stands or falls on the accuracy of its news reporting.'' But in this case, it went on, the BBC's director general, Greg Dyke, ''and his senior executives bet the farm on a shaky foundation.''
