''Everything has been rescued in one form or another,'' said Catherine Lévy, referring to the toy trunk she uses as a bench in her apartment here, her mismatched dining room chairs, the white enamel counter in her kitchen. Almost everything in her 860-square-foot apartment, not far from the Bastille, is meant to amuse. Ms. Lévy is one half of Tsé &amp; Tsé, a design partnership created in 1991 when she and Sigolène Prébois joined forces. Playful interpretations of everyday objects (their row of test tubes known as the April vase; their light garlands of tiny bulbs dressed in colorful bows or paper cubes) have made Tsé &amp; Tsé a hot name on the French contemporary design scene.
They are not to be confused, however, with the French designer Augustine Tse and his Tse fashion label; nor should they be confused with the fly that causes sleeping sickness, although that's what inspired the name. ''We wanted a name that could be separated into two parts,'' Ms. Lévy said, by way of explanation.
Whether people understand the name or not, the company's wares are showing up all over the globe. Their lighting and housewares are a sensation in Japan. Tsé &amp; Tsé's exploding circle of fairy lights, which sold for around $90 at Habitat in London, was singled out as a fabulous holiday decoration by four British newspapers.
Inside Modern Living in Toronto sells the Tsé &amp; Tsé floor-to-ceiling Totem Pole carved birchwood storage unit. ''Think of it as a tree with branches that hold vases, lamps, wire picture holders or metal shelves,'' said Daniel Aguacil, the store's owner, who is a fan of their work. In New York their housewares are at Clio, Karkula (the former Breukelen) and at Conran's.
Ms. Lévy's home, which she shares with her boyfriend, Christophe Prébois, a photographer and her business partner's brother, looks onto a quiet street a few blocks behind the Bastille Opera, a derelict neighborhood until a decade ago when it was pioneered by bobos -- France, too, has its bourgeois bohemians.
The apartment shares the Tsé &amp; Tsé aesthetic, where familiar items have been inventively repurposed. Sitting at a table that was once a long wooden counter used in a textile shop for unrolling lengths of fabric, Ms. Lévy explained how she found the chairs for the table -- several different shapes and sizes, now painted in bright colors -- on the street or at cheap flea markets as far a way as Prague.
''I don't believe I have ever bought a new piece of anything,'' she said, pointing out a metal file cabinet used as shelving, wooden crates that form a coffee table and pieces of hand-printed fabric from her sister's textile company, Maison Georgette, that she has hung to create a wardrobe in the bedroom.
''I find it an amusing exercise to make use of what one has or comes across, to never succumb to a Conforama or Brico Depot,'' she said, referring to the French equivalent of the Home Depot or Lowe's. ''I've managed to carry the most impossible things onto airplanes,'' she said, including an entire standing closet that she carried back, in pieces, from Japan. She found it at the Salvation Army in Tokyo for $53.
''Shipping it would have cost a fortune,'' she said. ''It was either get it on the plane or leave it in the street.''
Ms. Lévy, 39, also collects fabrics when traveling -- mostly to India (where Tsé &amp; Tsé produces some of its products) and Japan. She brings the fabrics back to a tailor here who transforms them into the basic clothing she likes: long skirt, shirts that wrap or tie, shawls.
Ms. Lévy's clothing is like an album of her business trips. And she keeps extensive notebooks to catalog what she saw but could not bring back. In fact, Tsé &amp; Tsé used a collage of pages from Ms. Lévy's notebook to design a fabric print for the Japanese fashion designer Issey Miyake.
''Everything we've designed has come out of a desire for pleasure,'' Ms. Lévy said. ''We try to always amuse ourselves.'' She and Ms. Prébois made their porcelain and glass tableware (which includes dishes, carafes, bowls, goblets and cups in curvaceous, slightly asymmetrical forms) because they themselves needed plates.
''We really liked them and so did our friends, so they became a Tsé &amp; Tsé product,'' Ms. Lévy said, adding as if it were unthinkable, ''We certainly didn't just sit down and say, 'Let's make tableware.' ''
Ms. Lévy and Ms. Prébois were still students at the newly created École Nationale Supérieure de Création Industrielle when they began collaborating. The school was founded as an experiment, with no set curriculum, in 1983 by Jacques Lang, then the minister of culture. Many successful French designers now in their 30's and 40's are products of the school, including Jean-Marie Massaud, Matali Crasset and Patrick Jouin.
''It was considered very experimental at the time,'' said Françoise Jollant Kneebone, who was director of the school from 1998 to 2001. ''There was a lot of media coverage.''
While still at school Ms. Lévy and Ms. Prébois created a rubber jewelry collection that became a mini sensation in Paris. ''We were cute and young, so the press loved us,'' said Ms. Lévy, who grew up in the preppy 16th Arrondissement here and remembers standing out from the other children. (For one thing, she wore coats her progressive mother brought back from Afghanistan.)
Pierre Romanet, director of the Sentou Galleries in Paris began selling Tsé &amp; Tsé products 10 years ago. He refers to the two as designers ''who are also artists -- which gives them that extra plus.''
The much lamented store Shí was the first in New York to discover the Tsé &amp; Tsé aesthetic. ''When Shí stopped selling them, she passed them on to me,'' said John Erik, the owner of Karkula, as if Tsé &amp; Tsé was a precious resource not to be squandered. ''They create things that look superprecious, but they are very affordable.'' A case in point, he said, is their Ink Bowls. ''Beautiful, food-safe bowls, a set of five, made of paper and covered in the natural resin of an African tree,'' he said. ''They look like wet black ink. A set of five is $125.''
Many Tsé &amp; Tsé products have become contemporary classics of Parisian homes. One is the glass flower vase hanging from the ceiling in a teardrop form (Tsé &amp; Tsé designed the original, which has been much copied); another is its tiny igloo of porcelain for burning votive candles, and yet another, its porcelain fruit bowl with silver or gold interior or exterior. Once considered the kiddies of the French design scene, the women are now so mainstream that they have designed for Habitat and Baccarat.
Ms. Lévy's style for furnishing her apartment reflects a poetic eye and a playful design aesthetic. Her sofa from Morocco is made of braided reeds, and she uses the wooden toy trunk from her childhood as a bench. A Charles Eames rocking chair was acquired for its light-hearted design. She liked the shape of a watchmaker's bench (curved to prevent delicate pieces from falling) and turned it into a shelf. Her kitchen counter, which has a white enamel top, once stood in a medical laboratory.
Ms. Levy stores her bed linens on a shelf above her bed in a row of nylon bags from southern India. The shelf was made from wood decorated with Arabic lettering found in the street. And just below the ceiling in the living room are strings of lights in various sizes and shapes collected from Europe and Asia, including, of course, India.
This fall, the French publisher Seuil will bring out a book called ''Cent % Indian,'' devoted to Ms. Lévy's collection of utilitarian Indian objects. These playful light bulbs, radios and kitchen utensils were created under laws, since lifted, that promoted home-grown Indian industries.
And when those brightly colored lights around the ceiling burn out, what will she do? ''Find something else that amuses me,'' she said.
Finding Tsé &amp; Tsé
''I LOVE their work -- so well designed and so much fun,'' said Michelle Lehmann, an owner of Clio in New York, which carries Tsé &amp; Tsé vases, plates, Hungry serving forks (below; platinum tips $76; all porcelain, $59), trays, votives and the Tsé &amp; Tsé Mirza teapot ($108; left). ''It's the most interestingly designed teapot I've ever seen,'' Ms. Lehmann said. ''It's art.'' Clio, 92 Thompson Street (Spring); (212) 966-8991.
John Erik, who owns Karkula, carries Tsé &amp; Tsé bowls, porcelain dishware and lamps. The set of five Ink Bowls costs $125. ''They are not kooky,'' he said of the designers. ''They are grounded in a design sense.'' Karkula, 68 Gansevoort Street; (212) 645-2216.
Tsé &amp; Tsé's April vases ($3 each) and the hanging vase are in stock at the Terence Conran Shop, 407 East 59th Street; (866) 755-9079.
MALLERY ROBERTS LANE
HOUSE PROUD
