For months, the Bush administration has resisted Iraqi calls for direct elections by June 30, citing the need for a census to compile voter rolls and other measures to ensure fair voting but too cumbersome to complete in time.
But some experts say that many of these conditions could be met. Another obstacle, perhaps greater and largely unacknowledged, according to the military, the United Nations and outside election experts, is the continuing violence in Iraq. To argue that security is a serious impediment, however, would be to admit that American forces are unable to quell the running war with the insurgents.
Some American generals now say privately that the continuing attacks, especially those against Iraqi civilians, present a daunting obstacle to holding the direct elections demanded by Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the country's most powerful cleric among the majority Shiites.
Even those outside experts who say that there are practical ways to hold a quick vote say that turnout could be suppressed by violence, and that protecting the polls with soldiers or policemen, too, may keep people away.
''I guess you could devise mechanisms to make it possible, security permitting,'' said Joost R. Hiltermann, a Middle East expert at the International Crisis Group, a conflict-prevention organization, who visited Iraq this week to research the prospects for elections here. ''But 'security permitting' is a big if. The risk is that if you go ahead, the results could be seriously skewed, even dangerously skewed.''
If bombings or other attacks like those that occurred this week in Baghdad, Karbala and Mosul take place in one section of the country or another during balloting, the resulting disparities in security might badly reduce turnout in certain areas and render the election unfair, election experts say. Iraq's ethnic divisions, mirrored imperfectly in its politics, tend to follow rough geographic lines that define the largely Kurdish north, the central Sunni Arab heartland and the overwhelmingly Shiite Arab south.
It would be especially dangerous if security is weak in Sunni Arab areas and consequently depressed turnout among that group, which makes up a fifth of the country's 25 million people. Sunnis formed the core of Saddam Hussein's government, and it is in the so-called Sunni Triangle that violence against the American military is fiercest. Many Sunnis already feel disenfranchised, and their anger will only grow if security problems keep them from voting and skew the election results, Mr. Hiltermann said.
Under the current plan, a transitional assembly -- several hundred Iraqis from every region and social sector -- will be chosen in caucus-style elections from the country's 18 provinces. That assembly is to choose an interim government in June, and that indirectly elected interim government is to draft a constitution.
But shortly after the November agreement, Ayatollah Sistani came out against the caucus plan and for direct balloting. A direct ballot would give the Shiites, who account for 60 percent of the population, a clear advantage, while the caucus plan is more likely to give moderate politicians a leg up.
On Monday, 100,000 supporters of Ayatollah Sistani marched through Baghdad protesting the coalition's plans. Because the issue of violence would lend weight to the arguments of those who oppose a direct election, the ayatollah's supporters generally avoid the issue of security.
''Grand Ayatollah Sistani insisted on direct elections, and it's a sort of obligation,'' said Muhammad Alaaowi al-Shameri, a representative of Ayatollah Sistani at the Khadimiya mosque in Baghdad, in an interview this week. ''It must be done. The picture of real democracy will not be achieved unless we have direct elections.''
The military, though, which has sustained hundreds of casualties in the past few months, sees democracy following security, not the other way around.
''Regarding elections, the concerns one in the military would have are security, and how the votes are represented and counted, given right now there's no polling data,'' a United States Army general based in central Iraq said in an interview on Wednesday.
Iraqi army and police forces would have to guard the polls, because a highly visible presence of American soldiers at voting booths could be seen as intimidation, the general said. But there are not even enough policemen right now to fight crime and battle insurgents, he said.
Other experts agree that the practical and technical obstacles to cobbling together a direct election swiftly could be overcome if the American-led occupation truly wanted to hold an early vote. Optimistic internal reports have also been written by Iraqi officials and by experienced hands at the United Nations.
Ibrahim al-Jafari, a Shiite member of the American-picked Iraqi Governing Council, said on Wednesday that he supported elections and even suggested that militias already organized by some Iraqi parties might play a role in helping to provide security. But that, too, could raise questions of intimidation, as the handful of parties with well-developed militias, like the two big Kurdish ones, would undoubtedly field candidates during an election.
The call for elections was repeated in Washington today by another member of the Governing Council, Adnan Pachachi, this month's chairman, who asked again for the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, to send a team of experts of Iraq to determine whether direct elections can be held before June 30.
''In principle, we are all in favor of elections,'' Mr. Pachachi said in a luncheon speech. ''The problem is that of time. Can we have proper elections in the next three months?''
An electoral assessment team from the United Nations visited Iraq for two weeks over the summer and concluded that it was possible to set up mechanisms for direct elections within six months, according to an official who worked out of the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad.
Their findings were summed up in an internal report written by Carina Perelli, the head of the electoral assistance division of the United Nations, who had met with Iraqi officials and leaders of the Coalition Provisional Authority. The report, the existence of which was first mentioned in Time magazine this week, was never circulated and is now considered outdated by United Nations officials in New York precisely because the security situation has deteriorated so much that the findings are obsolete. A bombing in August drove the United Nations out of Iraq, along with many other international organizations.
Mr. Annan is sending a four-member team of military and security experts to Iraq this week to assess potential dangers here before deciding whether to send in an electoral assessment team that would look again at the feasibility of direct elections.
In addition to the formidable security issue, American and Iraqi officials are debating whether ration cards issued to households under the United Nations oil-for-food program can be used to build voter rolls in the absence of a census. The proponents of this plan say the computerized list of households and their members is fairly comprehensive. But its detractors, including coalition officials, say the oil-for-food rolls are likely to be inaccurate, especially given how Mr. Hussein sometimes manipulated them for his own political purposes.
Supporters of direct elections say there are other ways to avoid a time-consuming census. Voter cards, for example, could be issued to individuals when they show up to vote. Some have suggested setting up regional civil affairs offices to locate voters and record their addresses, letting them register on the basis of whatever form of identification card they may already possess or issuing a standard identity card to all who register to vote.
--------------------
Bremer to Miss Talks
DAVOS, Switzerland, Jan. 21 (Reuters) -- The American administrator of the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq, L. Paul Bremer III, will not attend the current World Economic Forum here in this Swiss ski resort, a spokesman for the organizers said Wednesday.
The spokesman said he did not know why Mr. Bremer had canceled the trip. He said he expected another member of the American administration to come instead.
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about prospects for direct elections in Iraq misstated the view voiced by Adnan Pachachi, current chairman of the Iraqi Governing Council. He said that direct elections are desirable in principle; he did not join the demand by leaders of the Shiite Muslim majority that they be held immediately.
