President Bush seemed to cast himself as America's moral leader in his State of the Union address on Tuesday night when he called upon ''all of us'' to protect the nation's children from ''the negative influence of the culture.'' The language and Mr. Bush's solutions, including drug testing, teenage abstinence, faith in God and a forceful stance against gay marriage, were clearly intended to appeal to his most conservative supporters, Republicans said Wednesday.
But like so many other political appeals from the White House this election year, that one, Bush advisers said, was also aimed at netting a bigger, more important group: married women with children, who voted for Bill Clinton in 1996 and Mr. Bush in 2000. In 2004, that group is, as always, up for grabs.
The goal of the White House, Republicans said, was to try to pick off some married Democratic women who might be reassured by the president's oratory. In prose that bore the strong stamp of Michael Gerson, Mr. Bush's born-again chief speechwriter, the president said families, schools and religious institutions were the ''unseen pillars of civilization,'' and then vowed to defend them.
''This is an issue,'' said Linda DiVall, a Republican pollster, ''that fractures the Democratic Party, and I think the president will have an opportunity to reach out to many Democrats with this message. And I think it does create some consternation with Howard Dean, who indicated he did have a problem talking about traditional values and his religion.''
Many Democrats said the subtext of the large part of Mr. Bush's speech devoted to traditional values, if not the entire speech, had been aimed squarely at Dr. Dean.
Mr. Bush's political aides said repeatedly during the weeks when the speech was being written that they were anticipating an election campaign against Dr. Dean, and the address seemed, to Democrats at least, a direct response to the months of criticism from him. But by scheduling the speech only 24 hours after the Iowa caucuses, Democrats said, the White House had no time to tailor it to Senator John Kerry's victory there.
Republicans discounted that notion as nothing more than Democratic wishful thinking, but Ms. DiVall did note that Dr. Dean had seemed the most secular of the Democratic candidates until criticism impelled him to talk more openly about his faith.
Dr. Dean is also the only one of the Democratic candidates who ever signed legislation permitting gay civil unions, an act he performed as governor of Vermont. Polls show that a small majority of Americans oppose gay marriage while about half oppose gay civil unions. Republicans have already begun to attack Dr. Dean on the issue, saying it proves he is too liberal for mainstream America.
But Bush campaign advisers said the president's political speeches would mention his opposition to gay marriage only in a careful formulation, to avoid alienating moderate voters who might otherwise see bigotry in his views.
Mr. Bush, who has appointed gays to important jobs in his administration, has taken a position on gay marriage that Democrats said seemed to be carefully aligned with the polls, even though the official White House stance is that the president has no interest in polls.
Democrats predicted that the Bush campaign's pursuit of the votes of married women would fall flat, saying the president was offering them nothing but elegant language. ''What's striking about the Bush speech is that he spent so much time talking about middle-class values and so little time talking about middle-class problems,'' said Bruce Reed, domestic policy adviser to President Bill Clinton and now president of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council.
Mr. Bush's offerings on Tuesday night, like a call for athletic coaches and players ''to get rid of steroids now,'' were notable, Mr. Reed said, in that they cost little or nothing at a time when the president is under increasing pressure because of the budget deficit.
''If you run out of money,'' Mr. Reed said, ''then you talk about values, because it doesn't cost a thing to lecture others.''
Other political analysts said that Mr. Bush's appeal to traditional values might be powerfully effective and that the address had left nothing to chance.
David R. Gergen, who worked in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Clinton White Houses, said he thought it interesting that one of Mr. Bush's guests for the speech was Tom Brady, the quarterback of the New England Patriots, the team from Mr. Kerry's home state, Massachusetts. Mr. Gergen said he also thought it interesting that Mr. Bush had criticized ''activist judges'' for ''redefining marriage,'' a reference to Massachusetts' highest court, which ruled in November that gay couples had a right to marry under the State Constitution.
In short, Mr. Gergen said that he thought he already saw an effort to begin defining Mr. Kerry as a Northeastern liberal, and that Mr. Brady in turn represented ''manly'' virtues held in esteem at the White House.
''John Kerry may be the nominee, and the Democrats are going to have their convention in Boston,'' Mr. Gergen said. ''Connect the dots: they certainly suggest a pattern, although that's perhaps a Machiavellian interpretation.''
