A construction worker from Belarus died of a severe head injury on Tuesday, a week after a group of Hispanic men attacked him and four Russian co-workers with a bat and a knife in an ethnically charged fight in Bushwick, Brooklyn, the police said.
The worker, Valery Charnavus, 42, who came to Brooklyn four months ago with hopes of bringing his wife and two sons to the United States, died at Elmhurst Hospital Center. He was admitted to the hospital in a coma on Jan. 13, after one or more men struck him in the head with a baseball bat, relatives said.
''It's so hard to lose a husband without any reason,'' said Natasha Charnavus, 39, his wife. She came to New York from Lida, Belarus, three days ago with the couple's youngest son, Zhenya. Mr. Charnavus had been brain-dead for two days before his relatives took him off the respirator, family members said.
Last week, Mr. Charnavus and his co-workers were leaving a bodega at 1 a.m. when a group of at least seven Hispanic men approached them in the street and, thinking they were Polish, addressed them with ethnic slurs, the police said. The police said that Mr. Charnavus and his co-workers were Russian. It could not be determined if his co-workers were also from Belarus.
A fight ensued, and the police said, four of the Russian men were beaten so badly that they were sent to local hospitals.
The police have arrested seven men in the case, charging one with criminal possession of a weapon and six with attempted murder.
A former truck driver, Mr. Charnavus was awarded a medal of honor by the former Soviet Union for his work as a civilian truck driver during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan, his relatives said. Gathered at his home in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, yesterday evening, they described him as a devoted father who loved his new life in New York and spent hundreds of dollars on calling cards to talk to his wife.
''He said that he liked everything but the only thing missing was his family,'' Mrs. Charnavus said.
Mr. Charnavus had been working on a construction project in Bushwick late into the night before the attack occurred, said Alla Gerlovina, his sister, who lives in Bensonhurst.
''He never worked as hard in his life like he worked in New York,'' she said. The family donated Mr. Charnavus's organs, she said.
A spokesman for the Brooklyn district attorney's office said he could not comment on the status of the charges because the case was before a grand jury yesterday. The medical examiner's office was still waiting for autopsy results yesterday.
