Lloyd Silverstein, a former senior vice president for Computer Associates, is expected to plead guilty today in United States District Court in Brooklyn to a charge that stems from the federal investigation into the company's accounting practices, people close to the investigation said.
A plea by Mr. Silverstein would be a significant step in the investigation, which federal prosecutors and the Securities and Exchange Commission began two years ago. The joint inquiry has not resulted in any civil or criminal charges against the company or any current or former employees.
But last week, the S.E.C. told Computer Associates that the company might face a civil complaint accusing it of violating securities laws.
Computer Associates said yesterday that it expected sales and profit for its current quarter, which ends March 31, would fall short of analysts' estimates. Profit for the quarter ended in December were slightly better than analysts' expectations, the company said.
The people close to the investigation said Mr. Silverstein would plead guilty to one count of obstruction of justice related to the company's conduct during the investigation. He is cooperating with prosecutors, they said.
Mr. Silverstein could face prison time as a result of his plea, they said. Newsday, the Long Island newspaper, reported on Wednesday that ''a former executive,'' whom it did not name, was ''ready to cooperate with investigators.''
James Walden, a lawyer at O'Melveny &amp; Myers who represents Mr. Silverstein, said he could not comment on the investigation. Mr. Silverstein, a former senior vice president for finance at the company, did not return calls to his home. Eric Corngold, a federal prosecutor in Brooklyn, did not return a call requesting comment. John Savarese, who represents Computer Associates, did not return a call and an e-mail message requesting comment. Robert Gordon, a spokesman for Computer Associates, said the company could not comment.
Prosecutors and the S.E.C. are investigating whether Computer Associates used accounting tricks to inflate its sales and earnings in the late 1990's, a period when its three top executives received a $1.1 billion bonustied to the performance of its stock.
In October, Computer Associates said that it had found in an internal investigation that during the fiscal year ended in March 2000, the company had booked sales on contracts that had not been signed.
Computer Associates said that it had fired Mr. Silverstein and two other executives in its finance department, including Ira Zar, its chief financial officer, and that the investigation would continue.
Many former employees of Computer Associates have said that the company's accounting problems run far beyond the premature revenue recognition in its 2000 fiscal year. The employees say that throughout the late 1990's, the company used a variety of accounting tricks to inflate its sales and profits.
In October 2000, Computer Associates changed the way it sold software and the way it reported its sales. The change effectively allowed the company to count some sales and profits twice. Some former and current employees have said that the company made that change to hide that it had previously inflated its profits.
Since Computer Associates changed its accounting practices in 2000, its reported sales have fallen almost 50 percent. In fiscal 2000, the company reported $6.1 billion in sales. In fiscal 2003, it had $3.1 billion in sales. The earlier figure was wildly inflated, employees have said.
Computer Associates said yesterday that it had earned $22 million, or 4 cents a share, on sales of $844 million in the quarter ended December 2003, compared with a loss of 8 cents a share in the quarter a year earlier. Excluding certain noncash charges, the company earned 16 cents a share in the most recent quarter, a penny more than analysts' estimates, according to IBES, which compiles Wall Street forecasts.
Computer Associates said its sales rose $90 million, or 12 percent, compared with those in the period a year earlier. More than half of that gain came from the rise in the value of the euro against the dollar, the company said.
In North America, the company's sales actually fell slightly for the quarter, according to the quarterly report Computer Associates filed yesterday with the S.E.C.
For the current quarter, sales and profit will fall short of analysts' estimates, Computer Associates said. Excluding certain noncash expenses, the company said it expected profit of 15 to 17 cents a share in the quarter, compared with earlier estimates of 18 cents a share. Sales are estimated at $845 million to $865 million, compared with earlier estimates of $870 million.
Computer Associates said that KPMG, its accountant, refused to complete its review of the company's financial statements for the December quarter because of the company's continuing internal investigation. A spokesman for KPMG declined to comment.
