After a decade of effort, the European Union's goal to build a seamless single market out of 15 disparate economies is running out of steam, according to a report released Wednesday by its executive body, the European Commission.
Even the union's more specific aim of becoming the most competitive knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010 is on course to fail, the commission's president, Romano Prodi, said on Wednesday in a statement intended as a warning to the union's current members. The report comes ahead of an economic summit meeting scheduled for this spring.
The leaders of the European Union adopted the ambitious vision of a knowledge-based economy at a summit meeting in Lisbon in 2000, when the Internet boom was at its peak. The agreement set specific goals to be reached by 2005, including an array of European Union legislation intended to pull the national economies together.
Four years after the Lisbon meeting, the goal is still far off. ''It is clear that we are going to miss our midterm targets,'' Mr. Prodi said, accusing the union's members of not demonstrating enough ''ownership'' of the joint project.
Unfinished tasks include the creation of unionwide laws on patent protection  and intellectual property rights, and a directive on unionwide recognition of professional qualifications.
Last week, the commission called Belgium, France, Germany and Luxembourg laggards for failing to put in place unionwide internal market laws. Generally, it can take 18 months for laws approved by the union to be written into the national laws of member countries.
Since the European Union abolished internal borders 10 years ago, its internal market has increased economic growth across the union by at least 1.8 percent, the commission said in its report. By freeing the movement of goods across national boundaries, the internal market has helped create 2.5 million jobs, the commission estimated.
But the momentum is faltering. After steady progress in bringing the economies together in the 1990's, ''some of the key measures are moving in the wrong direction,'' the report said.
It found that the price of goods in different countries in the European Union stopped converging in 1998, and the growth in trade within the union stalled in 2001 and started to shrink in 2002.
To achieve what is called the Lisbon strategy, the European Union would have to overtake the United States in terms of competitiveness. But the commission said that labor productivity -- one measure of competitiveness -- was declining in the union. ''The gap with the United States has widened,'' it said.
A European Union diplomat who requested anonymity said that Germany was committed to the goals, but agreed that new impetus is needed in Germany to achieve them.
''Germany is in the process of implementing all E.U. laws, but it is a decentralized political structure,'' the diplomat said. ''A federation like Germany cannot immediately go and implement laws.''
Another European Union diplomat from a large member country accepted the commission's criticism. ''They are right,'' he said. ''Member states are not following their commitments.''
Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and President Jacques Chirac of France are planning to meet on Feb. 18 to discuss the issues raised in the report.
The diplomat said that while the commission is correct to scold member countries for failing to adopt the single-market laws, the commission itself should not stifle progress with too much regulation.
''There is a regulatory element to the problem holding the E.U. back,'' he said, adding that countries like Britain favor introducing ''an 'is it necessary?' test for all E.U. laws.''
