TWENTY stories above the snow-swathed construction beehive ground zero has become, the very veteran landscape architect Peter Walker contemplates a view he was recently commissioned, with the greatest of fanfare at the 11th hour of the World Trade Center memorial competition, to change for the better. The grim overview from One Liberty Plaza, headquarters of his new client, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, caused him to flinch the first time he looked at it head-on. Not anymore. Now he gets to help fix it in perpetuity -- if fate and a green thumb are with him.
''You're on the big stage now,'' he murmurs, half to himself, before turning his back to the window and taking a seat at an empty conference table. ''I can't imagine a project more important than this one in the world, really,'' says Mr. Walker, 71, a small-framed man decked out in stark back-and-white (he insists he wore the kind of kooky, black-framed eyeglasses that are currently mandatory regalia for designer types long before they were in vogue). ''I've never been through anything like this competition: between the jury, the politicians, the media, the bureaucrats and the pain of the families, the scrutiny has been overwhelming.''
Exhausting. He's been running on fumes since a 13-member jury that included Maya Lin, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial architect whose work Mr. Walker's Berkeley-based firm has embellished on several less momentous projects, determined that his December contributions to Michael Arad's design, ''Reflecting Absence,'' were the missing link that vaulted it ahead of two other finalists.
His better-late-than-never role in ''improving'' an austere design by a relative amateur -- ''Yeah, I helped, but I didn't win it, he did,'' says Mr. Walker -- is an assignment of such public and professional significance, a virtual crown on a career already crammed with renown, that he hasn't had time to feel guilty about the tragic circumstance that brought it his way. Honored is what he feels, particularly since his own firm's entry in the competition, a glassy wall with the victims' and heroes' names etched within, did not, as he puts it, ''make it past first base.''
Does he wish Sept. 11 were only a mirage and he could be trotting the globe on more typical, and less fraught, assignments like the Toyota Museum of Art, the Millennium Park at the Sydney Olympics or, a personal favorite, the water fountain set among 60 stones at his alma mater, Harvard? He rubs forlornly at his freckled bald forehead and says it only takes one visit to the room next door, the Family Room, a sanctuary for relatives of the victims, to touch base with reality. ''You don't ever walk out of that room happy,'' says Mr. Walker. ''Michael has come out of it in tears. Not because he can't possibly please everybody; they're more like tears of empathy. Michael's design gets it right: the artistic problem here is how to get people to see nothing as something. I knew what he was up to right away.''
He is secure that he, a landscape doctor with a proclivity for transforming negative urban spaces into positive ones, is the man to refine Mr. Arad's design. ''To cut two giant holes in the ground, and do it in a way that will get people to read it the most dramatic way, is the discipline behind the plan. At this point, I think Michael and I are joined at the hip: what we're trying to do is make emptiness visible.''
WHERE the layman's eye sees dirt, rocks and dump trucks at the trade center site, Mr. Walker, nearly 50 years into a decidedly requited flirtation with landscape architecture, envisions Mr. Arad's two water-filled tower footprints embraced by sculptural columns of trees rather than a barren plaza. He figures to combine sycamore, locust and linden trees, an arboreal assortment of 150 mature specimens that will yield a gold and brown canopy in autumn and bud on a sliding scale each spring. A mighty, but silent, juxtaposition of life and death, mutability and permanence. ''What my game is, as a landscape architect, is to try and do a lot of things using as few elements as possible,'' says Mr. Walker, who looks to the artists Donald Judd and Carl Andre as inspiration for his minimalist vision. While teaching at Harvard in the 1970's, he took a fling at painting himself: he rented a loft downtown but gave up after a year and went back to landscape architecture, first in Boston, then on the West Coast.
Mr. Walker grew up in Pasadena and Berkeley, the artistic one in a family of teachers. He studied journalism at Berkeley, intent on becoming a magazine publisher (blame it on a comic book fixation). But a studio design course changed his course, and he went off to the University of Illinois, where his mentor was the landscape architect Stanley White, brother of the writer E.B.White. He completed his master's degree at Harvard under the tutelage of Hideo Sasaki.
He lives in San Francisco with his third wife, Jane Gillette, whom he met when she interviewed him for a trade journal, and spends weekends at a bluff-top getaway in Mendocino, where he indulges a gardening gene inherited from his grandmother. His firm, Peter Walker &amp; Partners, was formed in 1983 and employs 27 landscape architects, several of whom are about to receive promotions, the better to allow him to concentrate on the memorial. ''The last 20 years have gone by so fast, and the projects have gotten bigger, and this one, I think, is the end for me,'' he says. ''Really, I don't know where one goes from here.''
PUBLIC LIVES
