For 30 years, the usually solitary sport of cross-country skiing has been transformed into a mass race of inspiration and perspiration along a 51-kilometer trail through the woods of northwest Wisconsin: it is the American Birkebeiner.
Four men -- John Kotar (64 years old), Ernie St. Germaine (56), David Landgraf (54) and Karl Andreson (80) -- have skied it every year since the first race in 1973. Known as Founders, they are no Johans come lately and will be among more than 6,000 skiers waxing, huffing and puffing on Feb. 21, when the 31st race begins in Cable (population 836) and wends south over 32 miles of groomed trails on challenging terrain to Hayward (population 2,129).
The Birkie, as it is called, is the largest cross-country skiing event in North America, drawing serious competitors from 19 countries and 45 states -- and more than 15,000 spectators -- to a refrigerated party that puts more than $4 million into the Wisconsin economy. It was not always so.
''The first race had 34 people in it,'' said Kotar, a native of Slovenia, who is a professor of forestry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. There were 33 men and one woman (Jacque Lindskoog of Edina, Minn.) in that first race. ''At that time, most people thought we were a little nuts to do this kind of thing. But people like me kept coming back because it became like a marathon: each year you think you can do better.''
The race is modeled after the Birkebeiner Rennet in Lillehammer, Norway, which commemorates a historic event during the Norwegian Civil War in the winter of 1206. Vikings wearing birch bark leggings (birkebeiners) saved the heir to the throne of Norway from invaders, taking the child on skis 55 kilometers, from Lillehammer to Trondheim, to safety.
''I started skiing two weeks before the first Birkebeiner,'' Landgraf, a physical education teacher in Bloomer, Wis., said. ''It was a disaster. I was literally crawling up the hills at the end of the race. I keep going back because once you've done the race, you feel obliged, and I plan to keep going as long as it's enjoyable.''
Landgraf recalled the fifth race, in 1977, when the creator of the Birkie, Tony Wise, persuaded several hundred serious Norwegian skiers to ski in the race. In all, there were 2,006 participants that year.
''For some reason, they all took off before the starting gun,'' Landgraf said. ''It was wild because people were still in the bathrooms, some didn't have their skis on. Once the race started, there was no coming back.''
As the number of participants grew and the race began to attract elite skiers from other countries (Canada, Germany, Switzerland, Norway and Russia send the most) and increasing numbers of Americans, race organizers were forced to break the participants into groups, or waves. The initial wave includes elite men and women (76 percent of skiers are male) who are competing in the F.I.S. Marathon Cup series. Then comes 10 waves of skiers divided by competitive status and age.
Cross-country skiing has evolved over the past 30 years, improved by technology that changed the equipment, training regimens and the style of skiing on the trail. When St. Germaine, an American Indian who is a tribal judge and historian on the Lac du Flambeau reservation in northern Wisconsin, got ready for that first race in 1973, he clipped his boots into now ancient three-pin bindings and grabbed a couple of bamboo poles. The style was classical: the glide technique. The goal was to finish without injury or frostbite.
Since the middle of the 1980's, the most competitive skiers in the world have used the often frenetic skating style that was introduced by Bill Koch, a United States Olympian. The equipment has changed from the old Nordic three-pin bindings to the more streamlined Alpine bindings.
''With the advent of skate skiing, time is no longer a factor with me,'' St. Germaine, who was the best man at Landgraf's wedding, said. ''I have and always will be a classical skier.
''The Birkie is a way of life. It helps me focus on a goal each year and helps me maintain a positive, healthy lifestyle. I think this would please those old Norwegians in Hayward, who held dear their heritage and keep alive a tradition, their way of life.''
Registration (birkie.com) costs $120 and is still open for this year's event for people 18 and older. Two other races are open to children: the Sons of Norway/Swiss Miss Barnebirkie for ages 3 to 13, and the Junior Birkie for ages 10 to 15.
THE SKI REPORT
