Theater Faction has decided to start at the top, opening its first season with the ''Oresteia'' of Aeschylus, the only ancient Greek tragic trilogy to survive. The new company has its own twist of course: each of three men adapted one of the plays in the trilogy to modern settings without knowing the others' approach. Not surprisingly, in the resulting three-hour production, running through Feb. 1 at the American Theater of Actors, the version that succeeds best in clarity and comic subversion is the one that departs least from the original.
For ''Agamemnon,'' the first play, Erik Nelson, one of Theater Faction's founders, cuts out all characters except Agamemnon and Clytemnestra. He replaces the chorus with passers-by caught on video along Eighth Avenue near the theater, being asked whether a wife might justly kill her husband if he had killed one of their daughters.
That question echoes philosophical conundrums relating to good effects of bad actions, which Clytemnestra chalks up on blackboards along with pretentious equations from a mathematical logic textbook. When Agamemnon enters, the victor of Troy, he rapes Clytemnestra, a particularly brutal act since she is made up to look almost like a child bride.
She enters a television contest, ''Agamemnon, the Game,'' and by negotiating a hopscotch maze earns the right to slit his throat.
For ''The Libation Bearers'' Yuval Sharon, another company founder, jettisons much of Aeschylus' play. Here Orestes pops up out of Agamemnon's grave to face seven powerful women, four of them incarnations of his vengeful sister, Electra, demanding that he kill his mother, Clytemnestra.
But this Orestes is a nerd who is appalled that the gods have assigned vengeance to him, never more so than when he faces the eighth woman in this play, Clytemnestra, who practically blows him away with vehement sneers.
As a substitute for the text he has dumped, Mr. Sharon jumbles together fragments from gurus ancient and modern, and the dissonance is numbing. Among the bewildering visual and aural diversions he provides, the most impressive sight is one of the Electras working out on an exercise machine for an hour nonstop, and the most memorable sound is another Electra lounging in a bathtub singing, beautifully, a bloodily enticing aria to Orestes from Richard Strauss's opera ''Elektra.''
David Johnston's adaptation of the last play, ''The Eumenides,'' directed by Kevin Lee Newbury, saves the evening. Its Apollo is a fine comic character, a sort of laid-back playboy who tells the mother-killer Orestes, ''You worry too much, relax'' as three snake-haired Furies rage around him, trying to tear him apart.
How distant is this Apollo from the one in Aeschylus? Not very.
After all, Aeschylus hauled him down to an Athenian court to justify the ways of the Olympians to human judges who had won the right to decide whether the god was right or wrong. After that stunning plunge from divinity, his transformation to Mr. Johnston's lounge lizard is no trip at all. And if his arguments sound specious, look at those he uses in the ancient play; they will seem familiar.
Mr. Newbury's direction keeps the characters moving in a fast, light step like that of a good chorus line, which of course the Eumenides themselves were the first time around, in the fifth century B.C.
ORESTEIA
An adaptation of the trilogy by Aeschylus. Presented by the Theater Faction. At the American Theater of Actors, 314 West 54th Street, Clinton.
AGAMEMNON, adapted and directed by Erik Nelson; sets by Katya Blumenberg; lighting by Greg Emetaz; assistant director, Jett Canary; technical director, Ben Tevelow; stage manager, Michele Traub.
WITH: Saori Tsukada and Chris Oden.
THE MOURNERS, OR MOURNING IS A FORM OF ACTIVISM, freely adapted by Yuval Sharon from ''The Libation Bearers'' by Aeschylus. Directed by Mr. Sharon; dramaturgical assistance, Cori Ellison; sound designers, Max Sanjulian and Lee Leaseburge.
WITH: Constance Tarbox, Laura Knight, Sarah Fraunfelder, Tia Shearer, Layna Fisher, Jonathan Day, Caroline Worra, Jeanne Lehman and Cara Consilvio.
THE EUMENIDES, freely adapted by David Johnston; directed by Kevin Lee Newbury; costumes by Jessica Jahn; assistant director, Margot Duffy; assistant costumer, Lisa Marzolf.
WITH: Cortney Keim, Beau Allulli; Kathy Lichter, Michael Bell, Vivian Manning, Nell Gwynn, Heidi McAllister and Lori Lane Jefferson.
THEATER REVIEW
