The Devils' Martin Brodeur, a workaholic among goaltenders, had skipped two full games. That qualifies as a sabbatical for him.
But Brodeur felt sluggish in his return Wednesday night, and his teammates played another listless home game. The result was a 2-1 loss to the Carolina Hurricanes, a sub-.500 team.
''We don't give him much offensive support, do we?'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said of Brodeur.
The loss was the fourth in the last five home games for the Devils (23-12-10-1), who failed to gain ground on the idle Philadelphia Flyers in the Atlantic Division.
The Devils still trail Philadelphia (22-11-10-5) by 2 points, and they lost one of the three games they had in hand over the stumbling Flyers.
The Devils have played 23 games at home and 23 on the road. They are 11-8-3-1 at home, for 26 points, and 12-4-7-0 on the road, for 31 points.
''It doesn't matter where we're playing,'' defenseman Colin White said. ''We've got to show up and give a better effort.''
After the backups Corey Schwab and Scott Clemmensen allowed only one goal in the last two games combined, Brodeur made 21 saves Wednesday, some of them brilliant.
But he said he felt out of sync. Asked when he felt he joined the flow of the game, Brodeur laughed and said, ''Probably not until tomorrow.''
He added, ''I didn't feel better today because of the rest.''
That the Devils were beaten by Carolina (16-21-9-2), which came into the game in 13th place among the 15 teams in the Eastern Conference, made their lack of passion more puzzling.
Left wing Jeff Friesen, who scored the Devils' goal, said the team seems to want to play at a higher tempo at home, but the Devils are not built to play at that kind of a pace.
''It's just a different mind-set, and the record indicates it,'' Friesen said.
The Devils are to play home games Friday against Montreal and Sunday against Atlanta before a three-game trip, but a home game is no longer a sure thing.
Defenseman Scott Stevens missed his seventh straight game because of postconcussion syndrome, and Burns added to the intrigue by scratching the veteran center Igor Larionov for the second time in three games.
Larionov, 43, left practice early Friday. He was scratched from Saturday's 2-1 victory over Washington, but he insisted Monday that the incident was behind him.
Larionov played only two shifts in the second period Tuesday in a 3-0 victory over Pittsburgh, and did not did not play at all in the third period.
Burns dressed his enforcer, Rob Skrlac, instead of Larionov on Wednesday night, and Skrlac and Carolina right wing Jesse Boulerice got into a spirited fight two minutes into the game.
Wednesday's game dragged until Carolina left wing Josef Vasicek and Friesen scored identical-looking goals 21 seconds apart late in the second period.
Vasicek scored his 13th goal at 12 minutes 26 seconds after getting past defenseman Scott Niedermayer and taking a crisp cross-ice pass from center Ron Francis.
''That's our job, not to let passes go across,'' Niedermayer said.
Only seconds later, Devils center Sergei Brylin flipped a pass to Friesen, who had sprinted past Carolina right wing Jeff O'Neill to the goal. Friesen tapped in a pass from Brylin at 12:47.
The tie lasted less than six minutes. The Hurricanes scored again when the Devils lost a battle for a loose puck in the corner.
Carolina center Eric Staal and right wing Pavel Brendl went into the corner with Niedermayer and began jousting. Brendl came out of the pack with the puck, which he pushed to O'Neill in the right face-off circle. O'Neill snapped a shot past Brodeur at 18:05. It was the 10th goal of the season for O'Neill.
The game was just about a lost cause at that point for the Devils. They are 1-6-2-1 in games in which they trailed after two periods.
''We've got a lot of improving to do,'' Niedermayer said. ''We've got to get back to our game consistently, and we've got to get back to our effort consistently.''
HOCKEY
