YOU think it's bad when your pipes freeze? Try when they thaw. That's when the torrent comes out of the cracks formed by the expansion of frozen water.
An Arctic blast in the Northeast last week meant that many homes were inundated, generating big business for the cleanup crews colorfully known as water extractors.
Jim Paradise, who runs James Paradise Cleaning and Restoration in Middletown, R.I., near Newport, said on Tuesday that he had deployed all of his drying equipment to houses with leaks. ''We're going to one right now,'' he added. ''In Newport, right on the water. The ceiling has fallen down on top of antique furniture and Oriental rugs.''
With a ceiling lying in a couple inches of water, the first thing homeowners should worry about is getting an electric shock. ''They have to be concerned about the electricity, standing in water and touching a receptacle,'' Mr. Paradise said.
After the leak is stopped, the next stage is recovery. If the water has spread only a few square feet, towels and a fan may do the job. For bigger floods, the first call should be to the insurance company (which will often cover emergency services) and the next to one of the insurer's recommended water extractors.
Water extractors are busy in winter. But they also find work when supply hoses on washing machines and ice makers break (a common occurrence), when toilets overflow and when hot water heaters rust out.
While waiting for the professionals, it's important to shelter large pieces of furniture from dripping ceilings and to get furniture legs out of the water. Now might be a good time to stock up on plastic sheets and Styrofoam blocks; in a pinch, you can wrap those legs in plastic bags.
Curtains and upholstery can be pinned up. A shop vacuum can pick up some water from a rug, and valuable books should be stuck in the freezer, Mr. Paradise says, then treated by a commercial freeze-drying establishment (it will be expensive). If artworks have escaped the deluge, leave them on the walls, he says, or they may get knocked over.
When extractors arrive, said Tom Light, owner of the Purofirst water- removal franchise in North Chatham, N.Y., the ''first order of business is to mitigate the loss, to keep damage from getting greater.'' Typically his company will attack floors, rugs and furnishings with giant vacuums, then bring in blowers and dehumidifiers.
The relative humidity in a waterlogged house may be 70 to 80 percent. The water extractor's goal is to reduce that to a normal range of 40 to 50 percent over two to five days. Probes determine whether water lingers in beams, carpet pads and deep inside sofas.
''If we can't bring it back to the way it was,'' Mr. Light said, ''we'll at least keep further damage from occurring.''
The average claim Mr. Light handles in upstate New York is $1,500. Mr. Paradise said his Newport-area rescues run $2,000 and up.
Both men offer tips on avoiding frozen pipes in the first place: ''People turn their thermostat down to save the fuel oil,'' Mr. Light said, ''but the 50-degree setting doesn't keep the home warm enough.''
Mr. Paradise said: ''You know what helps? If you are going to be away, open the cabinets under the kitchen and bathroom sinks, so your heat and warm air can go in there.''
But these tips won't help if the heat goes off.
''We do have people crying in our arms,'' Mr. Paradise said. ''Sometimes I have to hug them and say it will be O.K.''
TRADE SECRETS
