The food in there is slop, people say, but that is not why Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, Russia's richest prison inmate, skips lunch.
He is just too busy, said a lawyer who visits him almost every day. Three months after his arrest, according his legal team, Mr. Khodorkovsky has plowed through 12 volumes of charges and evidence against him. He has 215 to go.
''Every day he surrounds us with questions,'' the lawyer, Anton V. Drel, said in an interview. ''He has a lot of ideas.''
The young cutthroat entrepreneur who is worth $8 billion after taking over Russia's biggest oil company, and who had begun to cast his eye on the presidency, seems to be pouring his heart into his new role as jailhouse lawyer.
It may be a futile exercise, as even his lawyers come close to admitting. The case of Mr. Khodorkovsky, 40, has clearly been orchestrated from the top, and courtroom arguments may have little influence on its outcome. ''He understands that he may have to be in prison a long time,'' Mr. Drel said. ''I can't say he looks very good. You can see that he's tired.''
The charges against him are a hodgepodge of white-collar crimes including tax evasion, fraud, embezzlement and forgery, yet the real reason for his arrest is still a matter of debate here.
''There's still no definitive analysis,'' the American ambassador, Alexander Vershbow, said at a recent public discussion. ''A lot of factors were involved. I think that clearly President Putin and the leadership viewed Khodorkovsky as posing both a political challenge and becoming too much of an independent actor in the economic sphere.''
Just as clearly, the leadership has used the arrest to send a message about who is boss in Russia, and the audiences range from Mr. Khodorkovsky's fellow billionaires to the envious hoi polloi.
Beginning with a predawn arrest by armed masked men on Oct. 25 and continuing through a court hearing last week at which the defendant was shown on a television screen pleading in vain to be freed on bail, the Khodorkovsky case has been an exercise in public humiliation.
Mr. Khodorkovsky shares a small cell with two other men, exercises in a walled enclosure for two hours a day and is permitted to talk with his wife and parents through a plate glass window two times a month.
With President Vladimir V. Putin hinting last month that ''five or seven or 10'' more people could follow Mr. Khodorkovsky into jail, the country's wealthy oligarchs have lowered their heads and backed quietly away from their former colleague.
It is hard to find anyone -- apart from the lawyers who are paid to do so -- to defend him in public.
At the same time, with a presidential election arriving in two months, the pillorying of a super-rich oligarch does no harm to Mr. Putin's standing among the public.
''Most of Russia would be happy to see him carried through the streets in a cart so that they could poke sticks at him,'' said Pavel Arsenyev, who heads the Moscow office of the Foundation for Civil Liberties, which monitors prisoners' rights.
Already there seems to be a good deal of official poking going on.
As Mr. Khodorkovsky sits digging through his documents under a light bulb that shines around the clock, the government has been chipping away at his company, Yukos Oil.
Soon after his arrest, it froze about 40 percent of the company's stock, mostly belonging to Mr. Khodorkovsky. Then it began reviewing the company's licenses to natural resources. Since then it has begun to dun Yukos for more than $3 billion in back taxes and has removed the company's license to develop an important oil field. Two of the company's biggest shareholders have been jailed -- Mr. Khodorkovsky and his right-hand man, Platon Lebedev. Two others, who have taken refuge in Israel, have been placed on a government ''wanted'' list. The man who ran daily operations, Vasily Shakhnovsky, went on trial last week on charges of tax evasion and forgery.
Mr. Khodorkovsky's arrest caused the collapse of a merger with a second Russian oil giant, Sibneft, that would have put him at the head of the world's fourth-largest oil producer. Negotiations to sell part of Yukos to an American oil company have also been thrown into doubt.
''First they imprison him, then they break up YukosSibneft,'' said Robert Amsterdam, one of a separate team of American lawyers defending Mr. Khodorkovsky. ''Now they're going after Yukos for taxes. This is the way Putin works. The man sounds reasonable, but behind him the administrative machine works to expropriate the company.''
Yukos remains immensely profitable despite these setbacks. But Mr. Khodorkovsky has transferred his interest in it to an associate and claims to have no access to its funds.
The $8 billion man lives on a different scale now, Mr. Drel said.
To supplement the dreadful prison food, he is permitted to receive about 70 pounds of supplies from home each month. Mostly his wife sends him yogurt, the lawyer said; once she sent him a chicken.
She has also opened a small account for him at the prison canteen, where he can buy treats like juice, cookies and pastries. Officially prisoners are allowed one shower a week, but Mr. Khodorkovsky can use his canteen bank account to pay for extra showers as well.
