There are some fighters who can battle through cuts and blood and broken bones to win. And then there is Arturo Gatti.
Gatti, the former junior lightweight champion, seems to defy pain. In February 2002, he first met Micky Ward, who dropped Gatti seconds into the ninth round with his trademark liver punch. One knee on the canvas, Gatti closed his eyes and howled in agony. He stood up just before getting counted out and survived the round. Despite calls for the fight to be stopped, Gatti came out swinging in the 10th round. He won the round, only to lose the fight on points.
When they met again six months later, Gatti shattered his right hand on Ward's temple in the third round, bursting Ward's eardrum and sending him in a tailspin toward the ring post, where he crashed. Decision, Gatti.
When they met for a third time last June, Gatti fractured his right hand again in the fourth round on Ward's hip.
Gatti knew his hand was broken, but he did not quit. In a display of boxing finesse, he outpunched Ward with a popping left hand, winning a unanimous decision.
On Saturday night, Gatti (36-6, 28 knockouts) looks to push his career a step further against Gianluca Branco (32-0-1, 15 knockouts), an Italian-based junior welterweight who is making his American debut. They will fight at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City for the World Boxing Council's 140-pound title, which was vacated by Kostya Tszyu.
The light welterweight prospect Francisco Bojado (14-1) takes on Emmanuel Clottey (21-5) in the co-feature.
''A lot of people scratched me off when I lost against Oscar De La Hoya,'' Gatti, 32, said at a news conference in Midtown yesterday. ''But then I met Buddy, and we can make magic together better than Houdini.''
He was referring to Buddy McGirt, the former welterweight champion who is Gatti's trainer. McGirt will work two corners on Saturday night. One will be for Gatti and the other will be for his son, James McGirt Jr., who will make his pro debut on the undercard.
Ward, who retired after his last fight with Gatti and now trains amateurs in Boston, will also be on hand. Through their suffering in the ring, Ward and Gatti became close friends and play golf together. When Gatti leaves his dressing room Saturday night, Ward, wearing Gatti's colors, will lead the charge into the ring.
''I can't explain it, how deep the respect is,'' Ward said. ''But let me tell you, it's a lot nicer being on the other side. At least I can eat.''
BOXING
