Walter J. Turnbull, the founder and director of the Boys Choir of Harlem, will resign as chief executive but remain as artistic director, and his brother, Horace, will resign immediately as executive vice president under an agreement the choir and the city are close to completing.
The pact, whose final wording was being negotiated late last night, would effectively remove the Turnbulls from administration of the Boys Choir Academy, the school run jointly by the choir and the city's Department of Education. Nevertheless, the agreement would represent something of a victory for Walter Turnbull, given that the Education Department had said it would sever ties with the Choir Academy if the Turnbulls stayed on.
The world-renowned choir has been in upheaval in the two weeks since the special commissioner of investigation for the city's schools, Richard J. Condon, released a memo accusing Dr. Turnbull of failing to report a student's allegations of molestation by a choir academy counselor. Dr. Turnbull allowed the counselor to continue interacting with students after he was banned from the school, said the memo, which was sent to the choir board before Christmas.
The counselor, Frank Jones Jr., was convicted in 2002 and sentenced to two years in prison. The student has filed a lawsuit that seeks $30 million in compensatory and punitive damages.
''The goal of this agreement is to preserve the institution of the Boys Choir of Harlem, which provides important services to children of this city,'' said Dennis M. Walcott, the deputy mayor who oversees education. ''But at the same time, we wanted to address issues raised by the special commissioner of investigation report.''
''It is our desire to make sure that the Boys Choir continues to provide essential services that they've been offering for years,'' Mr. Walcott added. ''And the city looks forward to providing the appropriate management support.''
In coming to terms with the choir, the city would essentially be accepting a three-page proposal submitted to the Education Department by the choir, a proposal the two sides discussed in person on Tuesday.
Under the proposal, which was obtained by The New York Times yesterday, the choir's board and Dr. Turnbull, in consultation with the Department of Education, would conduct an employment search to fill the executive positions that would be vacated by the Turnbulls. The school would also create a new dean of students position. The person who fills it would report to the choir's chief executive and the principal of the choir academy ''with responsibility for all matters relating to the counseling of students, and the safety of their learning environment during all choir activities, performances, trips and other choir undertakings,'' according to the proposal.
The Department of Education has already reassigned the choir academy's principal, John King, and named an interim principal, Deloris Brown.
The choir also called for the appointment of an interim independent monitor to assure that the city's regulations against sexual misconduct are followed, that ''choir students are provided a safe and secure environment'' and that ''procedures are in place so that all trips and performances by the choir are properly chaperoned.''
To serve as monitor, the proposal suggests Stanley N. Lupkin, a former city commissioner of investigation who is now executive vice president of Decision Strategies, which specializes in developing and putting in place compliance programs for public and private companies.
In its proposal letter, the choir board says it consulted Mr. Lupkin as well as Bart M. Schwartz, who was chief of the city's federal criminal division under Rudolph W. Giuliani when the former mayor was the United States attorney.
The proposal was addressed to Chad Vignola, the Education Department's general counsel, and Mr. Condon, the special commissioner of investigation. It was signed by Anthony P. Coles, a former deputy mayor in the Giuliani administration who is now at the law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
A city official who spoke on the condition of anonymity said the Education Department had been displeased with the choir's attempts to portray Dr. Turnbull as a victim, believing the focus should be on saving the institution, not saving Dr. Turnbull's job.
No one involved disputes that Dr. Turnbull has made important contributions to the choir. But the city official who insisted on anonymity said the choir should be able to continue on without him. ''Any time a founder says the institution can't survive without me,'' the official said, ''that institution is doomed to failure.''
