The proposed budget that Gov. George E. Pataki rolled out on Tuesday relies on some questionable revenue sources to improve failing schools and close a $5.1 billion budget gap, starting with the money expected to come from video lottery terminals, lawmakers and budget experts say.
Governor Pataki, a third-term Republican, has proposed establishing eight new gambling parlors with the slot machine-like devices, in addition to the eight parlors already approved for horse tracks. Together, the governor has projected, the gambling parlors will produce about $240 million for the state in the fiscal year beginning in April, and that sum should grow to more than $2 billion in the next three years.
Under his plan, all that money would be earmarked for improving New York City schools and other failing school systems in the state, as the state's highest court has ordered.
Lawmakers from both parties, however, have expressed reservations about the plan and about other parts of the budget. Some said the budget plan is so porous it essentially leaves it up to the Legislature to find the ways to fill the holes.
In the case of the video lottery terminals, for instance, the constitutionality of the gambling parlors has been challenged in court by the Saratoga Chamber of Commerce, and a five-judge panel could upset the plan any day if it rules against the state.
Even if the court upholds the plan, and Mr. Pataki has confidently predicted that it will, most of the racetracks still have not opened their parlors. Saratoga and four other tracks upstate have plans to open them this year, but the two around New York City, Yonkers Raceway and Aqueduct, are not expected to have parlors running until next year, budget officials say.
No one knows what the new parlors will look like or where they will be located, though under the governor's plan, state lottery officials would ask casino operators to submit proposals. The governor has only proposed legislation saying the new parlors cannot be within 15 miles of upstate tracks or in the suburbs of Westchester, Rockland and Putnam Counties. Five could be put in the city, but not in the Bronx or Queens, or above 59th Street in Manhattan.
Assembly Democrats, many of whom are from the city, are leery of the proposal. First, they point out, the Board of Regents has estimated the cost of meeting the court order to provide a sound, basic education to city children as closer to $4 billion, and the money is needed sooner. In addition, some city lawmakers regard gambling as a tax on the poor. Finally, many say the supply of revenue from the gambling parlors might be unreliable and predict that the court will reject it.
''Not only is it not wise, I think it would not be approved by the court,'' said Assemblyman Steven Sanders, the Education Committee chairman. The video lottery proposal has ''multiple flaws,'' he added.
Legislative leaders, however, recognize that the governor has now thrown the burden of finding an alternative to the parlors on their shoulders. Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, said on Tuesday that he did not want a casino on every street corner, but he was careful not to rule out the governor's idea.
The Republican leader of the Senate, Joseph L. Bruno, has made it clear that his caucus might have to accept the gambling expansion proposal because raising broad-based taxes was out of the question in an election year. The plan for video lottery terminals may be questioned by everyone, ''but they end up having to support it,'' he said.
Mr. Pataki has expanded gambling significantly since taking office in 1995, pushing a law through the Legislature enabling him to negotiate compacts with Indian tribes to open six new Indian casinos. So far, however, only one of those has opened: last year in Niagara Falls. The state lottery has also expanded under his tenure, as has the Quick Draw gambling games in taverns. The State Lottery Division took in $5.39 billion last year, up from $3.61 billion in his first year in office.
Lisa Dewald Stoll, the governor's spokeswoman, said Mr. Pataki did not like gambling, but considered it a lesser evil than raising income taxes, business taxes or other broad-based taxes. When asked about the charge that gambling saps poor people of their money, Mr. Pataki has said again and again that New Yorkers are already squandering dollars at casinos in Connecticut, New Jersey and Ontario, and that the state should grab some of that revenue.
"The governor knows broad-based tax increases hurt New York's economy and our ability to create new jobs,'' Ms. Stoll said. ''The lottery expansion will create new jobs and allow New Yorkers to see the dollars they already spend in states like Connecticut and New Jersey invested in their own state and in their own children.''
Besides the gambling parlors, Mr. Pataki's budget also relies on accounting changes and capping the state and local contributions to the Common Retirement Fund to save $440 million and help close the budget gap.
Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat, has said those changes would be illegal because they would harm the $117 billion fund's viability and would violate a constitutional ban on using the pension fund for fiscal relief. The comptroller, who is the sole fiduciary for the fund, informed the governor in late December of his stance, but Mr. Pataki put the savings into his budget plan in any case. His aides say he still hopes to negotiate a resolution with Mr. Hevesi.
''I think it was inappropriate for him to take this as a savings because it's illusory, it's not real,'' Mr. Hevesi said on Wednesday. ''Even if I agreed and they passed the law, one retiree goes to court and wins.''
The governor included other savings that if history serves as a guide, the Legislature will never accept. Among them are cuts to college scholarships worth $227 million, several reductions in benefits under Medicaid to save $425 million and cutbacks in aid for school buildings, trade schools and buses amounting to $186 million.
Finally, he listed a savings of $170 million from his refusal to go along with the Legislature's plan to refinance and assume New York City's remaining debt from the fiscal crisis of the 1970's, even though the matter is still being fought out in court.
The result is a budget that challenges legislators to come up with alternatives to these cuts, a process that is more complicated this year because of the coming election and the court order to improve schools.
''There is the potential for a huge fight,'' one senior Democratic legislative staff member said, insisting on anonymity. ''I can see places where this gets very contentious, and that's clearly not what the governor wants.''
