A flurry of acquisitions at the Sundance Film Festival here has kept studio and independent distributors racing from one bidding war to another, although the features in competition seem not to have set audiences on fire.
Now that the festival, the leading showplace for independent film, is half over, at least seven films have been bought for distribution -- five features and two documentaries -- with several others close to deals.
Those bought include ''The Motorcycle Diaries,'' a poetic account of the political awakening of the revolutionary Che Guevara, by Walter Salles (''Central Station''). Focus Features snapped it up after a bidding war on the night of its premiere.
In an unusual joint deal Miramax and Fox Searchlight bought ''Garden State,'' a comedy written and directed by its star, Zach Braff of the television comedy ''Scrubs.'' Fox Searchlight also bought the crowd-pleasing ''Napoleon Dynamite,'' a comedy about a misfit teenager in the style of the director Wes Anderson, which drew competing bids, while Sony Pictures Classics picked up ''Riding Giants,'' the festival's opening-night documentary on surfing.
The hectic business activity seems to be partly a function of the sheer number of distributors now involved in independent films. Every major studio has an art-house division, and their acquisition executives are scouring the festival for hidden gems, or at least releases to fill their slates.
''It's a lesser year,'' said Michael Barker, co-president of Sony Pictures Classics. ''But the psychological mind set, whether valid or not, is that if you're a player in the independent world, you have to buy a movie at Sundance.'' That studio also announced that it had just acquired ''Heights,'' a Merchant-Ivory film not showing at Sundance.
The competition has led to some unusual arrangements. Miramax's co-chairman Harvey Weinstein mounted a pitched campaign to win ''Garden State,'' calling Mr. Braff and his producers nonstop through Saturday, after the premiere, people involved in the deal said.
But they said Mr. Braff and his team were reluctant to entrust the film to Mr. Weinstein, who has become notorious for recutting movies after he buys them, a practice that has earned him the nickname ''Harvey Scissorhands.'' ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' (Simon &amp; Schuster), Peter Biskind's new book about the independent film industry, details example after example of Sundance directors seduced and then disappointed by Mr. Weinstein.
In negotiations that stretched into early Sunday morning, Mr. Weinstein, calling from his home in Connecticut, surprised the producers by introducing Fox Searchlight's president, Peter Rice, into the conversation. Until then Mr. Rice had been a competing bidder.
''He said, 'We ran into Peter Rice in a bar,' and out of nowhere Peter Rice is on the phone,'' said Andrew Hurwitz, a lawyer representing the filmmakers. ''It was the most surreal moment, creepy. We all looked at each other. It was utterly insane.''
Miramax and Fox Searchlight closed the $5 million deal quickly, with the two studios splitting domestic and international distribution.
In past years distributors have been hurt by spending too much on movies that won over critics and earned standing ovations at the festival, only to fizzle at the box office. The examples include ''Happy, Texas'' and most notoriously, ''Care of the Spitfire Grill.''
As a result, many acquisition executives are reluctant to reveal the real price they paid for movies, just as producers are reluctant to reveal what movies actually cost. Fox Searchlight announced that it had paid $3 million for ''Napoleon Dynamite,'' but the film's 24-year-old director, Jared Hess, said the studio had paid $4.75 million after several competing bids were lower.
Gary Gilbert, whose company financed ''Garden State,'' initially said that the movie's production cost was $4 million, but after the film sold, he acknowledged that the figure was closer to $2.5 million. He lied, he said, because ''we didn't want distributors to know'' what the movie really cost. Fox Searchlight and Miramax announced that they had paid $4 million for the film; others with knowledge of the deal said it was $5 million. These prices were typical of recent years.
Lions Gate, an independent studio, bought ''Open Water,'' a low-budget thriller about a scuba-diving couple accidentally left in shark-filled waters. The film, which cost a reported $200,000, was shot using real sharks, with the actors in the water throwing meat to distract them.
''Because of the low budget there was no mechanical shark, no C.G.I.,'' said Tom Ortenberg, Lions Gate's president for releasing, referring to computer-generated images. ''It makes it all the more terrifying, with real people, real sharks, no one in cages.'' He said he had paid $2.1 million for the film.
Late Tuesday night Warner Independent Pictures bought ''We Don't Live Here Anymore,'' a drama about infidelity involving two couples, starring Mark Ruffalo, Laura Dern and Peter Krause, for $2 million. That night IFC Films also bought the fake documentary ''Confederate States of America,'' which projects what would have happened if the South had won the Civil War.
After the premiere of ''The Motorcycle Diaries,'' a Spanish-language film starring Gael García Bernal as the charismatic Che, distributors hovered in the lobby, clutching their cellphones, making bids. At the after-screening dinner party for the filmmakers, David Linde, co-president of Focus Features, wandered in to make a personal appeal to buy the film. He then perched with his executives at the restaurant's sushi bar, while other distributors hovered in corners.
''The deal didn't close until after dinner,'' said Michael Nozik, an executive with Robert Redford's company, who helped produce the film. Executives close to the filmmaker said Focus had paid $4 million for the North American rights to ''The Motorcycle Diaries,'' which had a relatively high budget for a Sundance movie, reportedly about $10 million.
A host of other films seemed close to striking distribution deals. They included ''The Woodsman,'' an intense drama about pedophilia starring Kevin Bacon, and the documentary ''Metallica,'' an often hilarious behind-the-scenes account of this heavy-metal band's problems, featuring long sessions with the members' therapist.
The race to buy has led one studio executive to propose that Sundance create a more formal film market to reduce the chaos of bidding wars.
''I proposed to Sundance that they do a virtual film market next year, where every filmmaker will have a Web site, and every buyer could have a Web site,'' said Tom Bernard, co-president of Sony Pictures Classics. ''It's all about the movies that win prizes and don't get sold.''
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  A picture caption in The Arts on Thursday with the continuation of an article about film purchases by distributors at the Sundance festival in Utah misstated the surname of a former surfer shown with Stacy Peralta, director of the surfing documentary ''Riding Giants.'' He is Grant Washburn, not Washington.
