It was a fashion mismatch. There with her shimmering accessories and halter-top tennis dress designed by Diane Von Furstenberg was Venus Williams. There across the net in her plain white T-shirt and no-nonsense ballcap was Vera Douchevina.
Despite the rust that is still flaking off Williams's power game after so many months away, it was a tennis mismatch, too. Douchevina, a 17-year-old Russian who was once the junior Wimbledon champion, showed flashes of promise but was never a genuine threat on Thursday, particularly when Williams was standing well inside the baseline to swing away at Douchevina's serve.
Late in the second set, intent on stealing a page from Williams's playbook, Douchevina moved well in to receive serve herself. Williams looked her over imperiously and fired an ace to go ahead by 5-1.
Six-month layoff or not, Williams still does not look vulnerable to the Tour's rank and file, although if she does not volley or serve a bit more crisply, she will be much more vulnerable to the likes of Justine Henin-Hardenne, Kim Clijsters and maybe even Amélie Mauresmo, the athletic Frenchwoman who has played well in Australia.
But for now, in the wake of her 6-4, 6-2 victory over Douchevina, Williams is back in the third round of the Australian Open, a little sore in the right ankle after twisting it in her first-round match and perhaps a little sore farther up the right leg, where she is sporting a white patch just below the knee to control chronic tendinitis. Williams will face 25th-seeded Lisa Raymond, who defeated Anca Barna of Germany, 6-3, 6-4.
''I had a few more errors today than what I wanted, but really the whole goal was just to keep hitting out,'' Williams said. ''I felt that I could have pulled back, of course, and cut my errors in half, but I really wanted to go after her.''
While Douchevina tried and failed to strike a blow for the younger generation, other emerging talents fared better. Tatyana Golovin, a 15-year-old who was born in Russia, trained in the United States and represents France, defeated 14th-seeded Anna Smashnova-Pistolesi of Israel, 6-2, 6-3, to reach the third round. The Russian star Marat Safin's younger sister, the 17-year-old Dinara Safina, eliminated 27th-seeded Amanda Coetzer of South Africa, 7-5, 6-3.
In the men's draw, Rafael Nadal, a Spaniard who will turn 18 in June, advanced to the third round in his first Australian Open by wearing down Thierry Ascione of France, 6-4, 3-6, 7-5, 6-1.
Australia also has a teenager in the third round: Todd Reid, 19, fought through cramps and doubts to defeat Sargis Sargsian, 6-3, 6-4, 4-6, 6-7 (6), 6-4, in 3 hours 36 minutes.
Reid served for the match at 6-5 in the fourth set, shortly after vomiting on court on his way to his chair, but he dropped his serve and the ensuing tie breaker. Though he was hobbling between points and in obvious distress throughout the final set, Reid maintained a slight edge. After failing to serve for the match again at 5-3, he closed out the most significant victory of his career by breaking Sargsian back in the next game.
Nadal made a major impact last season in his rookie year: defeating accomplished Spanish elders like Albert Costa and Carlos Moya with a blend of aggression and enthusiasm. Nadal was treated for tendinitis in his right knee during his match with Ascione. He also needed a lot of help from the Frenchman in the third set, when Ascione squandered three set points while cramping in the legs.
Though his serve remains a weakness, Nadal's court coverage and ground strokes are not, and he will now face either Karol Kucera of the Slovak Republic or Lleyton Hewitt, the Australian once ranked No. 1.
Hewitt's fiancée, Clijsters, preceded him at Rod Laver Arena, and though she is still having therapy for a sprained ankle, she did not keep Hewitt waiting long, overwhelming Maria Elena Camerin of Italy, 6-0, 6-0, disregarding shouts from the crowd of ''Give her a game!''
''What do you want me to do? Hit the ball in the net?'' the second-seeded Clijsters said to an on-court interviewer afterward.
MATCH POINTS
Top-seeded JUSTINE HENIN-HARDENNE of Belgium advanced to the third round with a 6-1, 6-4 defeat of CAMILLE PIN on Wednesday. . . . No. 5 LINDSAY DAVENPORT was dissatisfied with her timing and movement in her 6-3, 3-6, 6-0 defeat of the resourceful EMILIE LOIT of France. . . . MARTINA NAVRATILOVA, playing doubles at age 47 with LISA RAYMOND, confirmed that this would be her final year on the Tour.
TENNIS
