For more than a century, the Peabody Museum at Harvard University has owned a small paper label that says, in a spindly, old-fashioned script, ''Indian Necklace made of the claws of the Grizzly Bear -- Presented by Capt. Lewis and Clark.'' Whether the museum actually owned the necklace itself was uncertain until last month, when it turned up under the wrong name and among the wrong artifacts. The point of a museum is not only to preserve remarkable objects but also to find them at will. Yet somehow the fact that this necklace was lost for so long makes it seem all the more remarkable -- as if it had come fresh from the hands of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark.
This necklace carries with it, of course, the power of association, the unrecorded occasion when a Native American placed it into the hands of Lewis or Clark some 200 years ago. The necklace would have had a considerably greater power to them than it does to us, for they knew the grizzly bear firsthand. They had killed grizzlies on the way westward, presenting the claws of one bear to the Nez Percé, and they had come to admire the courage and ferocity of those creatures, which were once common across the West. ''These bear being so hard to die reather itimedates us,'' Lewis wrote. ''I must confess that I do not like the gentlemen and had reather fight two Indians than one bear.''
But the 38 claws in this necklace had been gathered by Indians, who would perhaps rather have fought one bear than two white men. Each claw was once covered in red pigment and is bound with rawhide to a fur foundation. We know nothing about the men who killed the bears or the women who made the necklace or the animal who gave its fur for it or the bears who surrendered their claws or even where the red pigment came from. But all those lives are interwoven in this one artifact, a diplomatic gift bestowed upon Lewis and Clark at a time when such gestures were about to be overridden by history. Until last month, only six of the Indian objects Lewis and Clark brought back with them existed, all of them at the Peabody. Now there is a seventh.
