Stepping into a contentious debate in Congress over country-of-origin labeling for supermarket beef and produce, Agriculture Secretary Ann M. Veneman said Wednesday that she supported a two-year delay in the program because Congress needed more time ''to put some refinements'' on a farm law that requires it starting next fall.
The secretary's comments, her first in public about the labeling question, came during more than two hours of testimony before the House Agriculture Committee on how her department was handling the investigation of the first case of mad cow disease in the United States.
She also outlined her views on labeling in a letter sent Tuesday to Senator Michael B. Enzi, Republican of Wyoming, who has joined with Democrats to oppose the delay.
''The country-of-origin provision contained in the farm bill is a targeted retail marketing tool, not a food safety or animal health program,'' Ms. Veneman wrote, ''and it should be treated as such.''
The labels are supported by independent ranchers and small family farmers, including constituents of the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle, who is facing a tight race for re-election in South Dakota. Backers contend that ''made in America'' labels would help fetch a higher price for American meat and produce, but opponents, including corporate ranchers and the meatpacking industry, say the labels would impose a costly regulatory burden and do little to improve food safety.
The labeling requirement is due to take effect on Sept. 30 under farm legislation that was enacted in 2002. But an $820 billion catchall spending measure now before Congress would mandate the two-year delay, and Senate Democrats have been holding up this bill as a result. A second procedural vote is set for Thursday, however, and the Democrats, who have been unable to win any concessions from the Republican leadership, are expected to drop their objections and allow the bill to pass.
Even so, three Senate Democrats -- Ron Wyden of Oregon, Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota and Tim Johnson of South Dakota -- held a news conference Wednesday morning to hammer home their point once again.
''They're trying to duck,'' Mr. Wyden said of Republicans, ''and what we're trying to do is generate so much grass-roots awareness that they can't push this under the rug.''
The labeling program became a particularly hot issue in the wake of the Dec. 23 discovery that a cow in Washington State, whose origin was later traced to Canada, had been infected with mad cow disease. Democrats have used the subsequent mad cow scare to press their case for the country-of-origin labeling, saying Americans want to know where supermarket meat and produce come from.
Senator Daschle said Wednesday that Ms. Veneman's remarks had caught him off guard; since the mad cow controversy erupted, the administration had been silent on labeling.
''They're using a backdoor approach to undermine the law'' already enacted, he said, adding that the two-year delay would be ''tantamount to killing the program.''
Ms. Veneman's appearance before the House Agriculture Committee was her first on Capitol Hill since the mad cow scare began. She declared at the hearing that the American meat supply was safe, and once again urged the nation's trading partners, particularly Japan and Mexico, the major importers of American beef, to reopen the door to imports. Of the dozens of countries that have closed their borders to that beef, Poland on Wednesday became the first to reverse itself, though it is not a significant importer of the product.
Ms. Veneman also said her department was considering a mandatory livestock identification program that would help trace infected animals. But she drew the line against testing every animal for mad cow disease, saying such a policy would not be ''based on sound science.''
