Moving up in the New Hampshire polls, Senator John Kerry ignored his rivals on Wednesday and blasted President Bush on health care and charged that new rules on overtime supported by the administration would bar many veterans from overtime pay.
Mr. Kerry said the president had rightly praised American troops and veterans in his State of the Union address. ''But once again it's an example of a say-one-thing-and-do-another administration,'' he said, pointing to the overtime dispute.
An omnibus spending bill has been stalled in Congress in a partisan dispute over provisions to which Democrats object. One would allow the Bush administration to press ahead with rules that Democrats say could strip millions of their right to overtime pay. Hitting that theme, Mr. Kerry said the president would treat those who trained for some skilled jobs in the military as professionals ineligible for overtime pay, adding that this ''made my blood boil.''
''We need a president who understands that the first definition of patriotism is keeping faith with those who wore the uniform of the country,'' Mr. Kerry, a Vietnam veteran, said at Daniel Webster College in Nashua.
He spoke as two new polls showed him gaining in New Hampshire. The separate polls, in The Boston Herald and The Boston Globe, each put Mr. Kerry 10 points ahead of his closest rival, Howard Dean, though each had a margin of sampling error of close to five percentage points. Other polls released Tuesday and Wednesday showed the two in a near draw.
Last week, a Boston Globe/WBZ-TV poll showed Dr. Dean with a 20-point lead over Mr. Kerry, with Gen. Wesley K. Clark between them. Primaries are notoriously hard to survey accurately because of the difficulty in identifying likely voters, as well as rapid fluctuations in choices.
Mr. Kerry also began commercials showing people praising his ''leadership and experience'' and emphasizing his endorsement by the Concord and Nashua newspapers.
Wednesday night at Phillips Exeter Academy, he drew about 1,000 people, easily his largest crowd for a stump speech in New Hampshire.
In his noon speech in Nashua, he rolled out a few new phrases to depict the president as out of touch with everyday Americans and in the thrall of the ''special interests.''
''You can tell from his State of the Union address that the president is facing re-election,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I wish he'd face reality. Watching President Bush's speech last night, one thing kept coming back to me: He just doesn't get it.''
He invoked ''the unheard majority in the health care debate,'' saying, ''We need a president who's going to make sure their voice is finally heard, that they have access to the White House, not just those who contribute significantly to campaigns.''
Mr. Kerry said he would reverse rules barring Medicare and states from negotiating for discounts on bulk purchases of prescription drugs and repeal a ban on re-importing American-made drugs from Canada. He called on Mr. Bush to work with states like New Hampshire that have tried to start re-importation.
Deriding the Medicare bill enacted last year as a benefit only for pharmaceutical companies, Mr. Kerry said, ''If I'm president, I pledge to you, we will repeal that phony bill.''
As Mr. Kerry aimed his fire at the White House, the second-place finisher in the Iowa caucuses, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, briefly detoured to his native South Carolina, where the Democratic primary will be held on Feb. 3.
At a packed sandwich shop in Greenville, Mr. Edwards sounded his themes of spreading optimism and hope in a country he sees dispirited by job loss, financial insecurity and shrinking education opportunities. And naturally he emphasized his roots in a state whose primary he says he must win to remain in contention. ''I was born here, I still have a lot of family here,'' Mr. Edwards said to raucous applause, adding, ''This is part of who I am and I intend to compete every way I know how.''
Later, back in New Hampshire, Mr. Edwards reprised a line comparing his electoral potential in the South to that of his Northeastern rivals. Answering a question at Roland's diner in Nashua on how he would get his agenda through a Republican-led Congress, he said: ''The question is, Who on the top of the Democratic ticket can go every place in America and campaign with the candidates and strengthen their ability to get elected?''
He added, ''In Georgia, do you want John Edwards campaigning with you? Do you want Howard Dean campaigning with you? Do you want John Kerry campaigning with you?''
Later Wednesday evening, Mr. Edwards drew one of his largest crowds yet in New Hampshire, some 400 people who filled a V.F.W. hall in Portsmouth to overflowing. He drew strong applause for his vow to diminish the influence of special interests in Washington who he said block legislation favorable to low-income and middle-class Americans.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who moved to Manchester rather than compete in Iowa, called the New Hampshire primary race wide open and talked up his ability to beat Mr. Bush as he spoke to high school students and business leaders. He urged voters to weigh his experience, consistency and predictability.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS
