As bidders in two states jockeyed over the fate of the New Jersey Nets, the basketball team's fans were mostly cool to indifferent -- a little like they were during the team's entire tenure in the state, where attendance at its games was, even in the best of times, lagging.
To be sure, there were a few staunch fans who lamented the team's possible move to Brooklyn after its sale late yesterday to the developer Bruce C. Ratner.
''It's so depressing,'' said Shawn Belschwender, 38, an illustrator who helps direct the JoeNetsfan.com Web site. ''New Jersey doesn't have anything,'' he said, nodding only grudgingly to the Devils, who won the Stanley Cup last season.
The Giants and the Jets, who play in the Meadowlands, have chosen to be identified with New York. It seems, Belschwender said, that living in New Jersey means never having anything to call your own.
But many more New Jerseyans were like John Tarro, 45, who shrugged when told of the team's sale and potential move. ''It doesn't matter to me,'' said Tarro, a manager at a trucking company. ''It's going to cut down on some of this traffic, that's what it's going to do.''
The state's cool relationship with the team has hindered the nearly five-year effort to build an arena for the Nets and the Devils in Newark, the state's largest city.
At various times under three governors, the arena plan has advanced, stumbled and been reborn. Until last summer, when the team was put on the auction block, Newark seemed poised to use proceeds from a newly negotiated lease of Newark Liberty International Airport to help team owners finance a planned $375 million arena.
Some thought an arena in Newark might more firmly establish the teams with the state's residents.
''Part of the problem the Nets face lies in the lack of a Jersey identity,'' said Dr. Barry E. Truchil, a sociologist at Rider University, who added that he thought the Newark arena might have been a place ''where over time, an identity with the team as a Jersey team would develop, and that over time could help foster a stronger Jersey identity.''
Mayor Sharpe James of Newark was in Washington at a meeting of the U.S. Conference of Mayors, a spokeswoman said, and unavailable to comment on the sale.
State Senator Richard J. Codey, the leader of the Democrats in New Jersey Senate, noted that it would be years before the team had a Brooklyn arena in which to play. In the meantime, the Nets were likely to continue playing at Continental Arena.
''If they have to stay there for years, think about the crowds,'' Codey said. ''You could shoot a cannon off in there on game nights and no one would get hit.''
PRO BASKETBALL: THE JILTED
