President Bush offered a skimpy menu of warmed-over health care proposals in his State of the Union address this week, evidently hoping to convince voters that he is doing something about the millions of Americans who have joined the ranks of the uninsured during his administration. Even if some of his ideas were adopted, they would be unlikely to have much impact on expanding health coverage for the uninsured or on slowing the rise in medical costs. But much of what he said seemed aimed less at passing real reform than at courting swing voters. The president, after all, already has a health care measure to campaign on: the Medicare prescription drug program. And he is calling for his huge tax cuts for the wealthy to be made permanent, a step that would leave little money for costly new health care measures in the years ahead.
The president's main proposals have been kicking around for years without exciting enough interest to be passed by Congress. These involve tax credits to help lower-income people buy health insurance and new rules to allow small businesses to band together to offer insurance.
The president called on Congress to provide refundable tax credits of up to $1,000 each for low-income individuals and $3,000 for families to help them buy health insurance. That does not seem like nearly enough to enable people near the poverty level to buy individual policies, which are typically the most costly of all, yet the mere existence of the credit might encourage some employers to drop their current coverage. At most, this credit might help a few million of the more than 43 million uninsured Americans buy coverage, at a cost once estimated at $89 billion over 10 years.
The proposal to let small businesses band together through trade associations to provide health coverage to their workers may seem reasonable at first glance, but it is fraught with potential difficulties. Bills previously considered in Congress would exempt association plans from state regulations and participation in state risk pools. How much such plans would help uninsured workers is uncertain. But they would clearly benefit the National Federation of Independent Business, a major Republican Party contributor that could reap substantial revenue selling policies. Its members would also welcome lighter regulation from the federal government. An earlier program like this led to fraud and insolvencies.
The chief new proposal in the president's speech was a tax benefit to encourage people to set up health savings accounts, as authorized in the recent Medicare legislation. Under that measure, individuals who take out high-deductible insurance policies to cover very large medical bills can invest money in tax-free savings accounts to pay for routine medical expenses. The accounts will get unusually generous tax treatment. Now Mr. Bush proposes to allow participants to deduct the full cost of the premiums for the high-deductible coverage as well. The accounts are intended to make people more cost-conscious in deciding what care is really necessary, a worthy goal, but they have the potential to interest mostly those who are healthy and relatively well off.
