None of Our Rowdy Friends Have Settled Down
The event on Tuesday night was billed as a bipartisan viewing of PRESIDENT BUSH's State of the Union address.
But a quick scan of the room made it seem as if the EASTERN ESTABLISHMENT of political, business and media types had been told to meet at the closest treehouse. DAVID ROCKEFELLER; PETER G. PETERSON, chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations; NICHOLAS LEMANN, dean of Columbia's journalism school; DAVID DINKINS; TINA BROWN and HAROLD EVANS; even MOBY, the outspoken rock star, was there.
The host was The Atlantic Monthly, and the place was Madison Avenue at the swank Sony Club atop the Chippendale-style skyscraper designed by PHILIP JOHNSON.
The impression was confirmed by the electronic straw poll (as well as the groans during the president's televised speech) that 73 percent of the room ''strongly disagreed'' with Mr. Bush's idea of abstinence education to fight venereal disease.
''We see a common theme here, of godless New York,'' joked the evening's host, JAMES FALLOWS, a correspondent for The Atlantic. He then introduced WALTER CRONKITE.
''Never before in the history of this nation,'' said Mr. Cronkite, in his finest Men-Walk-on-Moon delivery, ''has a president of the United States taken such a firm stand, as he did tonight, against -- gonorrhea.'' Pause. Guffaws. Applause.
GEORGETTE MOSBACHER, a prominent Republican fund-raiser, leapt to President Bush's defense.
Social Security, education and other domestic issues weren't addressed by BILL CLINTON and the Democrats when they were in office, she said, despite the simultaneous advantages of low interest rates, low inflation and a budget surplus.
Indignant, LAUREN HUTTON cited the quadrupling of the national debt and Mr. Clinton's attempts to reduce it. ''But I guess you can't read or something,'' said Ms. Hutton, glaring at Ms. Mosbacher. ''Because I can, and I'm a model! ''
Like a Christian surrounded by lions, Ms. Mosbacher seemed to radiate defiance. ''You don't have to personally insult me to make a point,'' Ms. Mosbacher said. ''I didn't insult you.''
Ms. Hutton, taken aback, replied, ''How did I personally insult you by saying I'm a model?''
Ms. Mosbacher, accepting some sort of Warner Brothers cartoon logic, said, ''That's an insult to you!''
Then Ms. Mosbacher gathered her purse and a copy of The Atlantic Monthly, as if about to leave. But she stayed awhile longer, before leaving, untheatrically.
Dude, Where's My Gun?
ASHTON KUTCHER, paramour of DEMI MOORE and avatar of ''Punk'd,'' cannot go anywhere these days where photographers may gather without something in their reptilian brainstems that says circle, scent, pounce.
So it was at the Mandarin Oriental Hotel on Columbus Circle yesterday when Mr. Kutcher, just in from Park City and the Sundance Film Festival, bounded onstage. Suddenly, paparazzi thrilled to the chase, electronic flashes flaring, shouts from behind lenses of ''Ashton, this way!'' ''Ashton, that way!'' ''No, Ashton, over here!''
Mr. Kutcher, wearing a green ski cap and a tie-and-sweater combination, took it all in good-natured, arms-akimbo stride. By now, he has fashioned his own boyish shtick to amuse reporters while avoiding questions he finds annoying.
At one point, a television reporter was in mid-Demi question when Mr. Kutcher jumped off stage and, as reporters chuckled, dashed around the room like Groucho Marx. He never answered the question.
Mr. Kutcher was in town -- along with AMY SMART, his co-star in ''The Butterfly Effect,'' which opens tomorrow -- to announce the AOL Moviegoer nominations. But the camera flashes were so retina-threatening that Ms. Smart declared, ''We're not reading these until the flashes stop!''
Mr. Kutcher did answer questions eventually. If I.R.S. agents ever appeared at Mr. Kutcher's door to seize his house and assets, would he weep like JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE, as in a memorable episode of MTV's ''Punk'd?''
Mr. Kutcher, in full imp, replied, ''Ah, I don't know if I'd cry.'' Pause. ''I'd be looking for a gun.''
with Melena Z. Ryzik and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
