Perry McLaughlin, part-time student, longtime Knicks fan, 39-year-old Brooklyn resident, tried to absorb the news as he stood in front of New York City College of Technology in downtown Brooklyn yesterday. The New Jersey Nets had been bought by a man determined to move them to Brooklyn.
There was a sense of celebration, yes, but of competing loyalties, too. But Mr. McLaughlin worked it out.
''I'm a Knicks follower,'' he said, ''but I'm a Brooklyn man first.''
Mr. McLaughlin's moment of soul-searching was lived out in many different ways across the borough yesterday, as word spread that the Brooklyn developer Bruce C. Ratner had bought the Nets for $300 million.
As the theoretical came closer to the real, the dreams come true forced hard reckonings.
There were the nostalgic, who were delighted at the prospect of a major league team in Brooklyn for the first time in some 50 years. There were youngsters who were excited. There were complex philosophical questions of rooting posed by the fact that while the Nets might be headed to the borough, some of Brooklyn's proudest hometown heroes, Lenny Wilkens and Stephon Marbury, are currently making good for the Knicks.
At Lincoln High School in Coney Island, alma mater of Marbury, the schoolyard legend, a custodian named Michael Guastella, 26, predicted: ''There's going to be a major conflict of interest. There's Steph, but now you got a new kid on the block: the Eastern Conference champions. It's going to be a little weird now.''
In sum, the quandary of the moment came down to this: The Nets are coming. Now what?
Mr. McLaughlin opined that the new team would bring jobs as well as respect to a borough that can always use more of both.
At this, his friend and former classmate Burshell Agaess shook his head. ''Yeah, man, but the Nets?'' Mr. Agaess, 22, said. Whether it was the New Jersey in front of the team's name or the expansion-team feel that still clings to the franchise, Mr. Agaess said he could not go there. He said he would continue rooting for the Los Angeles Lakers.
Still, Mr. McLaughlin framed an imaginary marquee with his hands.
''It would be a great rivalry: 'The Brooklyn Nets versus the New York Knicks,' '' he said.
Mr. Agaess protested that his Lakers, at any rate, were winning. Mr. McLaughlin patted him on the head pityingly. ''He has no pride,'' he said. ''Once they win the championship, he'll try and ride on the bandwagon, and I'll kick him right off.''
Of course, if and when Mr. Ratner clears all the financial and political hurdles in his way and builds the team a home -- he seeks to erect a $435 million arena in the heart of Brooklyn -- the Nets may no longer be the contending team they have been in recent years.
Mr. Wilkens, the former Boys High School player, may no longer be coaching the Knicks, and Mr. Marbury may be doing Geritol ads, or, for that matter, playing for the Lakers.
But the question will remain.
For some sports fans, the choice will be an easy one. Raymond Cameron, an electrician walking past the spot near Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues where Mr. Ratner wants to build the arena, was ecstatic at the prospect of having a local alternative to the recently hapless Knicks. ''The Knicks are awful,'' he said. ''I'm a Knick fan because I have to be. The Nets, they actually play basketball.''
Marty Markowitz, the Brooklyn borough president and one of the loudest voices in support of Mr. Ratner's plans, has already started dismissively referring to New York's other N.B.A. team as the Manhattan Knicks. When told of Mr. Ratner's purchase, Mr. Markowitz declared Brooklyn's destiny completely fulfilled. ''This might be the strawberries on the best cheesecake in America,'' he said.
Others said they would not even think of adopting a new favorite. ''There's still only one true New York team,'' said Kevin Roberts, 18, a student at Benjamin Banneker High School in Clinton Hill. ''That's the Knicks. I don't switch over on my teams. I watch other teams, but they don't mean anything to me.''
Of course, there are plenty of people who oppose the venture, particularly those who stand to lose their homes or places of business if Mr. Ratner builds the arena he wants.
''Allegedly, we live in a country where we are allowed to pursue our dreams,'' said Nenefer Khaptah, 50, the owner of a holistic health center called Geb Hetep that potentially stands in the path of the wrecking ball. ''Yet someone else's dream is being allowed to supersede ours.''
Outside Brooklyn Technical High School, Jason Hargrove, 19, had a diplomatic, if unworkable, solution to the conflict over which team to root for. ''They should put the two teams together and call it a day,'' he said. ''They would have a better chance to get on top in the East.''
His friend Jonathan Tricoche, 18, who welcomed the new franchise to Brooklyn but vowed not to forsake the Knicks, had one piece of advice for the new kids on the block.
''They better not lose if they come here,'' he said.
PRO BASKETBALL: THE STREET
