The wife of a former New Jersey pharmaceutical executive had been involved in an extramarital affair with another man and was killed by her husband after she arrived home early Friday after spending several hours with the man in a hotel, the authorities said yesterday.
The former executive, Jonathan W. Nyce, confronted his wife, Michelle, 34, after she drove the couple's sport utility vehicle into the garage of their Hopewell Township house and then killed her by striking her head against the garage's concrete floor, an assistant Mercer County prosecutor, Thomas Meidt, said during a bail hearing in Trenton yesterday.
In brief remarks during the hearing, Mr. Nyce, 53, denied having any animosity toward his wife and described her death as an accident. ''I have never ever had ill will toward my wife,'' Mr. Nyce said, according to The Associated Press. ''This, what happened, was a pure accident.''
It quoted Mr. Nyce as saying he had never had a history of physical violence ''ever against any person.'' Mr. Nyce's lawyer was quoted as saying that Mr. Nyce did not intend to kill his wife and would plead not guilty to the murder charge the authorities filed over the weekend.
The authorities said yesterday that Mr. Nyce initially denied any involvement in the murder but later said he killed his wife after she lunged toward him with a knife after parking in the garage. The Mercer County prosecutor, Joseph Bocchini Jr., said yesterday that detectives had not found a knife resembling the one Mr. Nyce described and did not believe his account that his wife confronted him with one.
After the killing, Mr. Nyce placed his wife's body in the driver's seat of the S.U.V., got into the front passenger's seat and drove to a snowy embankment about a mile from his home by steering with one hand and pushing on the gas pedal with an ice scraper he held in the other hand, law enforcement officials said yesterday. At the top of the embankment, he got out of the vehicle and let it roll down the hill into a creek. After the vehicle was found on Saturday with only minor damage, detectives believed her head injuries were too severe to have been caused by a crash, officials said.
During the hearing, Judge Charles A. Delehey of New Jersey Superior Court reduced Mr. Nyce's cash bail to $1 million from the $2 million imposed over the weekend.
Since Mrs. Nyce's death, the couple's three children, ages 5, 10 and 12, have been staying with members of Mr. Nyce's family in Pennsylvania.
Mr. Nyce, a former professor of pharmacology at East Carolina University in Greenville, N.C., has been out of work for several months, officials said. Last March, he stepped down as chairman and chief executive of EpiGenesis Pharmaceuticals, a company he helped found in North Carolina in the late 1990's to develop a new drug for treatment of asthma, after a syndicate of private investors took over the company, which is now based in Cranbury, N.J.
