Several of the nearly three dozen prospective jurors interviewed behind closed doors on Tuesday in the government's case against Martha Stewart have bought her products, watched broadcast interviews in which she proclaimed her innocence, or had dealings with her or her company through relatives or colleagues, a court transcript released yesterday shows.
Though many people are familiar with Ms. Stewart's name, the fact that some prospective jurors have had substantial connections to her was intriguing, considering that all of them had already been screened through their answers to a lengthy questionnaire.
According to the transcript, the questionnaire asked prospective jurors their opinions about whether cooperating witnesses involved in plea agreements should receive reduced punishment; whether the federal government is tough enough on people accused of ''lying in interviews''; and whether they believe defense lawyers are ''less truthful than prosecuting attorneys.''
It also asked if they held the view that ''the government is prosecuting Martha Stewart because she is a powerful woman in a man's world.'' When asked about that on Tuesday, a person identified in the transcript only as Prospective Juror 20 replied: ''I can't answer that. I simply don't know why the government -- I assume that the government has its reasons for this prosecution.'' She remained in the jury pool.
Ms. Stewart, the former chief executive of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, is charged with conspiracy, obstruction of justice and securities fraud, all stemming from a 2001 sale of shares in ImClone Systems, a company then run by her friend Samuel D. Waksal. She has pleaded not guilty and is being tried in Federal District Court in Manhattan along with her former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic. He is charged with conspiracy, perjury, making false statements and falsifying documents, and has also pleaded not guilty.
Jurors are being interviewed in secret because of an order issued by the judge, maintaining that the presence of reporters might have a ''chilling effect'' on the jurors' candor. Lawyers for various news organizations, including The New York Times, are seeking to have the order overturned, contending that the presence of Ms. Stewart is likely to be more chilling.
Still, the transcript offers many details about the jury pool, which is drawn from half a dozen counties. One prospective juror, who said she worked at Credit Suisse First Boston, detailed her association with William Drewry, an analyst who has followed Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia and who the transcript indicates may be called as a witness.
''When I first joined the firm, we had spoken about my interest in the company, and I had said that I read the magazine a lot,'' said the woman, identified as Juror 38 in the transcript. Asked by Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum if she could focus solely on what she heard in the courtroom, instead of her personal knowledge of Mr. Drewry if he were to testify, the woman replied, ''It might complicate my ability to dismiss what I know about him personally when he appears for his testimony.''
At the urging of a prosecutor, Karen Patton Seymour, the woman was dismissed. Before she left, the transcript noted, she turned to Ms. Stewart and said: ''I am a huge fan of yours. Good luck.''
Another juror, No. 108, described herself as a fan, as well. Asked by the judge to explain that, the woman, a psychoanalyst, said, ''I own a lot of Martha Stewart stuff,'' and added, ''I think that she has been a very strong and powerful role model for a lot of women in our society.'' Ms. Seymour sought her dismissal, as well, and the judge excused her.
One man, No. 36, was clearly not a fan, at least in the opinion of defense lawyers. During questioning, he informed the court that his wife had been ''unfairly fired'' from her job at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia in September 1999. He added, ''I truly believe, your honor, no, it should not affect my outcome.''
The defense wanted him out. ''You can tell from just the look on his face and the tension when he was answering those questions that he is angry,'' said Robert Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's chief lawyer. The judge excused him.
The transcript also gave clues about possible testimony in the trial. Among the witnesses who may be called are Mary Meeker, a Morgan Stanley analyst, as well as Mr. Drewry and two former assistants. Some prospective jurors were asked whether they knew other people who may testify, including Jean Pigozzi. Both Mr. Pigozzi, an Italian millionaire, and Ms. Stewart had gone to Mr. Waksal's Christmas party in 2001, and Ms. Stewart and Dr. Waksal were to attend Mr. Pigozzi's 50th birthday party in Panama the next month. Nearly all the prospective jurors said they did not know the potential witnesses.
Other potential jurors said that they had seen recent televised interviews of Ms. Stewart, which were part of an extensive campaign to improve her image. One woman, Juror 42, who said she had seen part of a Larry King interview on Dec. 22, replied no when asked by the judge if that would ''affect your ability in this case to reach a verdict based solely on the evidence presented in the courtroom.'' She remained in the group at the end of questioning.
Another, identified as Juror 43, said he had seen a Barbara Walters interview in early November, but added, ''That doesn't affect me, anything what I saw on TV.''
Still, Juror 43 ran afoul of the defense lawyers after he informed the judge that he had grown up in Italy and that in the United States, ''the defendants have, in my opinion, too many rights.'' He was excused.
An additional 28 jurors were questioned, again behind closed doors, during a court session yesterday. Jurors not dismissed are being asked to call the court Sunday night to see if they will be needed Monday, when opening arguments are expected.
