Matt Zuch and Joan Kristensen plan to be divorced by the end of March. But they also intend to remain active partners in the small business they started 16 years ago.
Their story is worth telling because it points to a way past a peril that hangs over millions of family firms where a husband and wife play crucial roles. Mr. Zuch (rhymes with took) and Ms. Kristensen found that the fissure in their marriage did not have to split their company apart, too.
They started Siren Design Inc., a boutique ad agency in Tenafly, N.J., in 1988, when they were dating. Four years later, they married.
Though small, Siren Design has 30 clients, including Sony, Samsung, Novartis and AT&amp;T Worldnet, and in recent years has had annual billings of $650,000 to $1 million. They declined to disclose their salaries but described their income as ''comfortable.''
The business has hit a bump or two over the years, but nothing had quite the impact of their marital split. ''When people found out we were divorcing,'' Mr. Zuch said, ''the responses ranged from 'You two are so evolved' to 'Are you insane?''' He said that a few clients tried to talk them out of it.
It was the stress of raising an ill child that undid their marriage, they say. Their daughter, Natasha, now 6, has early-onset bipolar disorder, although it took years for it to be diagnosed. As a baby, Natasha cried or screamed 16 hours to 18 hours a day. Their pediatrician called it the worst case of colic he ever saw.
Ms. Kristensen subsequently started a support group in Bergen County, where she lives, for parents of children with the disorder. Today, Natasha is on medication and under psychiatric care and has done a 180-degree turn, she says.
''But back then, we were holed up in the house with our daughter, we were arguing, and our marriage just wasn't working,'' Ms. Kristensen said. ''I think I had postpartum depression. I felt like I had too much to do and I was failing at all of it. I needed time to regroup. I didn't even want to talk business with Matt.''
In 1999, she moved out of their home in Alpine, N.J., to an apartment a few miles away. She decided that Natasha, then 2, should remain in a familiar environment, so Mr. Zuch hired a full-time nanny. Ms. Kristensen visited her daughter, but was torn by feelings of guilt and started seeing a therapist and taking antidepressants. Today, Natasha splits her time between the homes.
The first year after the breakup was rough, they say. The company had been on a roll, adding clients and hiring workers. Dealing simultaneously with a growing business and bruised emotions was a challenge.
''We were under extraordinary pressure,'' said Ms. Kristensen, who is the firm's creative director. Mr. Zuch, who handles client relations, was so emotionally devastated that he often hid out in his office, he said.
''I slammed doors,'' he said. ''I threw a phone receiver. I banged a coffee cup on the desk and was left holding only the handle.''
They had six employees at the time -- now they have three -- and tried to keep their breakup under wraps while they saw a marriage counselor. When they finally announced their separation five months later, their art director asked Mr. Zuch if she should look for another job. The day the director of their second office, in North Carolina, learned of the split, she flew to New Jersey to talk to them. They calmed her fears and she flew back.
The copywriter in the office said he was taking bets that the company would not last, and a friend who became a client said he never would have hired them if he had known they were divorcing. ''But I think he was kidding,'' Mr. Zuch said.
It could have been worse, they both now say. ''We're not the type to scream and call each other names,'' Ms. Kristensen said. ''We mostly ignored each other.''
At one point, Mr. Zuch wondered if one partner should buy the other out.
''But this was a lifestyle choice we had each made,'' Ms. Kristensen said. ''We lived two miles from the office. We had each had a taste of the corporate world early in our careers and decided we liked being entrepreneurs.''
It wasn't that she wanted her husband out of her life, she explained, she just did not want him to be her husband. ''Just because your marriage has ended, it doesn't mean your business has to as well,'' she said.
Mr. Zuch added that there was never any doubt ''that we'd remain friends.''
Perhaps surprisingly, they are among the majority of divorced business couples, according to Joseph H. Astrachan, director of the Cox Family Enterprise Center at Kennesaw State University in Kennesaw, Ga. When both partners work in the business, in probably at least 70 percent of the cases they remain business partners after divorce, he says. If only one spouse takes an active role in the business, then perhaps only 30 percent retain any kind of business relationship.
''It's hard to separate a business in a divorce because usually both people have very strong feelings about it,'' he said.
In the case of Mr. Zuch and Ms. Kristensen, who are both 40, the split did cost them a big client. A division of Prentice Hall, an account worth more than $200,000, jumped ship the year they separated. ''They told us they felt we were neglecting them,'' Mr. Zuch said. ''I was not at my best then, and they happened to be the ones that suffered.''
Their other clients watched them closely for about a year. ''For a while, if they had a business question, they e-mailed me and didn't copy Joan,'' he said, and clients e-mailed her with questions about creative matters without sending him a copy.
A year and a half later, he called Prentice Hall and asked for another shot. The manager was skeptical, until Mr. Zuch told him about the couple's breakup. Why hadn't he revealed the problem before? ''I was afraid it might sound like the 'dog ate my homework' excuse,'' he said. As a result of his call, that division is back on their active client list.
A client contact at Samsung was also worried about Siren's future. The advertising manager said, '''I have a project that's going to last at least nine months,''' Mr. Zuch recalled. '''Are you going to be around?''' Mr. Zuch assured him they would be, and the electronics company awarded them nearly $200,000 worth of work.
Six months after Ms. Kristensen moved out, the couple went to a mediator who drafted a legal agreement that defined their custody arrangement and the division of personal assets like the house. Then they visited separate lawyers, both of whom insisted that they draw up an ironclad business-dissolution agreement, just in case.
Instead, Mr. Zuch called another lawyer, a childhood friend, who drafted their current divorce agreement. Neither will pay alimony or child support.
They will maintain their 50-50 interest in the business, and Mr. Zuch will compensate Ms. Kristensen for her share of the house. But there is no written dissolution agreement.
That omission may come back to bite them, experts say. Ginita Wall an accountant and financial planner in San Diego, said that even if they are dead set against a formal document, they should at least write an informal one. ''They need an exit strategy,'' she said.
Albert Cohn, a partner with Cohn Lifland Pearlman Herrmann &amp; Knopf in Saddle Brook, N.J., and a specialist in matrimonial law, agreed, but also said Ms. Kristensen and Mr. Zuch illustrate the wisdom of keeping a business afloat after a divorce.
Where the partners have unique skills, he says, the whole is often greater than the sum of the parts, and there may be more money to divide if they can run the business successfully.
Not to worry, Ms. Kristensen says. ''I'm a much better business partner since the separation,'' she said. ''I can listen better now. I didn't want the business to be part of the marriage, and I realize how grateful I am that it's not.''
SMALL BUSINESS
