In a move that caught investors and analysts by surprise, the Liberty Media Corporation disclosed yesterday that it had increased its voting stake in the News Corporation to 9.1 percent, making it the second-largest shareholder after the Murdoch family, which controls 30 percent of the vote.
Liberty, which is controlled by the entrepreneur John C. Malone, said in a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission that it had traded a chunk of nonvoting shares for the new voting ones. But the deal, which News Corporation learned of only in the last day or so, according to a company official, will make Liberty the largest equity shareholder, with 17 percent, because it still holds a large number of nonvoting shares.
Some industry experts said yesterday that the move appeared to be a hostile transaction because Mr. Malone had so drastically increased his voting stake without informing Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of News Corporation, until the transaction was completed. ''It is shocking that the transaction would take place without a phone call from Malone to Murdoch,'' said one longtime media executive, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The question inevitably is Mr. Malone's motive and whether he might just keep buying stock so that he has more votes than Mr. Murdoch, said one analyst, who declined to be quoted.
Right now, however, Liberty would not have the ability to take over News Corporation, even with its new-found voting muscle. That fact has left other analysts thinking that the move might simply be Mr. Malone's effort to increase Liberty's ability to play a more active role in companies in which it has investments. Liberty's stock has trailed that of some other companies in the media sector in recent months, noted Matthew Harrigan, a media analyst at Janco Partners. This deal might give it a stronger image as an active company, which would appeal to investors, he said.
And another investor said that with Mr. Murdoch now 72 years old and his sons, Lachlan and James, in line to take over the company, Mr. Malone may feel he ''wants a seat at the table so that he has more input into the company's future.''
Neither Mr. Malone nor Mr. Murdoch was available for comment yesterday.
Another surprise for analysts was Mr. Malone's willingness to swap nonvoting shares, which typically trade at a discount to the voting shares, for voting shares. Mr. Malone has not historically been interested in taking an active role in companies in which he invests, and he generally likes to buy stock at a discount. For example, the News Corporation's voting American depository receipts closed up 41 cents yesterday, at $38, and the nonvoting A.D.R.'s closed at $32.95, up 60 cents. That difference can be attributed, in part, to the fact that Australians, who hold a large amount of stock in the company, which is based in Sydney, tend to buy the voting shares, several analysts noted yesterday.
As is typical of Mr. Malone, the structure of the transaction is enormously complex. To acquire the voting shares, Mr. Malone swapped 21.2 million nonvoting A.D.R.'s and $693 million in cash for 48 million voting A.D.R.'s. But the company said in a press release that the total figure took into account ''proceeds from sales and unwinding of collars'' on the voting stock. That makes it difficult to calculate the underlying numbers, analysts said.
After the transaction, Liberty will own 210.8 million nonvoting A.D.R.'s and 48 million voting A.D.R.'s. The company said in its filing that it bought 9.3 million voting A.D.R.'s over the last 60 days and 22 million voting shares on Tuesday, but it did not explain how or when it acquired the remaining 17 million shares, noted Richard Greenfield, who follows the company for Fulcrum Global Partners. He thinks that Liberty may have owned the 17 million A.D.R.'s for some time but was not required to disclose them.
To further complicate the transaction, Liberty entered into a hedge on 38 million of its voting A.D.R.'s through a forward contract. That means Liberty has agreed to sell the stock but can continue to vote those shares for the next five years until it delivers them but is guaranteed payments totaling at least $1.2 billion in five years.
Although Mr. Malone and Mr. Murdoch are said to be friendly, there have been some instances of friction between them. For example, after News Corporation made its intentions known to buy DirecTV after DirecTV and EchoStar failed to merge, Mr. Malone said publicly that he might like to look at buying DirecTV despite his professed friendship with Mr. Murdoch and the fact that he was a shareholder in News Corporation. Although a News Corporation spokesman denied at the time that Mr. Murdoch was angered by Mr. Malone's statement, an associate of the two confirmed that Mr. Murdoch was upset.
Liberty has accumulated stock in News Corporation over the years as the result of various transactions. For example, Liberty exchanged its shareholding in United Video, which it owned in partnership with News Corporation, for more News Corporation stock several years ago.
Market Place
