FOR those who have savored the freedom of wireless networks, whether at home, at the office or in an Internet cafe, wires and cables may seem like obsolete relics from the earliest days of personal computing. But even networked homes usually maintain one tether to the past: the printer cable.
It does not have to be that way. Today you can not only print wirelessly from the living room sofa or the kitchen table, but also wirelessly share a single printer among several computers. That way, the printer can be stored anywhere in the house -- centrally located for convenient access, or tucked out of sight. As a bonus, most of the options for wireless printing, from print servers to Bluetooth modules to printers with Wi-Fi technology already built in, are relatively easy to set up.
If you already have a home network based on a Wi-Fi router, or access point, incorporating a printer is a matter of only a few steps. Some users forget that wireless routers offer more than shared access to the Internet; they enable a family to share files, data, devices -- and printers.
One solution for bringing wireless printing to a family network is a print server. Several vendors offer such devices, which are typically small (some no bigger than a bar of soap) and are fairly easy to set up. Versions are available for printers with U.S.B. ports and with parallel ports.
Print servers come in two flavors: wired and wireless, and though it may seem counterintuitive, a wired unit may actually be the better option for wireless printing. One wired model, the D-Link DP-301U, for example, connects to an Ethernet port on a wireless router and then communicates with the printer through a U.S.B. cable. The D-Link unit, which sells for around $75, makes the printer available to Wi-Fi-enabled Windows and Macintosh computers.
I use the server in my new townhouse apartment for wireless printing from my wife's Windows desktop computer on the first floor and my Apple PowerBook, which is often in a second-floor office. We can print from anywhere without having to bother with printer cables. One drawback of any wired print server is that unless your home is also wired with networking cable, you will have to keep the printer near the router.
Configuring such a setup is fairly straightforward, although novices may want to make sure the manufacturer or a friend will be available to provide live technical support. Similar units, including ones that work with printers that have parallel ports, are offered by such companies as Linksys, Netgear and Hawking Technology.
Wireless print servers operate in much the same way but do not require an Ethernet connection. The big advantage is the freedom it allows to place a printer anywhere within range of the wireless router, with no need for a cable or network port. Such a setup would let you keep the printer and server in a bedroom upstairs and the wireless router in the basement, while you print from anywhere in your home.
This added convenience usually comes at a higher cost. The Belkin F1UP0001, which can connect to two U.S.B. printers, is expected to reach stores next month at a price of about $130; the D-Link DP-311P, a comparable device for parallel port printers, goes for as little as $100. A unit from Linksys, the WPS54GU2 (about $130), works with both U.S.B. and parallel port printers.
Beyond being more expensive, wireless print servers can be more complex to set up. The router and the print server must use compatible versions of Wi-Fi, and the print server must be configured to work with the same encryption as the router. By comparison, a wired print server simply connects to the network with a cable.
If you already have a Wi-Fi network up and running, you have another option for printing wirelessly: connect a printer to a PC in the conventional way -- with a cable -- and set the PC's operating system to make the printer available across the network. This method is economical, although it does require that the PC connected to the printer be on to allow other users to print.
To share a printer in Windows XP Home Edition, select Printers and Other Hardware in the Control Panel, and then click on Printers and Faxes. Find the printer to share and right-click on it, choose Sharing, then Share this printer, and then select Apply.
To use the printer from another Windows XP computer, go to Printers and Faxes to add the printer as a new network printer. (Printers can be shared by Macintosh computers, too, and in earlier versions of Windows.)
If you do not yet have Wi-Fi at home and have been thinking about getting it, you may be able to kill two birds with one stone by buying a Wi-Fi router (to share your broadband Internet connection) that includes a built-in print server.
One such unit, the GWA501 from Iogear, allows wireless printing to a U.S.B. printer. Setting up the device, which sells for about $100, is straightforward: the printer connects directly to the router with a U.S.B. cable, and anyone on the network can print to it.
A similar unit is available from SMC Networks. The obvious drawback of this solution is that the printer must be situated within a U.S.B. cable's length of the router. (Combination devices that work with parallel-port printers are available from Netgear and D-Link.)
While Wi-Fi has been the main focus for home networkers, several Bluetooth-based methods are also suitable for wireless printing. In comparison with Wi-Fi, however, Bluetooth technology offers a short range, normally limited to 30 feet.
A Bluetooth module from Anycom, which costs about $100, connects to the parallel port of a printer and enables printing from a maximum of about 30 feet. Another Anycom unit, for about $90, works with U.S.B. printers and has a range of 30 to about 330 feet, depending on the Bluetooth hardware in the PC or laptop from which you print. The F8T030 Bluetooth access point from Belkin that also works with U.S.B. printers and has a similar range, is about $120.
(To attain the greater Bluetooth range of 330 feet, the PC or laptop from which you print must be equipped with a Class 1 Bluetooth adapter; devices fitted with the more common Class 2 technology are limited to 33 feet. U.S.B. adapters are available from companies like Anycom, Belkin and Iogear for about $40 to $50. The tradeoff is that Class 1 adapters soak up a lot of power and will drain a battery more quickly.)
Several newer printer models come with built-in wireless connectivity. Hewlett-Packard's PhotoSmart PSC 2510 and Deskjet 5850 are Wi-Fi-ready and can connect to a Wi-Fi network without a print server. A Hewlett spokeswoman said the company was likely to offer this feature on additional models, depending on demand.
A few printer models come with built-in Bluetooth capabilities -- the HP Deskjet 995ck ($250), for example. Other printers designed mainly for travelers, like the Canon i70, have infrared ports for wireless printing; infrared may not be the best choice for use at home, however, because of the requirement for a clear line of sight between the computer and printer.
At first glance, wading through the options for wireless printing at home may seem to be intimidating. But assessing the possibilities step by step and taking advantage of networking tools that you may already have on hand can pay off by unleashing your printer's potential.
Options  An Army of Printing Gadgets, Eager to Serve
The growing array of options for printing wirelessly from computers, hand-held organizers and cellphones includes wired and wireless print servers, Bluetooth modules, and printers with built-in wireless connectivity. Most of the products are readily available online and at electronics stores.
Wired print servers like the DP-301U from D-Link (www.dlink.com), $79 at Amazon.com, connect U.S.B. printers to networks for printing from Wi-Fi-enabled devices. Others include the Iogear GPSU01 (www.iogear.com), $50 at CompUSA; the HPS1U from Hawking Technologies (www.hawkingtech.com), $60 at PC Connection; and the PS101 from Netgear (www.netgear.com), $80 at CompUSA, which works with parallel-port printers.
Wireless print servers enable you to print from anywhere within the range of a Wi-Fi network without worrying about network cables. One that works with U.S.B. printers, the Iogear GPSR01U, is $93 at PC Connection; for printers with parallel ports, possible choices are the D-Link DP-311P ($100 at Best Buy) and the Linksys WPS11 (www.linksys.com).
Several new all-in-one devices combine a Wi-Fi access point with a print server in a single box. The GWA501 from Iogear is $103 at Amazon and works with U.S.B. printers; the SMC2804WBRP-G from SMC Networks (www.smc.com) is $130 at CompUSA. D-Link also makes a router with a built-in print server, the DI-714P+ ($86 at Buy.com), which is for parallel-port printers.
To print from Bluetooth-enabled devices, you can use Anycom's PM-2002 (www.anycom.com; $98 at Buy.com), which attaches to parallel-port printers and offers a 30-foot range. Class 1 Bluetooth solutions, which offer a range of as much as 330 feet, include Belkin's Bluetooth access point, the F8T030 (www.belkin.com; $117 at PC Connection), and Anycom's PM-300 ($89 at Buy.com); both attach to U.S.B. printers. Class 1 U.S.B. adapters like the F8T001 from Belkin ($45 at PC Connection) and the USB-220 from Anycom ($39 at Buy.com), enable desktop and laptop computers to communicate with other Bluetooth devices.
An option that is likely to be less practical for home use, since it requires a direct line of sight between the communicating devices, is infrared. The Canon i70 printer (estore.usa.canon.com, $250) has built-in infrared capability and is suited for mobile users.
Finally, some new printers have built-in Wi-Fi connectivity. Hewlett-Packard's Deskjet 5850 is $250, while the PhotoSmart PSC 2510 is $400 (www.hp.com).
Thomas J. Fitzgerald
BASICS
