He is a former showman who often seems to relish attention and prides himself on his ability to connect with Italian voters.
But it has been about a month since Italy's prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, embraced the public spotlight, a period of uncharacteristic invisibility and seemingly lightened activity that has spawned a flurry of rumors and questions.
The unusual situation was thrown into fresh relief on Wednesday when Mr. Berlusconi did not meet with the president of Malta, Guido de Marco, who was paying a visit to Rome. Mr. Berlusconi sent Italy's deputy prime minister, Gianfranco Fini, in his stead.
An official with the Maltese Embassy said that the original plan had been for Mr. Berlusconi to attend.
An aide to Mr. Berlusconi said that the prime minister spoke at length with the Maltese president on the telephone on Wednesday and that the decision to have Mr. Fini meet with President de Marco was not a last-minute one.
As Mr. Fini had that meeting, speculation in Italy that Mr. Berlusconi was deliberately staying out of public view while he healed from cosmetic surgery grew louder.
On Wednesday, the popular newsweekly L'Espresso, a left-leaning publication that is often critical of the prime minister and his center-right governing coalition, distributed advanced copies of an article on the topic.
The article, to be published on Friday, states that the prime minister visited a clinic in Switzerland late last month and that a team of surgeons, including several from California, operated on his face and neck.
Mr. Berlusconi's aides declined to comment on the article, which follows similar ones in various publications over the last week.
The last occasion when many reporters got a long look at Mr. Berlusconi was at a lengthy news conference here on Dec. 20. He left Rome on Dec. 23, just before Christmas, and has spent much of his time since then at his villa on the island of Sardinia, returning to Rome only occasionally.
During those visits, he has been seen up close only by a limited circle of senior government officials, and there have not been news photographs or television images of the prime minister.
Instead there has been a whirl of gossip, in conversations and in the news media, about why. While most of it has focused on cosmetic surgery, there has also been some speculation that Mr. Berlusconi might be seriously ill. In the late 1990's, he battled prostate cancer.
But his aides and associates have said repeatedly over the last week that Mr. Berlusconi is not dealing with any serious health problems. They have also said that he spent much of his time in Sardinia at work on government business.
Giuliano Ferrara, a friend of Mr. Berlusconi, said on Wednesday, ''To my knowledge, he is not sick.''
Mr. Ferrara conceded that Mr. Berlusconi's extremely low profile over the last month was ''a little unusual'' for a national leader.
''But he was not in a bunker,'' said Mr. Ferrara, who edits a daily newspaper, Il Foglio, that is partly owned by Mr. Berlusconi's wife, Veronica Lario.
''He came to Rome,'' Mr. Ferrara added, referring to the past month. ''He just secluded himself from public view because of -- I think it's the only explanation -- a private matter of vanity.''
Mr. Berlusconi is expected to appear on Saturday at a large public event here celebrating the 10th anniversary of his political party, Forza Italia.
