GOOGLE vanity is getting to be costly.
As Internet users seek to differentiate themselves from people who share their names, some are buying their way to prominence on Google, Yahoo and other search engines. The added exposure comes courtesy of keyword advertising, in which marketers -- or common folk, for that matter -- bid to have brief advertisements appear atop or beside search results whenever Internet users type in certain words.
Most commonly, that means users who type the phrase ''airline tickets'' into a search box on Google or Yahoo will see a prominent text ad for Expedia or Travelocity, for which those companies bid more than 75 cents per click last week on Yahoo (Google does not disclose bid prices). But increasingly, it means people will also find an ''ad'' for Mark Pincus, for instance, whenever they type in his name into Google.
Mr. Pincus, a San Francisco-based technology entrepreneur who most recently founded a networking site, www.tribe.net, bought his own name on Google in 2002, he said, because he thought people would have trouble finding him after a job move.
''I'd been chairman of a company called Support Soft, so if people wanted to find my bio, they could Google me and find me that way,'' Mr. Pincus said. ''But when I stepped down, that was gone, so in a sense my Internet history had been wiped out.''
''I knew that when people Googled me, what came up was a lot of random stuff, and I wanted to control what was found about me,'' he said. ''And O.K., I also loved to see how many times I got Googled in a week.''
When Internet users type Mr. Pincus's name into Google these days, they are greeted by a tinted ad with a link to his biographical page, atop a page of other Mark Pincus-related links. The ad, when clicked, yields a résumé and links to Mr. Pincus's personal Web log, or blog, and the blog of the extended Pincus family. He pays the Google minimum, a nickel per click, for the ad -- and 25 percent of those searching for his name click on the link.
Charlene Li, an analyst with the technology consultancy Forrester Research, said that buying one's own name as a string of keywords ''is a trend that definitely has legs, especially if their name carries some sort of brand weight.''
''These are people that want to be found, for whatever reason,'' she said.
The practice, Ms. Li said, has been dominated by freelancers and other independent professionals like doctors or lawyers. The chief benefit for advertisers is that they pay nothing until their ads are clicked on. (Those bidding on unusual names would also be at an advantage, with fewer potential competitors.) Advertisers may also set a limit on what they pay, and they receive reports on the number of clicks logged, among other things.
Of course, for those with unusual names and enough archival material on the Web, an advertisement may be unnecessary, since a biographical Web page may appear near the top of search listings anyway. ''The more common your name, the harder it is for people to narrow it down to you,'' Ms. Li said.
That is one reason Andrew Goodman of Toronto, the founder and principal of Page Zero Media, an Internet consulting firm, also buys his own name on Google. In Google's conventional search-engine results, the first link to Mr. Goodman, who shares his name with one of three civil rights workers slain in Mississippi in 1964, appears below three links to that Andrew Goodman.
Mr. Goodman paid 22 cents a click to have searches on his name also return a tinted box at the right under ''sponsored links;'' it links to a page about a book he has written (on search-engine marketing, naturally). But he is getting competition for his own name -- and not from other Andrew Goodmans: a pair of authors of a competing book have secured a sponsored link next to his.
''I'm paying 22 cents for my name now, but they're outbidding me,'' Mr. Goodman said. ''I'd rather pay 10 cents, of course, but if someone makes me pay 50 cents, I'll do it.''
Google allows individuals to bid on the names of other people, with the exception of trademarked names. Dana Baker, editor in chief of Yahoo's Overture unit, which displays the paid search ads at Yahoo's site, among others, said that the company's editors also generally barred advertisers from buying other people's names.
Jennifer Vaughn, a freelance voice-over artist in Bokeelia, Fla., said the result page for her name on Google yields a monthly average of 116 clicks on a sponsored link to her site, www.jennifervaughn.com. (She says she is not sure what she pays for the link, because ''Jennifer Vaughn'' is just one of 150 phrases or words she buys on Google.) ''If people have done business with me and wanted to do business with me again, people are in the habit of typing the name into the search engine first,'' she said. ''It's worked really well.''
Buying one's own name this way does raise some thorny questions, though, Ms. Li of Forrester said. For one, if you are well known professionally as an employee of a particular company, the company may not want you to divert prospective clients to a site other than its own.
Ms. Li said that she began buying her own name at Google (5 cents a click) and Overture (10 cents) last year, but that when users type it in, they get a sponsored link not to a personal page, but to her biography at the Forrester Research site. ''I think about that,'' she said. ''The fact is, I may stay with Forrester for a long time, but at some point I may not be with them. And the fact of the matter is, this is my reputation I need to protect.''
Meanwhile, the ad has even provided interesting personal results. In late December, a former boyfriend in Amsterdam e-mailed her after a hiatus of several years, using the contact information found through the Google ad. ''It was a good thing, though,'' she said. ''We're still friends.''
