For the past two seasons, the Nets have been far superior to the Knicks, dunking on them repeatedly in matchups, turning Madison Square Garden into a den of Nets admirers whenever they play there. But, situated across the Hudson River in New Jersey, the Nets have never been able to make a real dent in the Knicks' kingdom.
The Knicks still outdraw them, still garner more interest, still own the metropolitan area's heart. But now that the Nets appear set to move from New Jersey to Brooklyn, can that change? Can the Brooklyn Nets put the city's dedication to the Knicks to the test?
Washington's general manager, Ernie Grunfeld, who spent 17 years with the Knicks as a player, assistant coach and executive, says the Nets do not pose such a threat.
''I don't think it will affect the Knicks adversely, if it happens,'' said Grunfeld, who grew up in Queens. ''The Knicks are New York's team and always will be.''
The Knicks would not discuss the impending move of the Nets and only issued this statement through their spokesman, Barry Watkins: ''We don't comment about business matters regarding other N.B.A. teams.''
The N.B.A. would not comment last night because the sale of the Nets to Bruce C. Ratner had not yet been officially announced. But the league has always considered the Knicks and the Nets to be in the same market because they are within a 75-mile radius of each other.
And in a large metropolitan area that can easily fill two arenas on a nightly basis, the N.B.A. would certainly welcome any challenge the Nets can offer the Knicks. Another rivalry never hurt any league.
The Knicks' recent resurgence under their new president, Isiah Thomas, and their new star, Stephon Marbury, a former Net, would seem to bode well for the Knicks now that a top-flight team is invading their turf. But even that might not come into play when the Nets move to Brooklyn in three or four years because both teams could be radically different.
Nets guard Jason Kidd will be 34 years old in 2007. Will he still run the floor as he does today? Will he still have relay partners Kenyon Martin and Richard Jefferson at his side then?
Either way, Grunfeld may be right. After all, who to better serve as a litmus test than Spike Lee, the Knicks' most celebrated fan. A native of Brooklyn, Lee boasts about his borough as proudly as anyone. But even he said he would never abandon the Knicks for the Nets, who are being bought by Ratner and his partners, including the hip-hop entrepreneur Jay-Z.
''I love Brooklyn, but I will always be a Knicks disciple,'' Lee said in an e-mail message last night. ''I won't hate the Brooklyn Nets. I hope it works out for Ratner and Jay-Z. But no way, no how will I ever jump ship. The Knicks are my team. Brooklyn is my roots.''
PRO BASKETBALL: THE NEIGHBORS
