Buried in the fine print of the government appropriations bill now heading for passage is a potent measure of the gun lobby's muscle in the Republican-controlled Congress. There, amid the reams of routine housekeeping necessities, is a provision designed to gut the current requirement that gun dealers maintain their records of customers' identity checks for 90 days. In the name of the privacy rights of American sportsmen, the change will let records be expunged after 24 hours, making it that much more difficult for law enforcement to track guns that have been used in crimes.
The capital's one-party rule since the last election has left the National Rifle Association riding high. Incumbents in both parties are increasingly afraid to stand up and be counted on this life-and-death issue. Gun control advocates face slippage on all sides, and an ominous deadline this September: that is when the 10-year-old ban on military-style assault weapons is due to expire, and G.O.P. leaders have given no sign that it will be renewed. The ban, a landmark law, is criticized as less than perfect. But it has saved lives, even as manufacturers have worked to circumvent it with cosmetically altered ''sportsmen'' versions of battlefield weapons.
The White House says President Bush would be willing to sign an extension of the ban if it should be passed by Congress. But the president has made no call for renewal, even in his poignant State of the Union passages about protecting America's children from harm. Rather, the House majority leader, Tom DeLay, has made the true state of this issue clear, reassuring the gun lobby that there is no way renewal will be passed by his chamber. Americans, whose lives are sacrificed in the tens of thousands each year to the nation's freewheeling gun culture, should use the campaign to fault the president's lack of leadership on this truly vital issue.
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  An editorial on Thursday incorrectly described a proposed change in the rules governing background checks of gun buyers. The proposal would require the Federal Bureau of Investigation to destroy those records after 24 hours. It would not apply to gun dealers.
