The Russians are coming to the Metropolitan Opera. Few people have yet figured out exactly what it means that Valery Gergiev, the star conductor of the Maryinsky Theater, has been the Met's principal guest conductor since 1997, but one apparent effect is an influx of Eastern European singers, Russian conductors, Russian repertory.
Take Mussorgsky's ''Boris Godunov,'' one of the great Russian operas, which is opening at the Met tomorrow night. Apart from James Morris in the title role and the tenor David Kuebler as Shuisky, the cast is full of Russians: Sergei Larin as Dmitri, Sergei Leiferkus as Rangoni, Vladimir Ognovenko as Varlaam. Vladimir Matorin, himself an impressive Boris, will sing at the Met for the first time, as the monk Pimen. And Semyon Bychkov, the conductor, is also making his Met debut.
Wait. Mr. Bychkov isn't Russian.
All right, he was born in Leningrad (now St. Petersburg), where he studied with Ilya Musin, hobnobbed with leading musicians and very nearly conducted the Leningrad Philharmonic while still a conservatory student, except that his concert was canceled because of his reputation as a free thinker.
But after he emigrated to the United States in 1975, he attended the Mannes School of Music in New York. And on July 4, 1983, while music director of the Grand Rapids Symphony Orchestra, he was sworn in as an American citizen at a ceremony while his orchestra played ''The Star-Spangled Banner.''
''This is the only country I would want to be a citizen of,'' he said.
This non-Russian Russian, whose passport when he emigrated said only ''Jew,'' is also a non-American American. He lives in France with his wife, Marielle Labèque, one half of the duo piano team the Labèque sisters. And he works in Germany, where he is music director of the West German Radio Orchestra, which he brought to Carnegie in 2002. But he has not performed regularly in the United States for years.
He is also an experienced debutant: another contradiction. He has not yet conducted at the Met, but he used to be a fairly familiar figure in New York: music director of the Mannes College Orchestra until 1980, he made his Carnegie Hall debut in 1986 with the Buffalo Symphony. By then he was already sweeping his way through Europe.
Stepping in at the last minute for Riccardo Muti, he had led the Berlin Philharmonic in 1984 and received a 20-minute ovation and wide approbation as Herbert von Karajan's probable successor (sanctioned by the maestro himself). He had signed a 10-year recording contract with Philips. By the time he got to Carnegie, the New York critics were primed to jump on his bandwagon. In The New York Times, Tim Page called his debut ''a musical event tinged with greatness.''
And here he is, making his Met debut a mere 20 years later.
So what happened? There's something intangible about a conducting career. Mr. Bychkov has never been out of work. In 1989 he became the music director of the Orchestre de Paris and in 1999 music director of the Semperoper in Dresden. He took over the West German Radio Orchestra in 1997. He has conducted in major opera houses and led orchestras around the world. And yet the aura that surrounded Mr. Bychkov in the late 1980's has ebbed a little bit.
''I took the Orchestre de Paris job because I wanted to grow as a musician,'' he said last week during an interview, with a flash of his darting dark eyes. ''I was concentrating on the German repertory, and I did not know the French repertory. I wanted to learn it. I wanted to immerse myself in the country and the language. Also contemporary music. I never used to conduct new music. I was put off by it. But the French are very open to new things.
''Now, people say, 'You were so hot, what happened?' What happened is that I needed to grow as a musician. You make your career for yourself, not for other people.''
O.K., touchy subject.
Mr. Bychkov's career illustrates, among other things, the growing pains that take place in the trajectory from wunderkind to established maestro. At 51, with a mop of curly black hair, he's still young in conductor years. But for conductors and musicians of his generation, those growing pains were exacerbated by the decline of the recording industry, meaning that big cushy recording contracts with major labels were not renewed. Meanwhile his newness wore off. Always a conductor with a certain amount of brio and showmanship, a crackling energy that gets the audience going, he is sometimes branded heavy-handed.
Meanwhile a younger generation is coming up. Another Russian who had his debut at the Met this year was Kirill Petrenko, 31, Mr. Bychkov's erstwhile assistant and the chief conductor at the Komische Oper in Berlin. Also at the Met is Vladimir Jurowski, 31, the music director of Glyndebourne. Another Russian-born conductor following in Mr. Bychkov's footsteps is Yakov Kreizberg, 45, who recently filled in for Wolfgang Sawallisch on his final tour with the Philadelphia Orchestra; older than the others, he remains for all time Mr. Bychkov's little brother.
Competition aside, Mr. Bychkov is well worth listening to, a dramatic conductor with a sense of architecture and control, shown not least on a series of recordings with the West German Radio Orchestra.
He is also unusually committed. He tends to put off opera singers with his habit of coming to rehearsals from the first day with notes and ideas about the piece. Most conductors wait to step in later in the rehearsal process. ''They say, What are you doing here?'' he said, laughing. ''But gradually, I think, they are getting used to it.''
''Boris Godunov,'' which Mr. Bychkov conducted for the first time at Covent Garden last fall, should serve as ample evidence. Mussorgsky's score challenges modern musicians, not least because of all the different versions of it followers (like Rimsky-Korsakov and Shostakovich) created in order to ''improve'' the composer's supposedly inferior orchestration.
''Even the people who admired him didn't get him,'' Mr. Bychkov said indignantly. ''They would see that he had a horn playing piano, at the very top of its register, and think, 'Oh, we must fix that.' ''
He acts on the premise that the composer knew what he wanted. Before the Covent Garden opening, he went through the score painstakingly, comparing it to the original piano-vocal score, trying to make it sound the way the composer intended. The result received considerable critical acclaim. The orchestral parts were then shipped over to the Met for these performances, which feature another Russian-born artist with a United States passport, Irina Mishura, as Marina.
Contrary to popular lore, no single musical debut is a career-maker or career-breaker. But Mr. Bychkov's debut at the Met is at least an indication that things are continuing to move for him. (He will also be returning to the Chicago Lyric with ''Aida,'' after his well-received ''Tristan'' there in 2000.) Later he will be conducting the Berlin Philharmonic and the Vienna Philharmonic back to back.
There's something fitting about his return to New York, which brings Mr. Bychkov, the expatriated Russian, back to the city in a Russian piece. ''It helped me learn more about Russia,'' he said, of his extensive research preparing ''Boris.'' ''There were so many things about the history that I didn't know.''
