A former health insurance executive accused of being the mastermind in an insurance scam that cost Nassau taxpayers millions of dollars was found guilty on Wednesday of evading $1 million in income taxes, prosecutors said.
A jury convicted the executive, Albert E. Isernio, the former president of the Benefit Plan Administrators Company, on two counts of tax evasion and two counts of structuring bank deposits to avoid reporting requirements, said Joseph Conway, an assistant United States attorney. Prosecutors have said that Mr. Isernio forged documents, paid bribes and covered up wrongdoing to win a health insurance contract with Nassau County, a deal that eventually cost Nassau taxpayers $70 million.
Mr. Isernio's first trial on charges of bribery and fraud ended with a hung jury, and he will be re-tried on those charges within the next two weeks, Mr. Conway said. In fact, it was his testimony at the earlier trial that spurred prosecutors to examine Mr. Isernio's tax returns, leading to the charges of tax evasion.
''They had the guy, and they were going to get him one way or the other on something,'' said a Nassau legislator, Lisanne Altmann, whose questions helped uncover the insurance scheme during the late 1990's. ''If they can't get you on something, they get on income tax fraud.''
In his defense, Mr. Isernio said that he had merely forgotten to report some six-figure bonuses, and blamed his accountant for omitting capital gains from his tax returns, prosecutors said.
Prosecutors had said Mr. Isernio lost hundreds of thousands of dollars betting on blackjack at casinos in the Bahamas, Atlantic City and Nevada, sometimes wagering $5,000 on a single hand. But his lawyer insisted that Mr. Isernio was not addicted to gambling and only lost what he could afford, the Associated Press reported.
After an eight-day trial, jurors deliberated just two and a half hours before delivering their guilty verdicts on Wednesday afternoon, Mr. Conway said.
Mr. Isernio's lawyer asked Judge Joanna Seybert for a one-day stay of the conviction so Mr. Isernio could get his affairs in order and kiss his children goodbye, said Bob Nardoza, a spokesman for the Eastern United States District Attorney's Office.
Prosecutors had argued that Mr. Isernio posed a flight risk because of his pending trial and the fact that he faces $2 million in back taxes. The judge ordered that Mr. Isernio be taken into custody.
The judge said that Mr. Isernio's wife could drive herself home, Mr. Nardoza said.
