HIGHLIGHTS
LONDON: VIRTUAL MUSIC TALKS -- In an echo of the dispute that shut down Broadway musicals briefly last year, the Musicians' Union, representing members of orchestras in shows in the West End of London, began negotiations with the producer Sir Cameron Mackintosh on Tuesday night in an effort to discourage the introduction of so-called virtual musicians. The Guardian reported yesterday that Sir Cameron planned to use the Sinfonia, a machine that replicates musicians, when ''Les Misérables'' transfers in March from the Palace Theater, its home for 18 years, to the smaller Queen's Theater, which has a smaller orchestra pit. The newspaper said the machine would replace 12 musicians, reducing the orchestra to nine. The union said the practice could spread to other shows, depriving its members of work. Horace Turnbridge, assistant general secretary of the Musicians' Union, was quoted by the BBC as saying, ''Take the musicians away, and you remove at a stroke one of the vital elements of the live theater experience.''
BERLIN: FILM FESTIVAL PLANS -- Twenty-three films will compete for the top prize, the Golden Bear, at the 54th Berlin Film Festival, organizers said yesterday. At the event, which runs from Feb. 5 through 15, Frances McDormand, left, who won an Academy Award for her performance as a pregnant police officer in ''Fargo,'' will head a jury that also includes the New York distributor and theater manager Dan Talbot, Agence France-Presse reported. The honors will be distributed on Feb. 14. The festival will open with the European premiere of ''Cold Mountain,'' starring Nicole Kidman and Jude Law. The Argentine director Fernando Solanas, a champion of politically and socially conscious films like ''The Hour of the Furnaces'' (1968), who was forced into exile in Paris for a decade by the military dictatorship, will receive a Golden Bear for lifetime achievement.
PARIS: AUSPICIOUS LIGHTING -- Decorated with Chinese lanterns, the Eiffel Tower will be bathed in red light in the evenings beginning next week in honor of the Chinese Lunar New Year. The tower will also play host to a series of Chinese cultural events, including a photography exhibition and demonstrations of the art of tea drinking. A restaurant on the first stage will be the temporary domain of celebrated chefs from Shanghai. The activities arise from a new partnership between the Eiffel Tower and the Oriental Pearl Tower, a 1995 building that dominates the Shanghai skyline, Agence France-Presse reported. In October the Oriental Pearl Tower will be the site of French-theme exhibitions and events.
BAGHDAD: MISSING SCULPTURE RETURNS -- A 1,750-pound bronze statue, among whose figures is a bare-breasted woman, vanished from a conservative Shiite neighborhood in Baghdad, but has reappeared after friends of the sculptor, Khaled al-Rahal, rescued it before it could be melted into scrap, Agence France-Presse reported. ''We have regained it thanks to friends of the artist who persuaded those who held it to return it,'' Mufid Jazairi, the Iraqi culture minister, told Agence France-Presse. Rahal, a pioneer of modern Iraqi sculpture, died in 1987. Conflicting accounts surrounded its disappearance. A former Baghdad university arts lecturer, Ahmad Fadaam, said the 1970 bronze, known as ''Lady of the Marshes'' and ''Maternity,'' was removed from view on orders of religious figures offended by it. But the culture minister said that after the fall of Saddam Hussein, it was stolen by ''people who hoarded the city's bronzes with the intention of melting them down.'' Mr. Jazairi said the statue would not be redisplayed until security in the country was restored.
ACCOLADES -- Diane Keaton and August Wilson are to be honored at the 10th annual U.S. Comedy Arts Festival next month in Aspen, Colo., The Associated Press reported. Ms. Keaton, who won an Academy Award for her performance in ''Annie Hall,'' will receive the AFI Star Award, previously given to Steve Martin, Rob Reiner and Billy Crystal, among others. Mr. Wilson, the prizewinning author of plays like ''Fences'' and ''The Piano Lesson,'' which document the experience of black Americans, will receive the Freedom of Speech Award. Past recipients of the award include Michael Moore and the Smothers Brothers. The comedy festival runs from March 3 through 7.
TRIBUTE TO MISTER ROGERS -- A 25-piece university orchestra and 65-member choir will present the world premiere next month of an 11-movement hourlong requiem for Fred Rogers, left, better known as television's Mister Rogers. The work is ''In Memoriam: A Requiem for Mr. Rogers,'' incorporating English, Hebrew and Latin lyrics, poetry and dramatic readings, The Associated Press reported. The composer is Luke Mayernik, 21, the music director at St. Justin Church in Pittsburgh, who said he began to write the piece a few months after Rogers died of stomach cancer at 74 last February. He said he did so at the urging of Maggie Stewart, a parishioner, who played Mayor Maggie in ''Mister Rogers' Neighborhood.'' The first performance, by the Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania orchestra, will take place on Feb. 29 at St. Justin.
FOOTNOTES
A ceremony at the Players club at 6 tonight will celebrate the return of the Hamlet Chair, used by John Barrymore in his 1922 production of that Shakespeare play. Barrymore played Hamlet on Broadway for 101 performances, one more than the legendary Edwin Booth, founder of the Players. The chair, given to the club by Blanche Yurka, who played Gertrude to Barrymore's Hamlet, has been restored after falling into disrepair.
