Nineteen years as an electrician for the Phillips Petroleum Company in suburban Houston came to a horrifying end for Alan Goss in March 2000, when a chemical tank exploded, burning him over half his body, killing another employee and injuring 73 others.
After 101 days in the hospital and 19 operations to rebuild his ravaged face and hands, the disabled Mr. Goss, now 50, and his wife, Teresa, 47, escaped four hours north to a dream house they had built on a half-acre lot in a residential subdivision on Lake Tyler East.
It was, said Mrs. Goss, a dental hygienist who has not worked much since the accident, ''as far as we could get away from the chemical plants and refineries and production.''
Now they watch disgustedly as a few hundred yards from their home, a stand of trees falls to the clear-cutting blade of a bulldozer. Two gas wells are going in, to the benefit of the subdivision developer who says he was surprised to find that he owned some of the mineral rights. Six other wells have been dug. And more may be coming.
Texas is caught up in a huge natural-gas boom, and wells are popping up in suburban backyards from Fort Worth to the Arkansas and Louisiana lines, often to local dismay. With prices soaring for reasons that have puzzled regulators, Texas leads the nation in gas and oil exploration, accounting for half of the nation's active 1,100 rigs, according to a recent industry newsletter. Reversing a trend of 20 years ago, about 85 percent of the drilling now is for gas, not oil.
The Gosses' outrage is matched by that of their neighbors all along the twin man-made reservoirs of Lake Tyler East and Lake Tyler West, which supply drinking water for Tyler's nearly 90,000 residents. Lured by a severe shortage of natural gas and sharply rising prices, gas operators using new technology have been thronging to tap the promising reserves under the woodlands of East Texas, where George W. Bush slipped away to fish when he was governor.
Just miles from the Gosses, a similar uproar greeted a decision last month by the City of Tyler, which, with little notice to residents, agreed to lease its wholly owned west-lake shoreline for gas drilling for the first time, setting off a lawsuit over what could be as many as 136 wells in forests where bald eagles winter.
''Were we able to do it again, we might have done it differently,'' conceded Mayor Joey Seeber, who pushed for the lease to C. W. Resources Inc. of Texas, and who said he and others had misspoken at a public meeting when they put the limit at 16 wells.
Mineral exploitation is, of course, old hat in Texas, where land ownership takes two forms: surface rights and subsurface rights, and subsurface rights dominate. Surface owners must grant owners of mineral rights reasonable access for drilling, even if it means an oil derrick, a pump and storage tanks on their property, unless such exploitation is barred by deed or other restrictions. Critics say restrictions apply here.
In particular, the East Shore Estates subdivision where the Gosses and 200 other families live appears to be protected by a deed restriction that rules out commercial use or ''obnoxious or offensive activity which is an annoyance or nuisance to the neighborhood.''
''There wasn't supposed to be any business in the subdivision,'' said Jerry Howard, 63, a former oil-field worker who was one of the first buyers here 30 years ago.
Mr. Howard interrupted tractor-plowing an onion field to gaze at a towering derrick a few hundred yards away, where another gas well was being drilled. ''I'd call that a business, wouldn't y'all?'' he said.
The Gosses say they and neighbors had contacted lawyers but were told that a suit was unlikely to succeed because of the state's permissive stance toward mineral exploration and because of the disposition of those rights in part before the deed restrictions were drawn up.
The developer, Ben E. Jarvis, a 78-year-old lawyer in Tyler, said the mineral rights were severed before he took over the property in 1974 from the financially troubled owners, distant cousins of his. He said he did not assume any of those drilling rights at that time, but later did buy some that to his surprise turned out to be partly in the subdivision.
So he now stands to share in profits from a lease he granted the gas operator, Will-Drill Resources Inc. of Shreveport, La. Under density rules set by the Texas Railroad Commission, which supervises mineral exploration, there can be only one well per 80 acres, or only two on the original 220 acres of the subdivision. But when that was added to 560 acres of adjacent land Mr. Jarvis owns, a unit of 640 acres was created, meaning eight wells could be allowed. Six have already been drilled inside the subdivision, and two are being readied on land near the Gosses'.
Moreover, citing difficulties of extracting gas from the site, petroleum companies have applied to the Railroad Commission to double the density to one well per 40 acres, which would allow 16 wells on the property.
Asked if people to whom he sold the home sites knew that their land was open to gas drilling, Mr. Jarvis said: ''I don't know whether they did or not. It was never mentioned.''
Saying he was powerless to prevent the work, Mr. Jarvis added, ''I didn't think they'd ever drill in that subdivision.''
Last week, the State General Land Office handed Mr. Jarvis and two clients a defeat in another controversial land case in East Texas. They had asserted that a populated five-square-mile tract had been wrongly surveyed since 1838 and that the land and its oil and gas riches should revert to the state with a finder's fee worth millions of dollars for them. They have 90 days to decide whether to appeal.
The City of Tyler's decision to award a gas-drilling lease for the west-lake lands, including Camp Tyler, a beloved retreat for children, has also drawn sharp questions and now a residents' suit. Mayor Seeber said in an interview that 15 bidders were approached but that only 2 responded, with C. W. Resources offering a far superior upfront payment of $1.1 million to the city.
Mark Flynn, a homeowners' leader, and other lakeside residents who lease land from the city said they first heard details of the deal at the City Council meeting on Dec. 10, when it was approved, with one council member objecting and two others away. The homeowners contend that the city failed to carry out a requirement to consider alternatives properly before taking away parkland. The mayor said a hearing was required only before siting any wells.
At the meeting, Mayor Seeber and Steve Smith, a councilman in the oil and gas business who urged the deal, put the number of possible wells at 16. But the 5,500-acre property could support as many as 68 wells and double that if the 80-acre spacing was reduced to 40.
Dick Hightower, who has lived on the lake from its earliest days in 1948, said: ''We're damn worried. There's no point in doing it, but dollar signs get into their eyes.''
Mr. Hightower's wife, Ann, said, ''$1 million up front will not cover one day of a spill, I guarantee it.''
Laurie McDonald, who lives on the west lake, knows something about accidents. Last January, a gas well in her backyard blew, spewing gas and saltwater and sending her and her family fleeing.
''My husband's granddad bought all this land,'' Ms. McDonald said, pointing toward a hilltop cemetery where their forebears are buried.
Now, she said, her family would like to sell. But who, she asked, would buy it?
