State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi on Wednesday rejected a no-bid consulting contract awarded to Standard &amp; Poor's to determine the cost of a sound, basic education for New York's schoolchildren.
The $1.2 million contract was awarded to Standard &amp; Poor's School Evaluation Services division by a commission that had been asked by Gov. George E. Pataki to come up with recommendations to fix inequities in financing for New York's schools. Mr. Pataki, a Republican, gave the commission, which is headed by Frank G. Zarb, until March to suggest the costs of complying with an order last June by the state's Court of Appeals.
Mr. Hevesi rejected the contract after Sheldon Silver, the State Assembly majority leader, denounced the deal last week. Mr. Silver said he saw a conflict because the company is already being paid millions of dollars by the state to rate its bonds and provide assessments of public school standardized tests. In a letter to Daniel Kinley, the commission's executive director, the comptroller's office took a similar stance.
''There must be no potential for even a perceived conflict of interest,'' said the letter from Joan M. Sullivan, an official in Mr. Hevesi's office. The letter said the contract had been returned unapproved on Wednesday to Standard &amp; Poor's.
The subterranean jockeying over the contract is part of a larger battle over how to provide 1.1 million New York City school students, and those in other poor districts, their constitutional right to a good education. Some Democrats privately expressed concerns that the methodology used by Standard and Poor's might be flawed, underestimating the true costs of educating children in impoverished areas.
Mr. Silver said he was grateful that Mr. Hevesi, a fellow Democrat, had stopped the accounting firm from getting the contract.
But a spokesman for the State Division of the Budget said the rejection was ''blatantly political.'' The spokesman, Kevin C. Quinn, said the Pataki administration had been told on Jan. 13 by Mr. Hevesi's staff that the contract was approved, though they also requested additional details before formalizing it. A day later, after Mr. Silver urged the comptroller to reject the contract, Mr. Hevesi turned it down, even though he had not yet received the details he had requested, Mr. Quinn said.
''It is clear that at the urging of Speaker Silver, Comptroller Hevesi is now playing cheap politics, and what's worse, his target is New York's children,'' Mr. Quinn said in a statement. In an e-mail message, a spokesman for Mr. Hevesi disputed the Pataki administration's account, saying that the comptroller never approved the contract and that Mr. Silver had unilaterally raised the same concerns. The squabble continued Wednesday night as Mr. Quinn sent out a countermessage.
Jim Denn, a spokesman for the commission, said the group was surprised by the comptroller's action.
''Standard &amp; Poor's has a national reputation that is of the highest integrity,'' Mr. Denn said.
