Iran's president, facing a deepening political crisis at home and persistent doubts abroad about Iran's nuclear ambitions, brought a robust, if mixed, message of hope and defiance on Wednesday to this year's World Economic Forum, a meeting of political and business leaders.
President Mohammad Khatami of Iran, who threatened to resign last week after Iran's conservative religious leaders disqualified about 3,600 candidates for parliamentary elections next month, said he hoped the elections would be free and competitive. But he left open the question of his own future.
''My colleagues and I will be at the service of the people of Iran, and inshallah, hopefully, we will have a good election,'' Mr. Khatami said at a news conference, using the phrase for ''God willing.''
In an interview with Swiss Television, he said, ''I have the intention to continue my task and my service to the people.''
President Khatami was unequivocal in rejecting the Bush administration's allegations that Iran is seeking nuclear weapons. Noting that his government had allowed United Nations inspectors to tour Iran's nuclear facilities, he said that Iran's motives were peaceful and that it had nothing to hide.
''I do not accept what he said,'' Mr. Khatami said of President Bush, who has declared that Iran opened the doors to its nuclear program only under pressure from the United States.
Mr. Khatami also dismissed a suggestion that he meet with Vice President Dick Cheney, who is to deliver a speech here on Saturday, well after Mr. Khatami is supposed to return to Tehran.
''The first requisite to any dialogue is the mutual respect between the two parties,'' Mr. Khatami said. ''Anywhere that we sense and feel that the other side respects us and does not force anything upon us, we are prepared to talk. We have not sensed that on the United States side.''
In case anybody missed the point, he noted that his definition of a dialogue was an exchange between ''scholars and wise men.''
All in all, it was a spirited performance from a leader who is a rare figure at such gatherings, and whose multiplying problems had led some organizers to fret that he might be a last-minute cancellation, or that he might avoid the news conference.
Mr. Khatami has repeatedly used the threat of resignation in clashes between his reform-minded government and the Guardian Council, a 12-member body dominated by clerics that has sweeping power in Iran.
The council set off a storm by disqualifying nearly half of the 8,200 candidates for the elections, on Feb. 20. The move was widely condemned as an effort by conservatives to beat back gains made by reformists, who hold a wide majority in Parliament.
Mr. Khatami seemed eager to use the platform of Davos, with its rarefied crowd of corporate executives, cabinet ministers and other notables, to send at least two messages. Iran, he declared, is proceeding on the path to democracy, if at its own pace, and the government is ready to engage with the outside world, provided outsiders treat it with respect.
After his appearance, Mr. Khatami headed for talks with the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw; the Nigerian president, Olusegun Obasanjo; and the president-elect of Georgia, Mikhail Saakashvili.
Mr. Straw, with his French and German counterparts, worked out an agreement with Mr. Khatami last October that allowed officials of the International Atomic Energy Agency to inspect facilities that the United States suspects may be used to develop a nuclear weapon.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Straw urged the United Nations to support a request by the United States to assess whether elections could be held in Iraq in time for a transitional government to take over on July 1. ''If there were to be a re-engagement of the U.N.,'' he said, ''that could only assist in this process.''
While the reconstruction of Iraq came up in several panels on Wednesday, it has not been an overriding theme here, as it was last year, when the hostility toward the Bush administration was palpable.
In a discussion of the campaign against terrorism, the sharpest criticisms of American policy came from Americans, like Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch. When Ehud Barak, the former Israeli prime minister, declared that the war in Iraq had ''made the world a better place,'' he steeled himself for disagreement from members of the audience. None came.
To the extent that people are worrying about the United States, they seem more alarmed about the ballooning federal budget and trade deficits, which some fear could derail the global economic recovery.
