With an eye on the outcome in Iowa, Gen. Wesley K. Clark emphasized his national security experience on Wednesday and his potential appeal in the South.
For weeks as he had New Hampshire almost to himself, General Clark, who is retired, cast the Democratic presidential contest as a two-way race between himself and Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor.
But faced with the radically revised political landscape and the rise of Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina, General Clark tried on Wednesday in a campaign appearance before veterans to say he represented the best of both of them -- while backing away from his initial attack on Mr. Kerry on Monday.
''People in Iowa were looking for someone who knew national security affairs,'' he said. ''They were looking for someone who could go toe-to-toe with the president -- a veteran. They were looking for someone who could campaign across the country and carry the South.''
''They split their votes,'' said General Clark, who is from Arkansas. ''I am that package all in one vote.''
Gone was his suggestion that Mr. Kerry's military experience could not match his as a four-star general, a suggestion he made on Monday night in an exchange with former Senator Bob Dole on CNN's ''Larry King Live,'' saying, ''Senator, with all due respect, he's a lieutenant and I'm a general.''
With his aides saying they were worried that the remarks could backfire, General Clark said Wednesday that he had not been trying to draw sharp distinctions with Mr. Kerry, who has moved into a tight race with Dr. Dean in the New Hampshire polls.
''We were both young officers in Vietnam,'' the general said. ''We just pursued different paths of service.''
General Clark also on Wednesday accused President Bush of playing politics in the Iraq war.
''Last night, the president listed a series of countries that are contributing to our effort in Iraq,'' he said, referring to the State of the Union address. ''Why didn't he admit that more than 75 percent of the forces doing the fighting and dying in Iraq are American?''
He said the administration was handing over governing authority in Iraq this year ''not because it is good for Iraq or our soldiers, but because it is an election year.''
Later at a town-hall-style meeting in Rochester, N.H., a member of the campaign's ''veterans for Clark'' group, Brian Hardy, introduced the candidate to the crowd and harshly criticized Mr. Kerry, saying the senator has ''gone from being the Boston Brahmin, the man of privilege and wealth to a man of the people.'' Mr. Hardy added, ''Don't buy what he's selling.''
General Clark gave his usual speech but then told the crowd that he liked Mr. Kerry and considered him ''a patriot and a fine senator.''
It was a day in which General Clark also sought to counter concerns that he had changed his position on the Iraq war.
''Let me be clear,'' he told students at the University of New Hampshire. ''I have always been against President Bush's war.''
With less than a week to go before New Hampshire's primary, the general has shown occasional signs of strain from his first political campaign. At a town-hall-style meeting on Sunday night in Newport, N.H., one voter began to ask him a question about his work as a registered lobbyist in Washington, reading aloud his question, which was written out longhand on paper.
''Can I just ask you, Is that like a prepared question from maybe another campaign or something?'' General Clark asked.
Told that it was not, General Clark went on with his admonishment.
''I'll be very happy to take it, but you've got to get your facts straight,'' he said.
When the questioner, David Brown, began to interrupt, General Clark cut him off, saying: ''Sit down. I'm going to finish it. I'm going to answer it.''
Mr. Brown, 44, later told a reporter he was leaning toward voting for Howard Dean and said he had been put off by General Clark's response.
Sometimes, as the general goes from town hall meeting to town hall meeting, he demonstrates remarkable patience, as he did on Tuesday night when followers of Lyndon LaRouche, the perennial presidential candidate, repeatedly interrupted him, one of them singing over General Clark's discussion with a voter.
But he was less patient with an elderly woman at Havenwood Heritage Heights, a retirement community in Concord, N.H., earlier this month when she asked about his support of the Pentagon's School of the Americas, at Fort Benning, Ga., some of whose foreign graduates have been implicated in atrocities in Latin America.
General Clark bristled and said, ''Well, ma'am, have you ever been down to the School of the Americas, and have you ever looked at the teaching material?''
When she began to say that a friend had seen it, he cut her off, saying, ''No, but have you ever seen it?'' Like Mr. Kerry, General Clark is courting veterans, particularly in here and in South Carolina. At least weekly, he has stopped in at a V.F.W. or American Legion halls. With many veterans, it has worked.
''Two years ago, I decided I was not a Republican anymore,'' said George Rickley, 57, a Vietnam veteran and former marine from Exeter, N.H., who attended a veterans event in Portsmouth Wednesday. Mr. Rickley said General Clark understood the military, having helped to rebuild the Army after Vietnam.
''He comes to the job of politician awkwardly,'' Mr. Rickley said. ''But leadership and team-building is intuitive to him.''
The Clark campaign also announced on Wednesday that the general had been endorsed by David N. Dinkins, the first African-American mayor of New York City and a former marine.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE RETIRED GENERAL
