He could go down as the avenger of Walter O'Malley.
All right, partial avenger. It's impossible to imagine the treasonous Walter O'Malley ever being forgiven for transplanting the Dodgers from Brooklyn to Los Angeles after the 1957 season. But by importing a New Jersey basketball team to the borough, Bruce C. Ratner, himself a childhood Cleveland Indians fan, could offer some mild retribution.
For the balding, bespectacled Ratner, though, the plan to bring pro basketball to Brooklyn has little to do with sports. He is in no sense a hyperventilating sports addict. He is described by friends as a casual sports fan. This is about development and it is about Brooklyn.
''When I first heard about the Nets, I thought it was amusing,'' said Mary Ann Tighe, president of CB Richard Ellis, the big commercial real estate broker based in Manhattan. ''I have not known Bruce to be a basketball fan. But I knew Bruce would become a devoted basketball fan.''
Like others who know him, she regards Ratner as the prototypical atypical New York real estate developer. ''He's the opposite of everything you visualize when you think of New York real estate,'' she said. ''He's a liberal Democrat, self-effacing. The non-Trump.''
Ratner, whose company is also the development partner of The New York Times Company in a new building for the newspaper's headquarters, shuns publicity (he refused to be interviewed for this article), would never envision a Ratner Tower or a Ratner Plaza or a television show in which he gets to say smugly, ''You're fired'' every week. And though he builds in Manhattan and the other boroughs, he seems to prefer Brooklyn.
It might have something to do with growing up in an underdog city. He was born in Cleveland in 1945, part of the second generation of a prominent Cleveland real estate family. The Ratowczer family (the name was changed to Ratner) emigrated from Poland in 1920. A family lumberyard business built by Ratner's three uncles and an aunt grew into a national real estate enterprise, Forest City Enterprises, now publicly owned. Albert Ratner, Bruce Ratner's cousin, is its chairman.
As a child, Ratner rooted hard for the Cleveland Indians, who had some powerful teams. The Indians won the American League pennant in 1954. Ratner's idol was Larry Doby, Cleveland's slugging center fielder, who was the first black player in the American League.
Ratner went to Harvard and then to Columbia Law School, staying on in New York. Originally, his interest was neither in law nor real estate development but public service law. His first job out of school was as a lawyer for the Model Cities program in Queens. Next, he became the head of the city's consumer-protection division under Mayor John V. Lindsay. He taught law for four years at New York University Law School before being named commissioner of the Department of Consumer Affairs under Mayor Edward I. Koch in 1978.
Money -- namely, its lack -- became a worry. He was married with two young daughters. He quit government at the end of 1981, intent on fortifying his net worth in real estate development. In 1982, he formed the Forest City Ratner Companies, an affiliate of Forest City Enterprises.
There were likely places to develop and unlikely places. He gravitated to the unlikely: forgotten, malnourished areas, chiefly Brooklyn. He built One Pierrepont Plaza, an office building in Brooklyn Heights, and then the Metrotech office complex in downtown Brooklyn, major factors in raising the vitality of the area. His company is now based at Metrotech.
''The typical developer goes after the low-hanging fruit in Manhattan,'' said Michael Bailkin, who was a law partner of Ratner's after he left the Consumer Affairs job. ''Bruce from the beginning tended to have a social mission as well as wanting to make money, which is why he concentrated on the other boroughs.''
And so while he has built the Embassy Suites hotel in Battery Park City and the Hilton Times Square hotel, his projects spread across Harlem, Queens, Brooklyn, the Bronx and Staten Island.
''My own experience with him is he's very smart, he's very dedicated to the city, he's a very reasonable person,'' Koch said.
He's also practiced in the art of political connections and deflecting community opposition and patience, essential traits in real estate development. ''When he gets into something, he gets into it 100 percent,'' Bailkin said. ''He's willing to stay with a project and go through all the pain and suffering to get a project done.''
Ratner, who is divorced, lives on the Upper East Side. He has two daughters, Rebecca, who is involved in filmmaking in California, and Elizabeth, who is a reporter for The New York Observer.
A few years ago, Ratner even pondered what would have been total O'Malley vengeance. In 1997, he was one of six people appointed by Gov. George E. Pataki to look into bringing the Dodgers back to Brooklyn. They were for sale then. A good thought, of course, but that was dreaming.
PRO BASKETBALL: THE BUYER
