THE JOURNEY TO THE WILD DIVINE: THE PASSAGE  Developed and published by The Wild Divine Project for Windows 98 SE and later and Mac OS X; $160; for all ages.
TIME CRISIS 3  Developed and published by Namco for PlayStation 2; $60 with Guncon light gun, $50 for game only; for ages 13 and older.
KARAOKE REVOLUTION  Developed by Harmonix and published by Konami Digital Entertainment America for PlayStation 2; $60 with headset, $40 for game only; for all ages.
MOST video games aim to amuse, but The Journey to the Wild Divine: The Passage, developed by The Wild Divine Project, wants to change your life and bring your mind, soul and body into alignment. In the final analysis, that may be easier than Wild Divine's other goal: getting you to shell out $160 for a video game.
The hefty price covers the game's unusual controller, a biofeedback device that measures your heart rate and perspiration. Instead of the eye-hand coordination central to many games, Divine asks for mind-body coordination. To make a ball float in the air, the player must relax; moving a boat across the water requires a speeding pulse. In other places you must breathe evenly while concentrating on your heartbeat.
Earlier biofeedback games were simple affairs in which relaxation won an arcade-style game. Divine, however, is much more ambitious, sending the player, who is assisted by various gurus, on a spiritual journey.
Throughout the game, you encounter obstacles that can only be conquered through the power of the mind. Breathe evenly, and a magical stairway will appear; relax, and a door will open to reveal a roomful of belly dancers. In one of the most interesting of the game's challenges, you must synchronize your heart with your breath in order to awaken a woman who will slowly open her eyes and begin to rise as you approach your ideal body state, but will go back to sleep if you lose control.
The further you proceed in the game, the greater the challenge. I found the last couple of relaxation exercises almost impossible. After sitting slumped in my chair for 20 minutes trying to slow my heartbeat enough to decrease the flow of air keeping a feather aloft, I finally had to lie on the floor and close my eyes to succeed.
I had less difficulty with exercises requiring increased energy. The game's energy gauge indicated that my energy level was high. I don't know if this is true of everyone; I tried to think of someone I could test the game on who might be more relaxed, but I live in New York City and I don't know anyone who is relaxed.
Divine is a very pretty and original game, but it is also painfully sincere, aimed squarely at people who own healing crystals, take courses in astral projection and say things like, ''That's such an Aries attitude.'' The manual even refers to the biofeedback device as a light stone and the sensors that attach to your fingers as magic rings. The game comes with a long, gracelessly written book that describes the events in the game in terms of a single individual's spiritual journey.
Fortunately, you don't have to read the book to finish the game, but you do have to endure the music of the Wild Divine Band, whose style of folk-rock sounds like Pink Floyd with all the cynicism and talent removed. While most of the game's music is pleasantly ethereal, the Wild Divine Band's occasional songs affected me like fingernails on a blackboard, and they ruined a perfectly good magic carpet ride by droning ''our spirits are flying high'' over and over again. The game also comes with a Wild Divine Band CD, which I do not ever plan to play.
The game has other flaws. You can call up a map in the game to help you get around, but because it doesn't show your location, it is virtually useless. Your spiritual guides will give you items needed to overcome the biofeedback challenges, but finding the guides involves wandering about in confusion, and if you come across the challenges before you find your gurus, you are likely to be dumbfounded. While fun, the game is also quite short, and you can easily finish your journey (the first in a projected series) in under 10 hours. Of course, you can replay the game, and get the presumed benefits of learning to relax, but then you'd have to listen to those Wild Divine Band songs all over again.
At the opposite end of the spectrum of games with alternative control methods is Time Crisis 3, a shooting game designed to be played with a light gun. A light gun is a plastic gun that plugs into your game console and allows you to kill enemies by shooting at the television screen. Crisis is a standard rail shooter, in which you are taken to a particular place where you must shoot dozens of savage foes in order to proceed to the next battleground. These games invariably have inconsequential story lines and are always very noisy.
Crisis does a good job with the basic formula. You travel with a partner who fights alongside you and draws enemy fire, and you have a variety of weapons. The game lets you duck behind objects, jump up to shoot someone, and then duck again. There are also some imaginative touches, like the one when you hang your head down through a hole and shoot at the bad guys while seeing them upside down. It's violent, yet there is no blood; bad guys simply vanish when you shoot them, making the game seem like a fast-paced version of a carnival duck-shooting game.
Mindless shooting gets old fast, and I prefer games with a bit more depth, but Crisis is a first-rate representative of the light-gun genre.
Harmonix's Karaoke Revolution falls somewhere between Wild Divine and Time Crisis. You have a choice between singing a song with spiritual beauty or twisting and hammering it violently.
In Revolution, you sing along with a pop song into a microphone; your score is determined by your ability to match the singer note for note in a rendition of ''Girls Just Want to Have Fun'' or ''Every Morning.'' Your virtual representative stands on a gaudy stage before an audience that will cheer and clap in time if you sing well or boo you off the stage if you hit too many sour notes.
A good score in the game means you are hitting notes more or less on time and on key, but it doesn't mean you are singing well. Playing on a medium-difficulty setting, I received a high score on ''It's the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine),'' but because the words go by very quickly, I could replace a line like ''Birthday party, cheesecake, jelly bean, boom!'' with ''Birthday-ay-ay-ayyy, boom!''
When I wasn't hitting the right notes, I comforted myself with the thought that I was simply reinterpreting the songs. Billie Holiday, who is said to have never sung any song the same way twice, probably wouldn't have done much better.
Each of these games has a lesson to teach: it's easier to hit the high notes if you belt a song out; deep, even breathing is relaxing; when a bad guy points a shotgun at you, it's best to duck. Play all three, and eventually you'll achieve a Zen-like state of perfection, singing and firing a grenade launcher while maintaining a state of perfect harmony with the universe.
GAME THEORY E-mail: Herold@nytimes.com
