Citing a potential conflict of interest, federal prosecutors have expressed concern about the role of a private lawyer hired by the city to advise employees testifying before the grand jury investigating the Staten Island Ferry crash, several people briefed on the case said yesterday.
Prosecutors from the office of the United States attorney in Brooklyn, Roslynn R. Mauskopf, met with city officials yesterday to discuss the issue. They agreed that the city would give ferry employees the option of choosing from several other lawyers, one of the people said. The original lawyer, John S. Siffert, a respected former federal prosecutor, had been retained by the city to represent more than a dozen ferry captains, assistant captains and other employees who have been subpoenaed to testify.
The employees, who are not now targets of the inquiry, are mainly being questioned about rules and procedures of the ferry operation, one law enforcement official said. In addition to the two captains aboard the ferry at the time of the October crash, investigators are focusing on whether several senior Department of Transportation officials who oversaw ferry operations had properly enforced rules requiring that both captains be in the pilothouse at docking.
At a time when the city faces the possibility of numerous lawsuits by victims, the prosecutors have questioned whether the arrangement with Mr. Siffert is appropriate, the official said.
Another law enforcement official said, ''Where does their interest lie, protecting the city, or in protecting the client they are supposed to be representing?''
Mr. Siffert declined to comment yesterday. But John S. Martin Jr., a former federal judge and United States attorney in Manhattan who was hired to coordinate the city's response to the subpoenas, said the arrangement was a normal practice, especially in corporate cases, and depends on the lawyer steadfastly honoring his obligation to his client. He called Mr. Siffert ''a man of terrific integrity.''
But prosecutors are questioning whether Mr. Siffert has cooperated fully in some instances when prosecutors were preparing ferry employees to testify, one of the officials said. Mr. Siffert has been present for those preparations, but not for grand jury proceedings.
Experts in legal ethics said the arrangement was not unusual. ''It's routine for organizations to pay for the lawyers of employees and officers who get into some kind of legal matter as a result of their job,'' said Stephen Gillers, a professor at New York University Law School.
It is daunting to appear before a grand jury, so a lawyer is often provided by the employer, Dr. Gillers said. In cases when the organization itself is under investigation, prosecutors can ask that an outside lawyer be used - in this case, Mr. Siffert.
''The lawyer's job is very clearly to help them respond to the subpoena in a way that is most beneficial to them, regardless of the effect on the city, even though the city is paying the fee,'' Mr. Gillers said.
Lawrence Kahn, a chief litigation assistant for the city, explained that Mr. Siffert was hired precisely to avoid the potential for a conflict of interest. ''This is an important investigation, and we think it appropriate for employees being questioned about their official conduct who want representation to be provided counsel to protect their interests,'' he said. He pointed out that Mr. Siffert was hired in deference to the United States attorney's view that the city's staff lawyers faced a potential conflict because of the civil lawsuits. None of the officials would explain why federal prosecutors were now dissatisfied with Mr. Siffert's role.
In a separate matter, a lawyer for the union that represents ferry captains and assistant captains said he had complained that city lawyers had questioned union members who had been interviewed by prosecutors without a lawyer.
''We fear retaliation, or are they going to pick their brains and try and figure out what the U.S. attorney is doing?'' said the lawyer, William P. Doyle, of the Marine Engineers' Beneficial Association.
He said the questioning stopped after he complained to the city. Mr. Kahn said federal prosecutors had given permission for the interviews.
