Since its earliest days the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center has commissioned a handful of new works every year, and in 35 seasons it has amassed an estimable portfolio. The society is celebrating its commissioning program with ''Sound Investment,'' a four-concert series that opened on Tuesday and runs through Feb. 1. Along the way its musicians will sample works by 43 composers who have written for the ensemble.
Sample is the operative word. Although several works are to be performed intact, most will be represented either by individual movements or, worse, excerpts carved from their pages.
Perhaps this shouldn't be surprising. The society opened its season a few years ago with a televised concert of excerpts from standard repertory works, and if it can blithely present its audience's favorite pieces that way, why wouldn't it similarly maul scores that presumably have a smaller constituency? In the program of standard repertory excerpts, the goal was to get as many of the society's players as possible into the performance. This time the point was to touch on as many scores as possible. In both cases numbers and self-congratulation were the objectives, and the music was secondary.
The approach the society is taking here is virtually guaranteed to please no one. Listeners who hate new music will not attend concerts that offer nothing else. Those who love it want to hear these works whole and are bound to be put off by the excerpting. It is almost as if the society had arranged the series to prove that new-music concerts were poorly attended, and although the sea of empty seats at Alice Tully Hall on Tuesday could undoubtedly be explained in any number of ways, the fragmentary programming was probably part of it.
The pity is that some fine music was given the bum's rush. '' 'Nature' Is What We See,'' a three-minute vocal excerpt from Jacob Druckman's ''Counterpoise,'' hinted at the rich texturing that gives this composer's work its characteristic shimmer and its sense of shifting time and space. Frank Martin's ''Ballade des Pendus,'' from ''Poèmes de la Mort,'' scored for tenor, baritone and bass voices, accompanied by two electric guitars and a bass guitar, worked a different sort of magic. The performance was tamer than it should have been, but there were moments when the voices had a choralelike purity and the guitars supported them with a mellow, appealingly quirky sound.
Stanley Silverman's ''Crepuscule,'' scored for clarinet, violin, two guitars and bass, moved easily between classical angularity and Django Reinhardt-inspired jazz, but the adventure was interrupted mid-idea, at the eight-minute mark. A vocal excerpt from David Del Tredici's ''Haddocks' Eyes'' was even stranger: it came in with a burst of rollicking piano, moved into an aria and then stopped dead instead of moving on to the next episode in Mr. Del Tredici's ''Alice in Wonderland'' fantasy.
The last two movements of Lukas Foss's String Quartet No. 5 took five minutes, and the Guarneri String Quartet's vigorous, haunting account left a listener wondering what led to those closing pages. The Drammatico movement from Alberto Ginastera's ''Serenata on Love Poems of Neruda'' seemed more self-contained.
A few pieces were offered intact. Stephen Albert's ''Flower of the Mountain,'' an evocative expansion of a text by James Joyce (Molly Bloom's memory of Bloom's marriage proposal in ''Ulysses''), was billed as a section of ''Distant Hills Coming Nigh'' but began life on its own. Ransom Wilson led a deeply felt reading of that score and of John Corigliano's ''Poem in October,'' a supple setting of Dylan Thomas that was one of the society's first commissions. Peter Lieberson's brief ''Ziji,'' for clarinet, horn, strings and piano, also benefited from a lively performance.
Susan Narucki was the superb soprano soloist in the Druckman, Del Tredici and Albert scores. John Aler gave a suitably wistful account of the Corigliano, and Marcus DeLoach sang the Ginastera solidly. Mr. Aler and Mr. DeLoach were joined by John Cheek in the Martin.
MUSIC REVIEW
