The news came in waves during the Carolina Panthers' training camp last summer, one crashing blow after another. The starting linebacker Mark Fields was found to have Hodgkin's disease in mid-August; the linebackers coach Sam Mills found out he had cancer of the small intestine two weeks later.
''When they told us about Mark, you hear cancer and you just automatically think that's it,'' safety Mike Minter said recently. ''Everybody was shocked and devastated at that point. Then a week later, you find out that Sam has cancer, too, and it's just unbelievable.''
That might have been the end of the Panthers' season even before it began for a team that was preparing to take its first fragile steps toward contention in the N.F.L. Yet here they are, preparing to face the New England Patriots in the Super Bowl on Feb. 1 in Houston, perhaps, in part, because of Fields and Mills.
''Whether it's by coincidence or whatever, the characteristic of Sam and Mark and the characteristic of our team are very similar,'' General Manager Marty Hurney said Wednesday. ''Those two guys are battlers and fighters and two of the most competitive guys. Our team is that type of team this year. We never give up. We never think we're out of it. We always keep fighting. I think somehow there's a connection.''
And there is no doubt a different perspective among the Panthers on what it means to fight.
''When the games get tough, you say, 'That ain't tough,' '' Mills told local reporters last month in the only interview he has granted since learning he had cancer. ''There's some other things that are tougher than that.''
There are few who would be considered tougher than Mills, 44, who has always been the essence of the franchise.
A former linebacker who played in the United States Football League from 1983 to 1985 and the N.F.L. from 1986 to 1997, Mills was a part of the Panthers' expansion team that began here in 1995 and reached the National Football Conference title game a year later.
Mills retired after the 1997 season and the Panthers honored him with a bronze statue that stands outside the east gate at Bank of America Stadium. The inscription: ''Sam Mills, Leader and Gentleman.'' Mills is also in the Panthers' Hall of Honor.
Mills, who grew up in New Jersey and played at Montclair State, has remained on the Panthers' staff through three head coaches, Dom Capers, George Seifert and now John Fox.
''It was hard,'' the reserve linebacker Lester Towns, who has played under Mills since 2000, said of the cancer diagnosis. ''Out of all the linebackers here, I think I've been here the longest. You hear something like that, it was hard for me.''
Equally difficult was the loss of Fields, 31, who along with Mills has stayed out of the public eye and has granted few interviews.
Fields was signed as a free agent in March 2002, one of the first acquisitions of the new management team of Hurney and Fox.
Fields spent six seasons with New Orleans and reached the Super Bowl with the St. Louis Rams in the 2001 season.
He had an immediate impact on a Panthers team that ranked 31st in the league in total defense in 2001. Fields led the Panthers in tackles (74) and forced five fumbles last season. He contributed seven and a half sacks along the way. He was part of a defensive unit that finished second over all in the N.F.L.
''Any time you lose a player like Mark, it obviously will affect you out there, especially him being a good friend of ours,'' linebacker Dan Morgan said. ''You have a certain chemistry with players that you play with a lot, so we definitely missed him out there.''
Fields and Mills have made it easy for the Panthers to go on this season. Although they are undergoing treatment that keeps them away at times, they have made their presence felt around the team. Mills has been on the sideline for every game this season.
The Panthers, meanwhile, used Fields and Mills as motivation as they won the N.F.C. South and beat Dallas, St. Louis and Philadelphia in the playoffs to earn their first Super Bowl berth.
All the while, under their jerseys, the Panthers have each worn a T-shirt bearing Nos. 51 and 58. Mills wore 51, Fields 58. They have been the inspiration for this season.
''One of the reasons is, we concentrate more on saying to ourselves, their best medicine is us doing well,'' linebacker Will Witherspoon said. ''You hate to be a player who's missing a game or a coach who's missing a game because he's ill, and then see your team do bad.
''So we took that in our minds and said: 'Look, we're going to carry them as best we can. We're going to do what we can for them, on the field and off.' ''
Now the Panthers have carried Mills and Fields all the way to the Super Bowl. Just as Mills and Fields carried them.
PRO FOOTBALL
