When President Bush outlined his ambitious vision last week for a new era of space exploration, one country in particular was on his mind as he extended an invitation for international cooperation: China.
In the last year, China succeeded in becoming only the third nation to put an astronaut into orbit, definitively signaling that it intends to break into the front rank of space explorers.
The Chinese plan to send more astronauts into space next year, to launch a Moon probe within three years, and are aiming to land an unmanned vehicle on the Moon by 2010, a half decade before the deadline President Bush set for the next Americans to arrive there.
The United States and China now stand at a critical juncture, between cooperation or competition, in what could be a costly and dangerous new space race that extends even beyond China.
Mr. Bush was deliberately reaching out to the Chinese, a senior administration official in Washington said. ''The reference to international cooperation was not a throwaway line,'' said the official of the speech on Jan. 14. ''It was an invitation. The president drew a day-night contrast. This is not the cold war.''
But it could be. The Chinese are not alone in this new push to harness the power and prestige of space, which is fast becoming a necessary stop, like mastery of the atom, for aspiring global powers.
Nations like Brazil and India are taking ever wider steps to make sure that they are not left behind in the new space race, intensifying the pace of exploration by the developing world.
Joan Johnson-Freese, an expert the Chinese space program at the Naval War College in Rhode Island, said the Bush administration had no choice but to respond to China's recent successes with a space initiative.
''The success allowed China to reach out to other countries and they've been responding favorably, so we could not do nothing,'' she said in an interview. ''While a space race is not a foregone conclusion, it is a possibility.''
She added that the United States now had a window of opportunity for concord that might not last long. ''Cooperation is the best position for the U.S. and the future,'' she said. ''An inclusive vision will give the U.S. an opportunity to assume the mantle of leadership on a mission that could inspire the world.''
The greatest concern is the militarization of space, using space-based weapons and satellites to extend the reach of nations or potential terrorists, and allowing more extensive and widespread intelligence gathering than ever before.
Such scenarios are central to the mistrust between the United States and China. Many American analysts note that China's manned space program falls under a wing of the People's Liberation Army, and suspect that China's primary ambitions in space are military.
Some analysts contend that China's manned space vehicle is specifically designed for potential military uses. The Chinese, meanwhile, saw the technological prowess displayed by the United States in Afghanistan and Iraq, and are now emphasizing the importance of ''information warfare,'' with the need for a presence in space.
In October, People's Liberation Army Daily said outer space would become a ''sphere of warfare'' because space-based satellite technologies were critical for a swift, modern military.
''It's clear that the Chinese are worried about the U.S. domination of space, and that the U.S. considers China as a potential competitor,'' said Adam Segal, a senior China expert at the Council on Foreign Relations. ''It's probably a good time to try to talk about these things since we haven't moved very far along in any of these plans.''
President Bush never mentioned China by name in his address, but the administration official said that by not limiting his call to Europe and Russia he was implicitly reaching out to Beijing. Asked for comment on playing a possible role in Mr. Bush's Moon-Mars endeavor, China's Foreign Ministry answered in broad terms, noting that China is committed to collaborating with other space-faring nations, including the United States.
But the Foreign Ministry also hinted at past frustrations, noting that the Chinese space program has already sought -- without success -- a stronger relationship with NASA. Since 2002, the ministry noted, the two sides have been talking about a meeting of the heads of the two space agencies.
''We hope the realization of this meeting will present an opportunity for developing Chinese-American cooperation in the space sphere,'' the ministry said in a written statement.
Brian Harvey, author of the forthcoming ''China's Space Program: From Conception to Manned Space Flight,'' said the United States had in the past excluded China on space issues, partly as political retribution for the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown. In one case, American officials denied visas for more than 50 Chinese officials to attend an annual meeting of the World International Space Congress held in Houston.
''The Chinese have felt very isolated,'' Mr. Harvey said.
Publicly, both American and Chinese officials now say the relationship is growing closer, even as frictions continue, particularly over Taiwan. Notably, the Chinese allowed Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to tour China's top-secret space command center in Beijing on the same day as Mr. Bush's speech on space.
The visit was part of a larger trip intended to build closer military ties. General Myers also met with his Chinese counterpart, Gen. Liang Guanglie, and later conferred with Jiang Zemin, the former Chinese president who remains in charge of the Chinese military.
At a news briefing, in a gesture to smooth tensions, General Myers was careful to praise China's successful launch last October. ''Obviously, this is a big step for the Chinese space program, and we congratulate them,'' he said.
China has taken other important steps as well. It recently teamed up with the European Union on a new global satellite navigation system. In a different project, China and the European Space Agency launched a research satellite last month to study the Earth's magnetic fields, China's first such collaboration with developed countries, state news media reported. China has also joined with Brazil on satellite launches.
In all, China plans to launch 10 satellites this year, and a total of 30 by 2005; it currently has 16 in orbit. The satellites have scientific, commercial and military applications.
More bold are China's plans to build on the success of last year's Shenzhou 5 space orbit, and eventually to land on the Moon. Officials say next year's Shenzhou 6 mission is expected to carry two astronauts on a five- to seven-day space journey.
Efforts to reach the Moon are beginning in earnest this year, and some experts in the United States speak ominously of a ''Red Moon'' -- the possibility that China might one day launch military astronauts into space with the aim of setting up a Communist lunar base.
Last March, Luan Enjie, director of the China National Aerospace Administration, described the Moon as ''the focal point wherein future aerospace powers contend for strategic resources.''
But Mr. Luan and other Chinese officials say China's lunar ambitions are wholly peaceful. Mr. Luan suggested that one of China's primary motivations for reaching the Moon was possible economic exploitation. He told People's Daily, the Communist Party's official newspaper, that China was also interested in developing lunar energy resources, like helium-3, a rare form of the element that scientists say could power advanced reactors on Earth.
In an interview this week, Ouyang Ziyuan, chief scientist for China's Moon program, said the program was part of China's larger efforts to become a leader in space.
''China has made a lot of achievements in satellite applications and manned space flight, but we haven't done much in deep space exploration,'' he said. ''We need a breakthrough in this field to fill the gap. As a starting step, the Moon program is very necessary.''
United States government documents, like the Air Force's Space Operations Doctrine and its Space Command's Strategic Master Plan, talk much about maintaining ''space superiority'' near Earth and even about using weapons in orbit. But they remain silent about the Moon.
''There is nothing in Air Force planning for the Moon,'' said Theresa Hitchens, vice president of the Center for Defense Information, a private research group in Washington.
Still, some analysts believe the Moon is part of a larger American military plan and interpreted Mr. Bush's speech as unilateral in emphasis, with echoes of the cold war.
''The Moon is a beachhead,'' said Alice Slater, director of the Global Resource Action Center for the Environment, a private group in New York. ''It's the high ground from which they want to control space'' she said of the Bush administration.
Bush administration officials say they are not worried that China's space achievements will undermine American prestige and leadership. Throwing open the door to Beijing on the Moon-Mars initiative, they added, stands to enhance American influence.
But the real potential for cooperation, the senior official said, ''we're going to have to determine over time as China's activities unfold.''
In the jubilant aftermath of the Shenzhou 5 flight, Chinese officials flirted with the notion of launching their own Mars mission by 2020. But this month, officials said any timetable was premature and that China was not yet far enough along to initiate such a program.
Meanwhile, the official Chinese news media have closely followed the exploits of the American robotic Mars explorer, Spirit, as have Chinese space officials.
''We have been always closely watching Mars exploration activities,'' Mr. Luan, the top space administrator said on the day Spirit landed. ''We hope the U.S. mission will be a complete success in the days to come.''
This article is the first on the expanding space race in the developing world. Later articles will examine a setback in Brazil and India's attempt to use its space program for development.
