Four months after Cliff Ronning helped guide the Minnesota Wild to last season's Western Conference finals, he had a regular Sunday game with a 57-year-old security guard, several accountants and a local radio announcer.
Twelve dollars each bought them two hours of ice time at a public ice rink in the Vancouver area. When it was over, a few would have to spring for the beer. It was the best deal that Ronning, a veteran of 17 seasons, could find.
''I missed just playing the game, just the basics of making a nice pass,'' he said Wednesday. ''I couldn't explain it. It's something I've done for so long and at such an intense level.''
Ronning, who had collected 297 goals and 548 assists in his N.H.L. career, rejected an $800,000 one-year offer from the Wild to play one more season. He was second on the team in scoring with 17 goals and 31 assists. He believed that $1.85 million was appropriate. So he walked away, bent on being a regular father to his four children, and a stay-at-home husband for his wife, Ivana, in Burnaby, British Columbia.
Training camp breezed by, as did other offers. Ronning, 38, became antsy to lace on skates.
A longtime friend of his father's, John Ferguson, played golf with the younger Ronning every summer. He told Ronning that he had an open invitation to join his rag-tag lot, none of whose players had played above junior hockey.
Given the rink rat that Ronning had been all his life, Ferguson, a security guard at a library, was not surprised when Ronning said yes. But Ferguson had one condition: that Ronning be on his side.
''I said to the rest of the guys, 'If you think I'm going to bring him out there and put him on your team, you're crazy,' '' Ferguson said.
Despite the clunky hockey, the Sunday night four-on-four became a competitive outlet for Ronning. He said he played defense most of the time and tried to set up goals.
''There's some guys who haven't scored in three years and you tell him to stand by the side of the net and they'd be the happiest guy for the rest of the month,'' he said.
In Nashville, where Ronning led the Predators in scoring four straight seasons, he once showed up in disguise at an over-40 league, Ivana Ronning said. He even fell on the ice so he would not look like a ringer. ''People kept saying, 'I think that's Ronning's brother,' '' she said. He played in another league with adults who had not played more than two years.
Ronning still carries a hockey stick in his trunk and joins children in street games, leaving by the time they run home to tell their parents. And he has played in leagues other than Ferguson's that were more competitive. But with every Sunday get-together, it became clear that Ronning was playing for reasons other than just love of the game.
''He had some unfinished business,'' Ivana Ronning said.
Richard Brodeur and Dave Williams, two N.H.L. retirees, urged him to return if he still had the passion. Ronning admitted that the mounting bills gave him a ''reality check.''
The Islanders were interested. Aleksei Yashin and Mark Parrish were injured. They needed a scorer and the gnatlike presence that the 5-foot-8 Ronning, who could play left wing and center, could provide.
Ronning signed for $400,000 on Jan. 9. He scored a goal in a victory over Buffalo on Jan. 17 and two goals in a victory over Ottawa on Jan. 19 to give him 300 for his career. He dedicated his comeback to his former teammates. Not the ones who played for pay.
''These beer-league guys,'' he said, ''that was their dream.''
SLAP SHOTS
The Islanders, who play at Carolina on Friday, sent center JUSTIN MAPLETOFT back down to their Bridgeport, Conn., affiliate.
HOCKEY
