For the first time since a nurse confessed last month to killing dozens of patients, investigators today plan to exhume the body of a possible victim, a woman whose family accused the nurse of murdering her more than a decade ago.
Members of Helen C. Dean's family say the nurse, Charles Cullen, gave her an unauthorized injection while she was a patient at Warren Hospital in Phillipsburg, N.J. The next day, Sept. 1, 1993, Mrs. Dean, who was in good condition at age 91 after surgery for breast cancer, died suddenly of heart failure.
The exhumation, scheduled to occur this morning at Fairmount Cemetery in Phillipsburg, takes place as seven counties in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, where Mr. Cullen worked at nine hospitals and a nursing home, are grappling with whether to order more bodies exhumed, and which ones. Though Mr. Cullen has admitted to killing 30 to 40 people during his career, he has not provided details and prosecutors and the police say that so far they have solid reason for suspicion in only a few cases. They say many deaths pose a quandary: investigators lack the evidence to justify digging up corpses, but exhumation may be the only way to get that evidence.
''We'll have to take it on a case-by-case basis,'' said John Morganelli, the district attorney of Northampton County, Pa., who said exhumations there remain a possibility.
Wayne J. Forrest, the prosecutor in Somerset County, N.J., had one body exhumed in October, that of the Rev. Florian J. Gall, the Roman Catholic priest Mr. Cullen is charged with killing last summer, but he would not say whether he expects to seek more exhumations.
The handful of similar cases around the country have run into the same trouble. In 1998, Efren Saldivar, a respiratory therapist at a California hospital, told investigators that he had killed 40 to 50 patients over many years, but not which ones. Detectives looked into deaths during just a fraction of his career and found well over 100 they considered possibly suspicious. Unable to narrow the list, they chose 20 to exhume - more or less at random, they said - and found that 6 had been poisoned.
Proving that Mr. Cullen killed Mrs. Dean became an obsession for her son, Larry A. Dean, a history professor at Harrisburg Area Community College, who died of cancer in 2001. He pestered the Warren County prosecutor and the county medical examiner, who investigated the case a decade ago but turned up no physical evidence. His cousin, Sharon Jones, recalled that Mr. Dean collected boxes of documents, saved tissue samples from his mother's autopsy in his freezer, and attempted to trace the career of Mr. Cullen as he bounced from hospital to hospital.
In 1993, an autopsy was conducted on Mrs. Dean's body, and tissue and blood samples were sent to two laboratories for tests. The laboratories checked for about 100 different drugs, but not for digoxin, the common heart medication that investigators now think was Mr. Cullen's favorite weapon.
Mr. Cullen was charged last month with killing Father Gall and attempting to kill Jin Kyung Han, a 40-year-old Basking Ridge homemaker, with large, unauthorized doses of digoxin. Ms. Han recovered but died of cancer three months later.
Dr. Isidore Mihalakis, the Warren County medical examiner, said that in the case of Mrs. Dean, ''of course we'll test for digoxin, and as long as we're at it, we're going to run a complete drug screen.'' He said it is uncertain, at best, what kind of evidence would remain after a decade.
Mrs. Jones, Helen Dean's niece, said she and Larry Dean urged investigators back in 1993 to test for digoxin, after hearing about its effects on a television program -- a contention that Dr. Mihalakis and Frank Bucsi, the acting county prosecutor, have said they could neither confirm nor refute. ''There might be a little disappointment if they don't find anything, but the real disappointment is that they didn't do the proper investigative work 10 years ago,'' Mrs. Jones said.
Today's exhumation actually involves disturbing two sets of remains. Sharon Jones said her cousin Larry was cremated, and said the urn containing his remains was buried in his mother's grave, atop her casket.
Dr. Mihalakis was the medical examiner in 1993, but he said he was away when Mrs. Dean died, and said another doctor conducted the autopsy and ordered the tests. Asked why digoxin was not included in that screening, he said, ''Quite frankly, I don't know.''
Larry Dean told family members and investigators that he visited his mother in Warren Hospital on Aug. 30, 1993, the day before she was to be discharged. A male nurse entered the room and asked him to leave. When the nurse left and Mr. Dean re-entered, his mother said, ''He stuck me,'' showed him a needle puncture wound on her thigh, and said that she was not scheduled for any medications.
He said that he and Mrs. Dean had complained to her doctor and others at the hospital and when the nurse returned to the room, she pointed him out and he was identified as Charles Cullen. The hospital administration has declined to comment on the case.
Dr. Mihalakis said the original autopsy turned up a puncture wound and that medical records showed that Mrs. Dean was not due for any medications.
The next day, Mrs. Dean was discharged, but she turned ashen and died a few hours later, about 20 hours after the mysterious injection. Experts say that a dose of digoxin can be lethal many hours after it is given, and even more than a day later.
For the counties involved, the Cullen case has become a significant drain on resources, requiring them to comb through dozens or hundreds of patient records, some of them a decade old or more. Mr. Forrest, the Somerset County prosecutor, said his office had 7 or 8 of its 50 detectives working on the case, along with several others. Mr. Cullen's last job, in 2002 and 2003, was at Somerset Medical Center, and he told investigators he had killed 12 to 15 people there.
Mr. Forrest said the task for his county was made easier because the hospital's records were fully computerized, no paper records had been destroyed as they often are after several years, and people's memories are still relatively fresh. ''So we aren't experiencing some of the difficulties that some others are,'' he said.
The Northampton County Council has given the coroner, Zachary Lysek, permission to add two full-time assistants to his staff of 15 part-time medical examiners, mostly because of the Cullen case, but the county has not yet figured out how to pay for them. Joseph Devine, chief investigator in the Morris County prosecutor's office, said the county had one investigator and one lawyer working full-time on the case, and was considering hiring a doctor and a nurse to help comb through Morristown Memorial Hospital records -- all of this for a hospital where no firm suspicions have yet been raised.
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  A picture caption on Thursday with an article about the planned exhumation of the body of Helen C. Dean gave an incorrect attribution in some copies for the accusation that she was a victim of a nurse who has confessed to killing dozens of his patients. The accusation was made by her son, Larry A. Dean, not by her husband, who was pictured. The caption also misstated her husband's given name in some copies. He was Mark Dean, not Larry.
