The Houston Rockets took away the Knicks' new toy, the lickety-split fast break led by Stephon Marbury, and reduced the Knicks to a jump-shooting mess Wednesday night.
One 15-footer after another clanged off the rim in the fourth quarter as the Knicks scratched and clawed to stay in contention without the speed game that had accounted for an average of 104 points over a four-game winning streak.
In the end, Houston's deliberate style and accurate shooters finally slowed the Knicks' joy ride under Coach Lenny Wilkens. The Rockets won, 86-71, snapping the Knicks' four-game winning streak.
The Knicks made just 29 of 73 shots (39.7 percent) and had their second lowest-scoring game of the season, behind the 70 they scored against the Indiana Pacers on Nov. 27. If not for some excellent offense off the bench by Penny Hardaway (6 of 11 for 12 points), it could have been a much worse defeat.
''I don't think you automatically say we're not a good team just because we didn't play well,'' guard Allan Houston said. ''We're not going to overreact, because when you have four good games, you are doing something well.''
Nothing came easy on offense for the Knicks. The Rockets made 48 percent of their shots, and when the Knicks are not rebounding an opponent's misses, their fast break has no chance to crank up. The starting forwards Keith Van Horn and Kurt Thomas made just 6 of 25 shots.
''We should play a little more up-tempo, we like that,'' Wilkens said. ''But when you get in a half-court game, you really have to execute.''
Houston center Yao Ming did not give the Knicks a break, sinking 12 of 15 shots and scoring 29 points. The reserve forward Maurice Taylor made 10 of 15 shots and had 21 points; he was averaging 11 a game.
''Yao Ming and Mo Taylor just lit us up,'' Wilkens said. ''We couldn't stop them.''
But it was not just the Rockets' offense that stymied the Knicks. Houston used some traps out front to make the Knicks give up the ball, and it worked in the second quarter when the Knicks lost a 10-point lead.
''For some reason, we got in a hurry to get rid of the ball,'' Wilkens said. ''The trap wasn't really on us, and we got anxious to try and find people. That's something we really have to learn. If you look at that quarter, we put ourselves in a hole.''
Marbury said, ''I should have been attacking it the whole time.''
The Knicks committed nine turnovers in the second quarter by rushing to escape trouble. The Rockets, who rank second in the N.B.A. in field-goal percentage defense under the former Knicks Coach Jeff Van Gundy, went from 10 points behind after one quarter to a 47-35 lead at halftime.
The Knicks missed 12 of 16 shots in the second quarter and lost control of the game.
''I think we settled for too many jumpers offensively, myself included,'' Van Horn said. ''We should have penetrated and taken it to the bucket.''
There was no running game to bail out the Knicks because the Rockets made so many shots (14 of 18). The Rockets won even though guards Steve Francis and Cuttino Mobley shot 8 for 26 from the field.
The Knicks' effort was a contrast to what happened two weeks ago, when they were embarrassed by the Rockets, 111-79, at Madison Square Garden.
The Knicks asserted themselves in the first quarter because the Rockets could not keep Yao, their center, on the floor. He picked up back-to-back fouls midway through the period and went to the bench. Yao played just five minutes in the quarter and the Knicks built a 26-16 lead.
But the Knicks' early edge was more than Yao's sitting. The Knicks committed just one turnover in the first 12 minutes. They made 9 of 19 field-goal attempts, with Marbury working the ball around the floor to different teammates.
The Rockets surged ahead in the second quarter, though, and their lead swelled to 58-40 as the Knicks struggled to make a defensive stand.
REBOUNDS
The Knicks added height on Wednesday, signing the 7-foot-2 center BRUNO SUNDOV to a 10-day contract. He replaced the rookie forward MIKE SWEETNEY, who was placed on the injured list because of tendinitis in his left knee. ISIAH THOMAS, the Knicks' president, coached Sundov with Indiana. Sundov, a five-year veteran, appeared in four games for Cleveland this season and averaged 2.3 points, 2.5 rebounds and 7.3 minutes before being waived on Jan. 15. He has also played for Boston and Dallas.
PRO BASKETBALL
