Many bridge enthusiasts hardly ever sit at a card table and are content to read a book or a newspaper column occasionally. Some of these play very well when opportunity offers. In this category is Stephen Sondheim, who spends his time, as he has for nearly half a century, creating major works for the Broadway musical theater.
His occasional games of bridge eventually dwindled to nothing, and when he was inveigled into a private foursome at Honors Club nine days ago, he offered a ritual disclaimer: ''I don't know what I'm doing here. I shouldn't be playing with you three experts.'' He then proceeded to disprove this. The play was of a high standard, the exchanges were even, and he produced the best defense of the evening as East on the diagramed deal.
North and South were Andrew Arkin and August Boehm, both veterans of bridge in New York. The cue-bid of three clubs over two clubs showed strength with diamond support. The partnership then maneuvered correctly into three no-trump. A club was led, East taking his ace and continuing with the queen. South won with the king, planning to use his remaining club to endplay East eventually. That was going to succeed against routine defense. East has to make three difficult discards when the declarer takes his diamond winners.
If East throws two clubs and a heart, South has no trouble. He cashes his heart ace and leads his last club, scoring three spade tricks at the finish. If East throws three clubs, the ending would be:
South plays the ace and another heart, and the defenders are caught in a winkle position. If West wins with his king, South's 10 is established, and if West plays low, his partner is endplayed, forced to lead a spade at the finish.
None of this happened because Sondheim sensed trouble ahead. On the diamonds he nonchalantly discarded a club, a spade and another club. Since East had not betrayed any anxiety, South had a serious problem. Placing the spade queen on his left, he cashed the king and finessed the jack. One down.
BRIDGE
