Surprises abound in James Sewell's choreography for the James Sewell Ballet, a polished gem of a chamber dance troupe from Minnesota that opened its first extended season in New York at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night.
Mr. Sewell is no stranger to the city, but few New Yorkers have been able to watch him develop, at 43, into one of American ballet's most inventive choreographers. A leading dancer in Eliot Feld's company in the 1980's, he founded his dance troupe in New York in 1990, but then moved it to his hometown, Minneapolis, in 1993.
When the group, essentially a new company, appeared in New York briefly for the first time since then in 2001 at the Kaye Playhouse and again last year at Brooklyn College, Mr. Sewell's creative breakthrough was more than obvious. Different and unpredictable, this is the company to see.
In ''Moving Works,'' the best piece on the Joyce program, which runs through Sunday night, contemporary ballet comes across as both fun and sophisticated. Mr. Sewell weaves the classical idiom into dazzling and dissolving patterns by way of highly mobile bodies.
If Mr. Sewell is never without a quirky side, he knows how to use the classical vocabulary with astounding imagination. Unfortunately, this program does not include ''Opus 131,'' the exquisite tutu ballet set to Beethoven that he showed last year in Brooklyn.
But ''Moving Works'' is a Sewell trump card, brilliantly analytical in its use of musical and choreographic structure and its range of movement. He knows how the body works and makes it work in new ways.
Trained at the School of American Ballet, where he took part in choreography workshops, Mr. Sewell retains a strong loyalty to the ballet vocabulary. But he has also studied modern dance, as reflected in the program's other two pieces. ''Loves Remembered'' is an early (1991) work, danced powerfully by Mr. Sewell and Penelope Freeh with an emotive power that comes out of its modern-dance sensibility. ''Barrage,'' a New York premiere, is a glorious mess that deliberately disrupts its initial neo-classical ensemble with planned stage accidents (one of the stage lights swings down on a rope from the grid above), improvisational passages and films.
One of these films shows Sally Rousse, Mr. Sewell's dancer-wife, with a very pregnant naked belly. At one point her image is imposed on that of Saddam Hussein. If the taste is dubious, that may be the point, and ''Barrage'' was an audience hit.
One would prefer to judge Mr. Sewell more on ''Moving Works,'' in which the dancers speed through contrapuntal patterns. Each body is also a study in contrasting dynamics, as isolated movements explore what Mr. Sewell has aptly called polyrhythms within the human body.
The visual impact is bright and multihued, thanks to Mary Hansmeyer's leotards for eight dancers, the changing lighting by Kevin A. Jones that sometimes projects colored silhouettes on the backdrop and the palette of the choreography and music.
The first of five sections is set to the second movement of a Bach sonata. A man bent in profile shoots out an arm, joined by a woman who does the same until five dancers spread out and align into dissolving patterns. The group (Justin Leaf, Julia Welsh, Mr. Sewell, Ms. Freeh and Peggy Seipp) move into changing formations with two dancers often opposite three in various interweaving structures.
A second section for six dancers to the neo-Oriental music and beat of the group Combustible Edison has six dancers (Brittany Fridenstine, Benjamin Johnson and Matthew Keefe join; Ms. Seipp and Mr. Sewell drop out) move mostly sideways (the women are on toe) in a dialogue with their shadows.
The dancers, especially the women, are strong in their classical placement, and the men are good ballet partners. But the third section, to Bach's Cello Suite No. 5, is essentially a modern-dance monologue for an expressive torso (Mr. Sewell's). You can see the energy course turbulently through his body until he is joined by three couples, and the classical adagios are studded with an occasional handstand.
Monteverdi's madrigals accompany Ms. Freeh, a captivating dancer, as she becomes involved in some entangled gymnastic partnering. Something is always happening, and the eclectic world-music mix for the last section unites four pairs into a communal weave. The piece is inviting, with a ring of truth and authenticity.
These qualities were less persuasive in ''Barrage,'' and the tone is unsure. Mr. Sewell may think the world is a mess and that the birth of a child is or is not a symbol of rebirth. But ''Barrage'' needs some editing. The fake stage accidents, films and humorous partnering for crowded dancers can stay but need to be reconsidered.
By comparison ''Loves Remembered,'' danced to German art songs, looks conventional. But Ms. Freeh and Mr. Sewell, dejected loners who temporarily find love and sex by stripping to flesh-colored leotards, offered a profound performance.
DANCE REVIEW
