Last June, Nichelle Thompson's landlord told her that he wanted his family to move into the Bronx apartment that she shared with her father, Richard Thompson, 63, and her two children, Katrina and Daniel Lopez, ages 14 and 6.
Unable to afford much more than her $500 rent, she began packing boxes, but did not know where the family would move. She could not have imagined that the photo albums and encyclopedias she had boxed in the kitchen would be the only belongings they would have by the end of the month. Or that by July they would be living in a shelter.
On June 30, Ms. Thompson said, she had a strange feeling. After setting up her children and father with a pizza for dinner, she returned to work for some over-time at Metropolitan Hospital, where she has been a patient escort for 17 years. Feeling uneasy, she kept calling home. ''Like eight times,'' she said.
Katrina asked what the calls were about and Ms. Thompson told her that she wanted to be sure they were all right. Katrina assured her they were: Daniel and her grandfather were watching television and she would be going to sleep. Ms. Thompson told her that she would be leaving for home in about 20 minutes. ''Before I could leave, she calls me back,'' Ms. Thompson recalled, ''hysterical and crying saying the house was on fire.''
Ms. Thompson arrived home on Rosedale Avenue to find that her children and father (and the pet rabbit Mr. Thompson had carried out) had escaped the blaze. A full investigation of the fire has not been completed, but Ms. Thompson said a firefighter on the scene told her it had been an electrical fire that started in a socket behind Katrina's bed when Mr. Thompson and Katrina, in separate rooms, used light switches at the same time.
Their apartment was destroyed and Ms. Thompson said they lost everything except what she had already packed for a move that was sitting in the kitchen.
Ms. Thompson and her husband -- the children's father -- separated four years ago after 14 years of marriage. Before the fire, she had already been stretching to make the $1,000 she earns each month cover the family's expenses and rent. Without money to absorb the loss of personal property and move into a new place, Ms. Thompson and her family stayed in a Red Cross-provided hotel room for five days. Then they moved to a shelter in the Bronx, where they have been ever since.
The winter is proving particularly difficult. ''You can't sleep in a shelter bed that's not yours,'' Ms. Thompson said. ''You have no privacy.''
Daniel attends Public School 50 in Manhattan, which, like Katrina's school in the Bronx, Intermediate School 98, is among the 10 community schools operated through a partnership between the New York City Board of Education and the Children's Aid Society, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. These schools provide many family services -- including after-school programs, health screenings, legal advice and counseling -- on site.
When Katrina's guidance counselor at I.S. 98 learned of her family's situation she referred them to Paula Kim, a social worker there. Ms. Kim immediately drew on the Neediest Cases Fund, offering $200 for food and $300 for clothing for the children.
Ms. Thompson applied for public housing and is on a list with the New York Housing Authority, but hopes her family will soon ''have a place for ourselves that we can call home again and start fresh.''
Just before Christmas, Ms. Thompson took her children to a service at Times Square Church. She had $4 to last her several days. She bought two $1 hamburgers and a small order of French fries for the three to eat at McDonald's, and they went to church.
''I sat there and I prayed,'' Ms. Thompson said, explaining that she did not know how she was going to get through the week without money.
After the service they spoke with a woman behind them who, upon learning they were living in a shelter, placed $40 in Ms. Thompson's hand.
''There was an angel behind me,'' she said.
But she does not want to exist only on the kindness of others.
Ms. Thompson said she spoke to a woman at the shelter who has been there four years. She said the woman told her, ''If you leave you're going to have to pay rent.''
''I could see where she was going: she doesn't want to pay rent,'' Ms. Thompson said. ''I work. I want to pay rent.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,320,021.47  Recorded Tuesday: 19,247.56
Total: $7,339,269.03  Last year to date: $7,622,990.39
