The Nets team that took the court against the Spurs on Wednesday night for a rematch of the N.B.A. finals is much the same as the one that could open a new arena and a new era in Brooklyn.
In an age when most professional sports teams recycle their superstars annually, the Nets appear built to last. There is plenty of construction to be done in Brooklyn over the next few years, but the two-time Eastern Conference champion Nets should not need to be part of the rebuilding effort.
From his new courtside seat, Bruce C. Ratner will be able watch Kenyon Martin bully aside opponents, Jason Kidd make no-look passes and Richard Jefferson finish reverse jams. For all the flux surrounding the Nets, those constants can remain.
Kidd signed a six-year contract over the summer that will take him through his 35th birthday. Martin is a restricted free agent after this season, but the Nets can match any offer made to him and probably will. Jefferson can become a restricted free agent after next season, but many within the organization want to make him a centerpiece.
Because the Nets have been to the finals each of the past two years, they are often confused for a grizzled group of veterans. But Martin is only in his fourth season, Jefferson is in his third season and so is Jason Collins, the serviceable starting center.
''I don't know when we'd move to Brooklyn, and as far as the long term, anything can happen,'' Collins said. ''But the way it stands right now, the future looks good.''
The immediate future could be cloudier. Although the Nets are under contract with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority at Continental Arena, they rank second to last in the league in average attendance. Because the Nets will be viewed as relatively short-term tenants, attendance could dip further.
''I think people that support us now will continue to support us,'' Brian Scalabrine said. ''They realize we put on a good show. They are Nets fans, and they will be Nets fans regardless. You just hope we can continue to get that support. Or maybe it will give them another excuse not to come. We've already heard them all.''
Most players said they wanted to remain in New Jersey, mostly so they would not have longer commutes. But they also look forward to the possibility of a new arena. When the Nets travel around the league, they see the plush locker rooms and five-star facilities enjoyed by other teams. They are jealous.
''It finally happened,'' Martin said. ''I've been to Brooklyn one time and I didn't drive. Hey, I'm still going to be Kenyon.''
No one uncorked Champagne in the locker room Wednesday night, but relief was starting to spread. Although players insist they were not troubled by the uncertain ownership situation, Coach Byron Scott suggested that distractions trickled down from the front office to the floor.
''I don't know Bruce, but I'm happy for him,'' Scott said. ''But I've got other things on my mind right now.
The Nets, either as a result or a coincidence, have fallen short of expectations this season. They lead the anemic Atlantic Division but trail Indiana, Detroit and New Orleans in the Eastern Conference, which they were supposed to dominate. The Nets have been looking forward to the completion of a deal so they can stop answering questions about the sale and start planning their future.
''Most of the guys have kept it to themselves,'' Scott said. ''But families are asking, wives are asking what's going on, because it affects everybody. It's affects your family and where you're going to live.''
It might affect Scott more than anyone else in the organization. Two weeks ago, he joked that ''no one in this room'' will be around when the team moves to Brooklyn. Scott is in the final year of his contract, and a new owner will certainly play an integral role in deciding his status.
Anything can happen in an ownership change, but Rod Thorn, the team president, would seem safe. He is the one who drafted Martin in 2000, traded for Kidd in 2001 and then pulled a draft-day deal for Jefferson and Collins. That core should lead the Nets through an awkward period and into Brooklyn.
''When do we move?'' Kidd said. ''I might be retired by then. That's nice, it's one thing that's done, so you don't have to ask us anymore.''
PRO BASKETBALL: THE TEAM
