A dead peregrine falcon found near two chicken farms here was infected with the avian influenza virus, agricultural officials here said Wednesday. The dead falcon was the first sign that the disease, which is spreading in chicken flocks in Vietnam, South Korea and Japan, may also be present in China.
Hong Kong officials said they would respond by stepping up the monitoring of chicken farms for the disease, with inspections continuing through the Chinese New Year holidays beginning on Thursday.
World Health Organization officials have been alarmed about the spread of the influenza virus, the A(H5N1) strain of bird flu. They have described the scale of its spread as ''unprecedented'' and warned that the disease could evolve to spread from person to person, and not just from birds to people.
Thailand and Laos have also reported large scale deaths of chickens in the last several days. While both have insisted that the problem is bird cholera, Thai officials said Wednesday that they were testing three people for possible bird flu.
The W.H.O. has confirmed five cases in people in Vietnam, all of whom apparently contracted the disease from chickens and all of whom have died.
Testing of wild birds began last March in Hong Kong after two residents became infected with the virus and one died. Agricultural officials have collected more than 6,000 samples from wild birds since then and found no infections until the falcon.
An agricultural worker found the falcon's body on Monday less than seven miles from the border between Hong Kong, a special autonomous region of China, and Shenzhen, an adjacent Chinese city. But Lai Ching-wai, Hong Kong's assistant director for agricultural inspection and quarantine, said experts could not guess where the bird had become infected.
A dozen peregrine falcons live in Hong Kong year-round, typically foraging within a 15-mile radius of their favorite roosts. But another 30 to 40 falcons winter here after migrating from breeding grounds as far away as Siberia. Agricultural officials here have not been able to determine whether the dead bird was migratory or resident.
Mr. Lai said that the migratory falcons do not travel to South Korea or Japan, which have been slaughtering chickens in response to outbreaks of bird flu there. China, Mongolia and Russia -- along potential flight paths to Siberia -- have not acknowledged having any cases of bird flu.
Roy Wadia, a spokesman in Beijing for the World Health Organization, said that the agency had asked the Ministry of Health there a few days ago about the disease in China but had not received a reply.
The Chinese Agriculture Ministry announced Monday that it was requiring local officials to report daily whether they had detected any cases of bird flu. China has also banned poultry imports from countries where flu infections have been found.
Pathologists are conducting tests to determine whether the falcon here died of the virus or some other cause. While bird flu is lethal to domesticated fowl and has an estimated 30 percent mortality rate in people, wild fowl appear to be less affected and sometimes can spread the disease until they die of other causes.
Hong Kong has had a half dozen outbreaks of flu in local birds since 1997, when 18 people were infected and six of them died. The recurrence of the disease here has fanned suspicions that it is present in southern China, although Chinese officials have denied that.
