The Art Institute of Chicago named James Cuno its director today, ending a four-month search for a successor to James N. Wood.
Mr. Cuno, 52, an American, has for the last year been director of the Courtauld Institute of Art in London, which combines a rich collection with a full research and education program.
He is no stranger to the Chicago museum. Just 13 months ago, in an interview, he called it ''the greatest municipal art museum in America.'' Now he will have a chance to run it.
The announcement came after the Courtauld was closed for the day, and no one there could be reached for comment. Nick Ferguson, the Courtauld's chairman, was quoted in the Chicago trustees' statement as saying that Mr. Cuno ''has done an excellent job'' and that his new appointment was ''a major and much deserved accolade.''
For nearly 12 years Mr. Cuno was director of the Harvard University Art Museums, a complex that under his leadership doubled the size of its staff and budget and emerged as one of the best smaller museums in the United States. At Harvard in the 1990's he directed a $37 million capital campaign that ended up raising $55 million.
The Art Institute, founded in 1879 as the Chicago Academy of Fine Arts, has been in its present imposing building on South Michigan Avenue since 1893.
It holds an encyclopedic collection, employs more than 600 people and has a $69 million annual budget. Among its most popular pictures is Edward Hopper's ''Nighthawks.'' Mr. Wood, 62, had been its director for 23 years.
''This is one of the four or five outstanding art museums in the country,'' said an official at the Art Institute who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''A job like this comes along once in a generation. You couldn't not jump at it.''
In art circles Mr. Cuno is known as an active and outspoken leader whose preference for informal dress reflects an iconoclastic streak. In 1999 he signed a scathing letter denouncing a decision by Malcolm Rogers, director of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, to reorganize his museum by reducing the power of curators.
In speeches and articles Mr. Cuno has called for museums to be open and accessible rather than intimidating. He has asserted that some museums devote too little attention to the viewing experience and too much to the search for blockbuster shows and amenities like cafes and gift shops.
Before taking the post at Harvard in 1991, Mr. Cuno taught at Vassar, U.C.L.A. and Dartmouth. At Harvard he pursued a special interest in architecture, both as a teacher and an administrator. He left after losing a five-year effort to expand the museum there with a new building designed by Renzo Piano. Now he and Mr. Piano will be reunited. The Art Institute has named Mr. Piano to design its new building. It is to cost $198 million, with groundbreaking scheduled for this year.
Mr. Wood, the outgoing director, announced his departure in September, saying it would be wise for a single director to oversee the final planning, construction and opening of the new wing.
''We wanted someone with a solid base, ideally in art history, with a professional career in the museum world rather than someone from another discipline,'' Mr. Wood said. ''You need to have the background that allows you to lay out why art is important.''
Mr. Wood said he had made no plans for his future and was ''very much in the open-ended phase.'' Asked about Mr. Cuno, he replied: ''Jim's a fine candidate. I mean, a fine successor. Successor, I can't get my tongue around that one quite yet.''
