A fight within the Republican Party over whether to push for a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage turned yesterday to a debate over the meaning of President Bush's open-ended comments on the subject in his State of the Union speech.
Some evangelical groups celebrated what they called a presidential endorsement of an amendment, while other major groups, including the Family Research Council, said the president had failed to act fast enough on the issue. At the other end of the party, a major gay Republican group, the Log Cabin Republicans, said it could no longer support the president because of the speech. But the chairman of another gay group, the Republican Unity Coalition, stuck by the White House, arguing that President Bush had not yet explicitly called for an amendment.
The mixed reactions reflected wording seemingly intended to rally conservative voters without spooking too many moderates, who might find the idea of changing the Constitution over gay unions intolerant or an overreaction.
But the contradictory interpretations of his words also underscore the delicacy of the balancing act Mr. Bush faces in carrying this issue through the election year. And two leaders of the gay Republican groups said they believed President Bush's careful approach to the question of an amendment also stemmed from his own personal reluctance to stigmatize gays.
As Washington was digesting the speech yesterday, the White House took more private steps to make sure its core conservative supporters got the right message. The White House dispatched an aide to two meetings of dedicated conservatives: a weekly gathering convened by Grover G. Norquist of Americans for Tax Reform in the morning and a lunch gathering at which Paul Weyrich of the Free Congress Foundation played host. The aide reminded the groups of the aspects of the speech most likely to appeal to them, like Mr. Bush's call to increase financing for the promotion of abstinence or to open the way for religious organizations to win public service contracts.
Many of the policy goals and much of the language in the speech resonated with conservative Christians. ''All of us -- parents and schools and government -- must work together to counter the negative influence of the culture,'' President Bush said. His words expressed the feeling of many conservative Christians that their values are under attack by the secular culture around them. But he did it without insulting the millions of people who enjoy violent movies or racy television.
Several prominent conservative Christians praised President Bush for criticizing ''activist judges'' who he said ''have begun redefining marriage by court order, without regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives.'' To conservative Christians, it was a clear reference to a decision by the highest court in Massachusetts that outlawing same-sex marriage was discrimination. The ruling created the possibility that courts will require other states to honor same-sex marriages made in Massachusetts.
''Judicial activists have gotten out of control and something has got to be done to stop them,'' said Sandy Rios, president of Concerned Women for America, who said the speech had reassured her about President Bush's position.
But President Bush never used the words ''gay,'' ''homosexual,'' ''same-sex'' or ''amendment.'' Instead of an amendment, he referred only to a ''constitutional process.'' And, as he has in the past, he qualified the present need for such a process. ''If judges insist on forcing their arbitrary will upon the people,'' he said, ''the only alternative left to the people would be the constitutional process.''
Some conservatives found fault with his reluctance.
''He made the case for the necessity of an amendment, and I am puzzled as to why he did not, having diagnosed the problem, prescribe the only remedy, a federal marriage amendment,'' said Dr. Richard Land, president of the Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, the largest Protestant denomination. ''I know that millions of social conservatives join me in praying that he does in the very near future.''
Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council, said Mr. Bush's failure to ask Congress to get to work on an amendment negated his other initiatives.
''If we throw out 6,000 years of human history that says marriage is between a man and a woman, then the rest of that doesn't matter,'' Mr. Perkins said.
Congress needed to act within a few weeks, he said, so that the debate over an amendment could begin before the next election and before ''you have same-sex marriages sprinkled all over the country.''
Some gay Republicans said the president had gone too far.
''We will not stand with anyone who is willing to write discrimination into the Constitution,'' said Patrick Guerriero, executive director of the Log Cabin Republicans.
But Charles Francis, chairman of the Republican Unity Coalition and a family friend of President Bush, said he was not yet ready to break ranks. He emphasized that the president had not mentioned an amendment and that his comments about the ''constitutional process'' remained conditional, although he acknowledged, ''He has come about as close as he can get.''
Some gay Republicans said the president was capitulating to Christian conservatives. Unlike some other conservative Republicans, the president, they said, has always seemed comfortable with gay people and same-sex couples -- appointing openly gay men to prominent positions, patting gay supporters on the back, showing sympathy for their sometimes awkward position in the party.
''There is not an anti-gay bone in his body,'' Mr. Francis said.
The issue may also be personally complicated for Vice President Dick Cheney, whose daughter is a lesbian and is also directing vice-presidential operations for the re-election campaign. Mr. Cheney argued during the 2000 election that decisions about recognizing same-sex couples should be left to the states, but he has said he will support any moves the president makes on the subject.
Matt Foreman, executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, said his family knew Mr. Cheney in Wyoming.
''I could never imagine Dick Cheney choosing politics over his family,'' Mr. Foreman said.
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  An article on Thursday about conservatives' reaction to President Bush's State of the Union comments on the sanctity of marriage referred incorrectly to the Log Cabin Republicans, the gay political group. While its executive director said, ''We will not stand with anyone who is willing to write discrimination into the Constitution,'' the board has yet to decide whether to endorse the president for re-election. It has not determined that it can no longer support him.
