Eleven months after being fired as the top executive at McCann-Erickson, James R. Heekin is running an agency again after being promoted yesterday to lead the largest division of the French agency company Havas.
Mr. Heekin was promoted to chairman and chief executive at the Euro RSCG Worldwide division, succeeding Bob Schmetterer, 60, who is retiring, effective immediately. The change came during a tumultuous day for Havas in the stock market. The price of Havas shares plunged in trading in Paris, a decline that Havas executives attributed to rumors of accounting irregularities at its Scandinavian operations. The executives said the rumors were untrue and asked French stock market regulators to investigate whether the share price was manipulated.
Mr. Heekin, 54, joined Euro RSCG as president and chief operating officer, a new post at the New York headquarters, in September, seven months after he was fired by the Interpublic Group of Companies, the parent of McCann-Erickson. His firing came in the aftermath of accounting irregularities at the McCann-Erickson European operations, which resulted in $181.3 million in charges for Interpublic last year. Mr. Heekin had served as chairman and chief executive of McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising as well as the McCann-Erickson World Group.
''It's unfortunate,'' Mr. Heekin said yesterday in a phone interview, referring to the rumors, which he termed ''categorically untrue,'' and their timing. ''It just doesn't seem fair,'' he added.
Euro RSCG, which works for marketers like Coca-Cola, Danone, the Volvo division of Ford Motor and Intel, is being reorganized as part of efforts by Havas to reduce costs and improve performance by focusing resources on Euro RSCG rather than other smaller operations. For instance, Havas this week merged a public relations agency, Magnet Communications, that had been part of its Arnold Worldwide unit with a sibling, Euro RSCG Middleberg; the merged agency, Euro RSCG Magnet, will operate under the Euro RSCG umbrella.
''It's a time for action,'' Mr. Heekin said. ''We come into the new year as an agency all cleaned up and ready to go.''
Though the promotion of Mr. Heekin to succeed Mr. Schmetterer came unexpectedly, Mr. Heekin said it had been promised to him when he joined Euro RSCG last year, adding, ''I just didn't know when.''
Mr. Schmetterer is also relinquishing his post as chief operating officer at Havas, which he had held for the last year. That position is not being filled, a spokeswoman, Peggy Nahmany, said. Mr. Schmetterer led Euro RSCG for seven years after serving as president of Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer in New York, which is now the New York operation of Euro RSCG. He began his advertising career in 1971 at Scali, McCabe, Sloves in New York.
Though Mr. Schmetterer's retirement came as a surprise, ''it's certainly something I've been thinking about,'' he said in a phone interview. ''At some point in your life, you say it's time, and 33 years in advertising is a long time.''
Mr. Schmetterer disputed speculation in trade publications that there had recently been tensions between him and Alain de Pouzilhac, chairman and chief executive at Havas in Paris.
''Alain and I have been close, personal friends for 20 years,'' Mr. Schmetterer said. ''The only one who prompted me to do this is my wife,'' Stacy.
Mr. de Pouzilhac said that Mr. Schmetterer would serve as a senior adviser to Havas after his retirement.
As for the wild day for Havas in the stock market, the shares closed in trading in Paris yesterday at 5.02 euros, down 4 percent from Tuesday; at one point they traded down as much as 10.7 percent.
Havas, in a statement, labeled the speculation about accounting irregularities as ''unfounded rumors,'' and asked the Autorité des Marchés Financiers, the French market regulator, to begin ''an investigation into possible manipulation of the Havas share price.'' Reuters reported yesterday that the rumors were centered on the Havas accounting firm, Ernst &amp; Young, refusing to certify Havas's financial results because of the claims of irregularities in Scandinavia.
