Nassau County's economic development agencies often operated in violation of basic rules -- or even without them, witnesses testified on Wednesday at a hearing here.
Disorganization, waste and illegalities at the agencies have prompted audits, a criminal investigation and proposed changes. The deputy county executive in charge, Peter Sylver, quit under fire in December for disputed charges on what officials say was an illicit credit card.
County Comptroller Howard S. Weitzman, referring to the ''vertical'' grouping of the agencies in the county's organization chart, testified, ''The evidence is overwhelming that the entire vertical has been mismanaged'' and operated ''as if it were answerable to no one and exempt from county policies and procedures.''
Pointing to the Industrial Development Agency as an example, the comptroller said, ''The problem is the I.D.A. didn't have any rules or regulations.'' Not only that, the last time it was audited was 15 years ago, he said.
His testimony came at an all-day County Legislature hearing on mismanagement at the county agencies, punctuated by angry political outbursts. The hearing will resume on Friday.
Witnesses said that one agency had no adopted budget, some lacked insurance, several had no bidding procedures, and accounting and attendance records were often neglected.
Among the many examples of waste were $707 to tint the windows of Mr. Sylver's county car, $2,500 for a charity event he attended, $600 to a church where he spoke, $318 for a retirement lunch and $126 for softball equipment that was never used.
Some problems were inherited from the previous Republican administration, the comptroller said. But he added that under County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi, a fellow Democrat, ''the new administration failed to put into place crucial financial and managerial controls where there were virtually none.''
''While we have not uncovered evidence of substantial personal gain,'' Mr. Weitzman continued, he said auditors found ''a pattern of laxity and negligence that was so pervasive that far worse abuses were possible than those we found.''
The Suozzi administration accepted blame. ''This is on our watch,'' said Deputy County Executive Arthur A. Gianelli. ''We needed to be more careful, and we weren't.''
The Legislature's Republicans voiced frustration that Mr. Sylver and two other witnesses failed to appear after their lawyers sent letters citing pending investigations or litigation.
''If you have subpoenaed those witnesses, they must appear,'' said the minority leader, Peter Schmitt. ''Send the sheriff to go out and get them.'' One Democratic legislator agreed, and the presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, said that she would review the issue.
While the Democrats said they were determined to get to the bottom of the problem, Mr. Schmitt accused the administration of withholding documents and giving an early false assurance ''that everything was O.K. and Mr. Sylver was staying.''
Mr. Schmitt also asked whether Mr. Suozzi was involved in any of the disputed spending for trips and dinners. County officials who testified said that they had not researched that question.
A moment of bipartisan consensus came when a Republican legislator, John Ciotti, said, ''If you boil this whole hearing down to one word, it would be 'procedure.''' Deputy County Executive Gianelli replied, ''I agree with that.''
