NOW that the big home retail stores are offering off-the-rack renovations, designers like me are wondering if we're obsolescent. Why hire an architect and a contractor to renovate, when a store can give you the whole shebang?
Nowhere is this question more pressing than in the kitchen, a subject of national obsession. Hundreds of thousands of kitchens will be renovated this year, at an average cost of $17,700, according to Kermit Baker, an economist at the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard. More than half of such renovations are done by homeowners themselves, and many others by the top-to-bottom services of big retail stores.
The stores' popularity is easy to understand. One-stop planning, purchasing and installation cut the annoyances, and eliminating the middleman reduces the price. That's the theory, anyway.
To see if the premise lives up to the promise, I asked four companies -- Ikea, Boffi, Expo Design Center and the Home Depot -- how they would propose to renovate the kitchen of a friend, Lara Suarez, in NoLIta. Armed with a sheaf of photos and a rough floor plan, I gave each company the same guidelines: show me the best value, and tell me what it should look like.
What I found is that, during hourlong initial consultations, the designers provided by each company were more patient and courteous than I am as they explained the relative merits of things like drawer slides.
Other customers I spoke with seemed to agree. Sue Williamson, an assistant principal at a high school in Brooklyn, said her Home Depot designer ''read me well'' and was unfazed when she called ''in hysterics'' with last-minute changes. Ken Arthur, managing director of a children's theater company, said he was pleasantly surprised to find that Expo, a Home Depot company that sells higher-end merchandise, helped him get building permits and navigate his co-op board's approval process when he renovated his kitchen last year. ''What I thought was going to be fast and cheap turned out to be fast, inexpensive and well done,'' he said.
On the other hand, gaining access to a store's expertise can be hard. To meet with a staff designer, who helps you lay out your space and select materials, the Home Depot, Expo and Boffi require retainers ($100, $750 and $2,000 respectively); Ikea's consultations are free.
At the Expo Design Center in New Rochelle, N.Y., a sales agent told me to pick what I wanted from the store's 100,000 square feet of cabinet, counter and appliance displays. I would then pay $750 toward my cabinet selection and be assigned a designer. But how, I wondered, was I supposed to pick by myself? Estimating cost is vexing, as each cabinet style has several prices per linear foot, with premium choices costing up to five times as much as the basic versions. How would I find the best value? And what about the look? Buy now, design later? Not for me.
My Expo visit made clear the cold reality behind off-the-rack renovations: stores exist to sell, and their employees, particularly those working on commission, have incentives to sell customers as much as possible. (Granted, designers like me often work on commissions based on a percentage of construction and appliance costs -- 20 percent is typical -- and contractors customarily add a markup. The retail stores charge no design fees if you buy their merchandise.)
One shortcoming at Ikea and the Home Depot is that the designer does not normally see the kitchen before drafting a scheme. Instead, the company sends a measurer who, in turn, conveys the dimensions, and in some cases photographs, to the designer. But the person with the tape measure would rarely take note of where the morning sun comes in or what style furniture is in the living room.
Normally, a designer would see a renovation through from concept to completion, being sure that as problems arise, what is built is in keeping with the original design. At Ikea, Expo and the Home Depot, on the other hand, the designer passes a plan to a project manager, although the Expo designer monitors the progress. When a hollow wall turns out to be solid or a pipe pops up in an unexpected place, the project manager adapts the design.
The nuts-and-bolts execution is the stores' biggest challenge. All but Boffi hire subcontractors to do the actual work.
Any renovations can be hellish, of course, no matter whom you hire to do them. The best you can hope for is that when problems arise, they can be addressed quickly. Expo, Ikea and the Home Depot, however, often require full payment up front, rather than in stages, as is the norm when a designer supervises the job. So when things do go wrong, customers are left with little leverage.
Susan Hughes, a public relations consultant in Washington, said that she was thrilled with Expo's design for her kitchen, but that its installation was a nightmare. Several months ago, she said, she returned home from work to find water from a bathroom flowing through her living room, and no workers in sight. Three crews later, Expo has agreed to pay $2,500 to replace her ruined carpet, but her kitchen is still unfinished. (The company has promised it will be done by the end of the month.) Ms. Hughes found that she had limited influence over the workers because they were hired by Expo. ''How can you read the riot act to workers you didn't actually hire?'' she asked.
Customers may be able to avoid these problems by asking about the specific crew assigned to the job -- how many kitchens has it done, and how much experience does it have? Alternatively, customers may want to hire their own contractors.
And now for the results. Some $50,000 separated the most expensive plan (Boffi, at $59,100) for Ms. Suarez's kitchen from the least expensive (Ikea at $8,906). But which was the best?
Each store's designer had to contend with the kitchen's idiosyncracies. At almost 10 feet by 10 feet, it is roomy, but the shallow shelves offer little storage. The only place to put a dish next to the stove is in the air.
To open up the space, Boffi cleverly proposed moving the refrigerator from its prominent position by the living room and tucking it behind a door. Ikea flipped the refrigerator to the oven side, freeing up the entire sink wall for food preparation. To increase storage, all the plans added cabinets above and below the counters. Ikea, Expo and the Home Depot took advantage of the high ceilings in the room -- nine and a half feet -- to add taller cupboards. The catch was that the top shelf would be out of Ms. Suarez's reach. More storage does not always mean usable storage. Only Boffi deliberately used standard-height cabinets, placing them within easy reach.
In my opinion, all four companies piled too much onto their renovations. Ikea and Expo marooned seven-foot-tall cupboards in clumsy freestanding positions. Boffi extended its cabinets partly over an opening into the living room, obscuring a valuable view. Each company also called for generous drawers -- handy for a line cook, but probably not necessary for a client whose primary meal is a morning cup of coffee. None of the designers told me that cabinets with drawers are typically 15 percent more expensive than those with doors. And everyone was quick -- overly quick, I would say -- to have Ms. Suarez's charming old-fashioned stove and two-year-old refrigerator replaced.
The tendency to overdo was most evident in the Expo scheme. Jumbled and visually dissonant, it featured awkwardly shaped countertops and moldings that did not match others already in the room. Added to that were details that suggested a McMansion, like expanses of stainless steel (stove, dishwasher, refrigerator and microwave), beige granite counters and a backsplash made of inch-square tile and inset with depictions of fruit.
The Expo designer actually saw the kitchen. Designers for the other companies -- Boffi, Ikea and the Home Depot -- may have been hampered because they had only secondhand information. But they proposed covering up the beautiful tile work under the sink or ignored the ceramic insets in the existing backsplash. Nor could they consider the kitchen in relation to other rooms. To avoid grappling with the existing conditions, the Home Depot's designer opted for what he called a neutral look. Natural maple cabinets with simple paneled doors were intended to harmonize with the surroundings -- an arbitrary selection, because there is no maple in the rest of the apartment.
Ikea took a similar tack with gray ash cabinets, albeit with a bit more Euro flair. Boffi was the only vendor to address the issue head on by boldly inserting its trademark sleek cabinets and counters, in stark contrast to the existing ramshackle environment. None of the designers I consulted suggested restoring the moldings. Only Expo's designer proposed painting the peeling walls.
Naturally, the vendors specified only those products carried by their employers. But the best kitchens usually come from a wide and imaginative variety of sources. With a little more flexibility, Ikea's frosted-glass cabinets, at $66 for a model 18 inches wide and 30 tall, could be paired with a colorful glass mosaic tile backsplash. Or the Ikea cabinet shells -- ''carcasses,'' as they are called in the trade -- could be given upgraded doors like solid oiled walnut with nickel-plated flush pulls.
The biggest differences among the proposals lay in the quality of the materials, which generally varied according to cost. Boffi's extra-chunky stainless steel counters are almost twice the standard thickness, and, at almost $7,000, cost roughly twice as much as stainless counters from commercial kitchen supply stores. The finish is nearly as lustrous as sterling silver, rather than the familiar brushed tin. The same level of finish is found in Boffi's luxuriously shiny and indestructible polyester-coated cabinets. Even the utensil drawers have the confident thunk of a Mercedes door.
The Omega Embassy cabinets selected by Expo are plywood, not the less durable particleboard, with substantial stainless drawer slides. Expo's granite is . . . well, granite -- but at $79 a square foot installed, it is competitive with that of specialty stone suppliers. The Home Depot's KraftMaid cabinets are also appealing, if a little less solid than Expo's. The Home Depot recommended counters of Silestone, a low-maintenance synthetic that looks fake.
At the low end, Ikea's cabinets are heftier than its furniture, and they offer good value, with fully extendable drawers and substantial drawer bottoms, three-eighths of an inch thick. Ikea's hardware may look a little skimpy, but it's easily replaced. Hi-Macs, the acrylic material Ikea recommended for countertops, is durable and stain-resistant.
Despite the range of prices quoted, the four schemes displayed a remarkable uniformity: two rows of boxes set across from each other and a fixation on stainless steel. A store designer is unlikely to offer any radical ideas, like liquid crystal lighting, or even mildly adventurous ones, like open slotted racks for dish storage.
In the end, perhaps that's not so important. Not every kitchen needs to be a design statement. All the vendors have a solid grasp of space planning; all make it easy to envision options; all supply well-made products. In short, each does a decent job. And sometimes decent is good enough. With these off-the-rack suppliers taking on most of the burden, you are free to focus on what is most important: what comes out of your kitchen and whom you share it with.
ROOM TO IMPROVE
