For months Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has successfully kept two corruption investigations of his past activities in the background. But on Wednesday a criminal indictment of a prominent real estate developer with ties to Mr. Sharon suddenly increased the political pressure on him.
An Israeli court accused the developer, David Appel, of trying to bribe Mr. Sharon, beginning in the late 1990's when he was foreign minister. The indictment raises potentially serious legal and political issues for Mr. Sharon and prompted political opponents to call for his resignation.
Mr. Sharon has not been charged with any wrongdoing. A Justice Ministry official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said a decision on whether to indict him and his son, who is also under investigation, was expected sometime in the next few weeks or months.
The indictment accuses Mr. Appel of paying roughly $700,000 to Mr. Sharon's son Gilad, with the aim of getting Mr. Sharon's support for real estate projects.
Mr. Appel ''gave Ariel Sharon a bribe in recognition of activities connected to the fulfillment of his public position,'' the indictment says. He paid ''exorbitant funds to the son of Ariel Sharon for the goal of getting action from Ariel Sharon,'' it says.
Mr. Appel's lawyer, Moshe Israel, said his client was innocent.
''There was no bribery, there was no giver and there was no taker,'' Mr. Israel was quoted as saying in the Israeli media.
In a country where prime ministers fall with regularity, Mr. Sharon has shown strong staying power during his nearly three years in office. His current four-party coalition government has remained stable since its formation a year ago after a landslide election victory by his rightist Likud Party.
But the scrutiny of the unfolding case could put extreme political pressure on Mr. Sharon, even if he is not charged.
On Thursday, he said had no intention of resigning.
''I am not about to resign,'' Mr. Sharon told the newspaper Yediot Aronot. ''I stress, I am not about to resign. If the question is whether recent developments are liable to bring about my resignation, the answer is no.''
The indictment in the Tel Aviv Magistrates Court says Mr. Appel agreed in 1998 to hire Mr. Sharon's son Gilad to promote the planned development of a Greek island resort, and proposed payments totaling $3 million. Gilad Sharon was hired even though he ''did not have the relevant professional skills,'' the indictment says.
After the agreement was reached, Mr. Appel made monthly payments to an account of the Sharon family ranch, which is in Gilad Sharon's name, the indictment said. The prime minister has lived for years at the sheep and cattle ranch in the Negev region of Israel and stays there when he is not in Jerusalem.
The indictment lists 15 separate payments, some in dollars and some in shekels, totaling about $700,000.
The first payment listed was in November 1999. Mr. Sharon was no longer foreign minister then, but was the leader of the opposition in Parliament. He became prime minister in March 2001, and the payments continued until June 2001, according to the indictment. The indictment also alleges that Mr. Appel tried to bribe Ehud Olmert, who was then mayor of Jerusalem, and is now the deputy prime minister.
Mr. Olmert has not been charged, and a decision on whether to indict him is expected around the same time as with Mr. Sharon and his son, said the Justice Ministry official.
Mr. Appel's Greek island project never won approval from the Greek authorities. But he also sought political help with a real estate deal in Israel, the indictment said.
The case has been simmering for months, and the Israeli police questioned Mr. Sharon for seven hours on Oct. 30 at his official residence.
But the indictment, with its new details about alleged payments, could potentially lead to pressure from within his coalition to step down, or to a no-confidence vote in Parliament, analysts said.
''He should already have resigned in the light of earlier events,'' said Avraham Shochat, a member of the opposition Labor Party. ''What happened today is just an extra. He is polluting the atmosphere.''
Mark Heller, an analyst at the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies at Tel Aviv University, said Mr. Sharon and his coalition had seemed capable of weathering Israeli political turbulence and the ongoing conflict with the Palestinians. But the scandal could make him vulnerable.
Mr. Sharon has given no indication that he would consider resigning. But if he did step down, his rightist coalition, which holds 68 of the 120 seats in Parliament, could remain in place.
Mr. Heller said that in that case, a new prime minister would almost certainly come from the ranks of Likud. Benjamin Netanyahu, a former prime minister and the current finance minister, would be a leading candidate, he said.
If Mr. Sharon remains in office and the scandal worsens, some of his coalition partners could threaten to leave, depriving the government of its majority and possibly forcing its collapse. The second-largest faction in the government coalition, the centrist party Shinui, has 15 seats and made its reputation by demanding clean government, Mr. Heller noted.
''It could be a question of how long Shinui can hold its nose before it begins to lose credibility,'' he said.
Hillel Sommer, a constitutional law scholar at the Interdisciplinary Center in Herzliya, said the case could take years to play out in court.
Even if the prime minister is indicted, he will not be required to step down while legal proceedings are under way, Mr. Sommer said.
A prime minister can only be forced from office on legal grounds after a conviction, he said.
Mr. Sharon and his sons, Gilad and Omri, are the subjects of a separate campaign finance investigation.
In that case, Mr. Sharon was ordered to return campaign contributions of nearly $1 million that were improperly raised from overseas donors in 1999, when he was chosen as the leader of Likud.
Mr. Sharon and his sons sought a loan to repay the money, using the ranch, which they possess on a long-term lease, as collateral. But the application was rejected, and a South African businessman, Cyril Kern, transferred $1.5 million to Mr. Sharon's sons. Mr. Kern has described the money as a personal gift, not a political donation. Mr. Sharon has denied knowledge of the money.
Corruption investigations are an almost permanent feature of political life in Israel.
Mr. Sharon's two predecessors, Ehud Barak and Mr. Netanyahu, both faced long-running investigations that were ultimately dropped without charges being filed.
