Sometimes it is four or five flights that stand between them and the sunshine. Sometimes it is only 12 stairs -- a physical barrier so daunting that it has virtually marooned many aged or ailing New Yorkers in apartments they cannot afford to give up, trapped high above the teeming street life they once enjoyed and took for granted.
Were it not for the stairs, people like Robert Fine, who has multiple sclerosis and uses a wheelchair, would not need to make appointments with friends to carry him down from his second-floor West Village apartment so that he can enjoy some fresh air. And he would not need to ask strong-looking strangers on the street to carry him back up.
Were it not for the stairs, people like Sebastian Pernice would not have to wait for the world to come to him, in his airy fifth-floor apartment of almost 30 years in the West Village, 67 steps off the ground.
''Sometimes, you feel very trapped,'' said Mr. Pernice, who has a diagnosis of AIDS. ''Everyone tells me that I should get out more, because I'm often depressed. The only thing is -- the stairs.''
New York City has thousands of people in walk-ups who, though not completely homebound, are still separated from the world by a finite number of vertical steps, bedeviled by what they might consider a conspiracy of fates. They do not fit the classic definition of a shut-in, those so bedridden or immobile that they could not leave any apartment. Many of the marooned would eagerly encounter the outside world if they lived on the ground floor or in an elevator building.
But unable to afford a comparable home anywhere else in the city, and unwilling to leave a beloved neighborhood that is part of their marrow, they have few options but to stay frozen in a world that eventually shrinks to the four walls of their walk-up.
Many live alone. Many are treading poverty, dependent on fixed incomes and rent regulations. And many more New Yorkers will soon find themselves in similar straits, housing groups and social workers predict, assuming the elderly population continues to boom and construction of new housing does not keep pace.
There are roughly 328,000 apartments in walk-up buildings in New York City with four or more floors, according to the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development. There are 277,000 more apartments in buildings with three stories, basements included. That total of more than 600,000 -- or 20 percent of all the city's apartments -- makes New York the walk-up capital of America, housing groups reckon.
For generations of New Yorkers, walk-up apartments have been an inconvenient but vital staple of vertical urban life, a gritty first berth up the ladder of success for the newcomer and the striver. But walk-ups are far from the dominion of the young. According to new research from New York University and the International Longevity Center, 27 percent of New Yorkers over 65 live in walk-up apartments that are not on the first floor.
The story of Dawn Gantly, a 70-year-old expatriate from Britain, is typical, tempering optimism with economic hardships, independence with personal concessions.
A former retail saleswoman, Ms. Gantly has lived by herself in the same rent-regulated, fourth-floor walk-up studio on East 28th Street in Manhattan for 25 years. But her vision is rapidly deteriorating. Her legs have poor circulation. And while she would love to live in a garden apartment, or in an elevator building, she can barely afford her current regulated rent of $484 a month. In fact, she was almost evicted two years ago.
So she rarely ventures out anymore, save for imperative errands to buy food for her two cats, visit the doctor or, on Christmas Eve, pick up a mince pie. She recently signed up for the city's Meals on Wheels program through the nearby Stein Senior Center, and every week or so, Julie Audet, an accountant at Credit Suisse First Boston, visits Ms. Gantly as part of a volunteer program arranged by United Neighbors of East Midtown, a community group.
''You've always been an independent person, but suddenly, you can't do these things anymore, darling, and you get stuck up here,'' Ms. Gantly said. ''You do get a little lonely, and you do feel it's you against the world, so it's so pleasant to have people come by and help.''
If Ms. Gantly is emblematic of those who have readily accepted help, then the sisters Soto in Cobble Hill, Brooklyn -- Feliza, 86, and Carmen, 91 -- are examples of those who are still reluctant.
For years, Carmen lived on the second floor of a three-story walk-up, and Feliza on the third floor. But Feliza recently received a diagnosis of Alzheimer's and can leave the apartment only occasionally. So Carmen moved upstairs to take care of her sister. And because the two refuse to get a home health attendant, the eldest sister must run the errands, despite her own osteoporosis, difficulties with the stairs and a wobbly banister in the building.
''I cannot live without Carmen,'' Feliza said in Spanish, through interpreters with the Fifth Avenue Committee, a community group. ''She's the only companion I have.''
They are desperate to live in a building without stairs. So a few months ago, when the two heard that they could get into a public housing building with elevators if they canceled their Section 8 housing vouchers, they did just that. But they were mistaken. And now, with their Section 8 vouchers gone, they are plowing into their savings to pay the rent of $891 a month.
''We don't have any place to go,'' Carmen said.
Self-sufficient or not, many walk-up residents say that they must get used to the new reality of watching the center of gravity of their daily activities shift skyward, and waiting for everything, and everyone, to come to them. God's Love We Deliver, which serves a growing roster of people with AIDS, cancer, multiple sclerosis and other serious diseases, estimates that 20 to 30 percent of its 1,500 daily deliveries are made to people essentially trapped in walk-ups.
One of those deliveries goes to Mr. Pernice, the AIDS patient in the fifth-floor West Village walk-up, who consumes his hot meal at lunchtime with his medication. While it is easy, he said, to feel despondent about his health and his isolation, he says that he has come to appreciate the nest he has created for himself, and his longtime partner, Tim Sutton.
''I used to fly up and down the stairs, and it's been difficult to lose all that, being sick a lot,'' Mr. Pernice said. ''But sometimes, I feel like I'm in an aerie, because I have my pets, I have my books.''
If there is one commodity that many of these walk-up residents say they most fondly desire, though, it is the chance to enjoy as much human contact as possible -- whether in person or over the phone.
That is part of the reason why Alvin Lorberfeld, who has nerve damage in his legs that makes the one-flight, 13-step journey to his apartment arduous, enjoys the University Without Walls program established by Dorot, a social service organization in Manhattan.
People who are basically homebound can discuss, in a teleconference call, anything from international affairs to Jewish humor (Mr. Lorberfeld's current choice). And in so doing, they make disembodied contact or even form friendships with people they have never met, or may have met long ago.
''There was a gal in a class -- she happened to be from the Bronx -- she was from my old neighborhood,'' said Mr. Lorberfeld, 76, who now lives in Bayside, Queens. ''But I only knew her first name.''
Then there is the remarkable story of Mr. Fine, who asks friends to carry him down from his second-floor apartment on Perry Street, and strangers to carry him up.
Mr. Fine, who says that he is in his 50's, used to be in the real estate business. He has used a wheelchair for several years now, but he is so determined to go outside that he keeps a motorized scooter on the ground floor, outside his building. He does not go out much -- he cannot stand the cold, for one thing -- but when he does, he relishes every moment.
''Other people might think it's no big deal, trudging through the streets, but for me, it's almost like a special treat,'' he said. ''When you're cooped up, and you go outside, you say to yourself -- 'Wow, this is so fabulous to be outside.'''
Mr. Fine does not mind being inside, though.
With the help of his current full-time home health aide, he busies himself with his plants, his books, his collection of dance figurines atop his fireplace. He will recite poems for any visitor: Wallace Stevens and Emily Dickinson are particular favorites. And he loves ballet, most of all, as evidenced by a large collection of brooches depicting dance figures.
''I used to spend all my time outside -- I'd sleep and go out all the time, but now, I hate to say relegated -- but it's a fact that I'm domesticated,'' he said.
His apartment also has lots of framed photographs and drawings. Many are of famous ballet dancers. There is a print of a Cartier-Bresson photograph. And near the door, there are photographs of a young man standing next to his motorcycle and trekking through Southeast Asia and Latin America.
The young man, of course, is Mr. Fine himself, back before the stairs became the dividing line between what he could and could not do.
