Despite all their assurances to the contrary, the Nets might have been more preoccupied with business than basketball Wednesday night.
Many players learned before the game that a deal had finally been struck to sell the franchise to Bruce C. Ratner, who plans on moving the Nets to Brooklyn. If Ratner saw his new acquisition at the SBC Center, he might have asked for a markdown.
The Nets made their first trip to San Antonio since the N.B.A. finals, and Jason Kidd made his first visit since taking a free-agent recruiting trip over the summer. Once again, they left with nothing.
The crowd welcomed Kidd with a smattering of boos and the Spurs kicked the Nets out of Texas with a second-half surge and a 99-76 victory. The Nets have not shown their prospective new owner much value recently, losing four games in a row and five of six.
''Way to get off to a good start, guys,'' Richard Jefferson said.
In a way, they did get off to a good start. Kerry Kittles scored 24 of his season-high 30 points in the first half, made his first four 3-pointers and gave the Nets a 1-point halftime lead. Then the Nets stopped getting back on defense and communicating with one another, earning a scolding from Coach Byron Scott.
''We made a ton of mental mistakes in coverage,'' Scott said. ''We gave them I don't know how many layups. We just fell asleep.''
They were understandably exhausted, having been whipped in Dallas on Tuesday. In the second half here, the Nets lost their legs, shooting 28.2 percent and scoring 29 points. The Spurs were almost twice as good, shooting 55.3 percent and scoring 53 points.
One team was getting easy shots and the other was giving them. The Nets were obliterated in the paint, 52-18, and their starting front line of Kenyon Martin, Jason Collins and Jefferson finished 4 of 24 from the field. Martin at least had a legitimate excuse: back spasms that pained him whenever he moved.
As usual, none of the Nets could match Tim Duncan, who spoiled Kidd's return to San Antonio with his usual stat line: 21 points and 17 rebounds. The Nets were reminded of the N.B.A. finals, with one important exception.
''In the finals, the games were a lot closer,'' said Kidd, who also scored 21 points Wednesday.
The Nets could only act competitive. Even when they were behind by 20 points near the end of the fourth quarter, Scott instructed his players to foul. The oddball strategy could not prevent the inevitable blowout.
Heading into Wednesday, the Nets and the Spurs had each dropped four of five games, but the Spurs turned themselves around for one night while the Nets tripped over another elite opponent.
The Nets thought they were finished with four-game losing streaks in early December. Now, as they near the midpoint of the season, they are forced to cope with another.
REBOUNDS
The Nets are one of six teams that have inquired about HUBERT DAVIS, the former Knicks guard who was waived this week by the Detroit Pistons. The agent for Davis, STEVE KAUFFMAN, indicated that the Nets were one of two leading contenders to land him.
Earlier this month, the Nets pursued another former Knicks guard, CHARLIE WARD, but he chose the Spurs. Ward said Wednesday that he held no bitterness toward the Knicks, who dealt him to Phoenix in the STEPHON MARBURY trade after nine years with the club.
Davis will clear waivers on Thursday and is expected to sign with a new team by the weekend. The Nets are interested in him because he is an accurate outside shooter and because LUCIOUS HARRIS has been bothered by injuries.
PRO BASKETBALL
