CHRISTOPHER SMITH of Fairfax County, Va., has had his own Web site for two years. He originally created it to showcase his cartoon drawings, but his interests have changed, and he has taken the site in a new direction: he uses it to share homemade animations.
The site, thingemon.com, is typical of many personal Web pages, except for one thing: Christopher is 12 years old.
He started working on the site when he was 10, at the urging of his father, Tim, who works in technology and has his own Web server. Nowadays Christopher works on the site a couple of hours a week, and he says it gets him attention. ''I like how everybody can see it and tell me how they like it and they all talk about it at school and stuff,'' he said.
As if children did not already have enough of a lock on mastering technology, they are quickly infiltrating a bastion still largely ruled by adults: Web sites.
A recent study by Grunwald Associates, a research and consulting firm in San Mateo, Calif., says that 12.2 percent of girls and 8.6 percent of boys ages 6 to 17 with Internet access at home now have their own Web sites. With an estimated 23 million children in the United States online at home, that adds up to about two million sites, and the study found that another 30 percent of the 2,000 children surveyed said they wanted to create their own digital soapboxes soon.
''Kids are becoming content providers and electronic publishers,'' said Peter Grunwald, the firm's founder. ''It's a fundamentally different relationship between the kid and the medium that exists in television. Kids are exercising control over media.''
Of course, as with many sites created by adults, children's Web sites are not always maintained, since keeping them current proves to be as difficult for many children as, say, cleaning up their rooms. Many sites are abandoned altogether as interest and energy wane.
Yet children clearly want to know more about how to build their own sites and pursue other Web activities, said Leslie Conery, deputy chief executive officer of the International Society for Technology in Education. ''Web pages are one tiny little way that students are using the Internet,'' she said.
While most schools do not include Web site-building lessons in their curriculum, children are learning how to do it on their own anyway.
''Kids grow up on the Internet -- it makes sense for them to use the Internet as an audience for whatever they're passionate about,'' said Wes Cruver, 21, who started his own Web site as a preteenager. ''When you've grown up online, you've had friends all over the world and it's the only way you can share information.''
Mr. Cruver now is the chief creative officer of Nortel Networks Kidz Online (kidzonline.org), a well-financed Web site with content largely created by high school and college students that aims to teach children about technology, including how to build a Web site.
What children are doing with their Web sites depends on their age, their technological aptitude (or their parents'), and their ambition. Mostly, children are turning to the Web to showcase their artwork and poetry; to tell the world why they love something, like cars, movie and pop stars or Harry Potter books; or for a school project.
But some children are using their sites to speak out and let others have a say, too. Joshua Niamehr, 16, a high school junior in Roslyn, N.Y., says he wants to go into politics. The child of Jewish Iranian immigrants, he felt compelled to try to understand why the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks occurred, so he created his Web site, www.newsbyteens.com, ''so everybody learns more,'' he said.
The site is modeled like an interactive magazine. Anyone can contribute, and the site receives about 10 to 15 submissions weekly.
Joshua started Newsbyteens when he put a posting on a Web site seeking other young people to help him build a Web site along a newspaper model.
Thirteen teenagers replied from all over the world. Now about five teenagers work on the site. The ''assistant Webmaster,'' Kamran Ayub, lives in Minnesota, and Joshua says they have never met.
Because Joshua is comfortable with technology, he used several sophisticated programs to create his site, including Dreamweaver, Fireworks and Adobe Photoshop. But even children who know little or nothing about page-design tools and being a Webmaster can stake their claim on the Web with the help of specialized sites.
Among these is www.matmice.com, a three-year-old Web site that hosts free pages for children. It was created by three teenage sisters in Australia: Emily, Sarah and Elise Boyd. The site, which has a corporate sponsorship from Scholastic Australia, has hosted more than 400,000 Web pages.
The sisters spent eight months developing the site, writing 10,000 lines of code because, way back then, ''unless you knew HTML and how to upload a page to the Web, it was pretty difficult for a kid to have a Web page,'' Emily, 20, said by e-mail.
Of the Web pages for which Matmice is host, some children load up once, never to be heard of again. Others abandon fan-type sites because they lose passion for the topic. But Ms. Boyd said that plenty of other youngsters stick with it, updating their pages regularly and finding an audience for their work.
For some children, the choice of project may be the problem, not the Web technology involved. When Melanie Klerer, 9, of Scarsdale, N.Y., had a play date with three friends last spring they decided to create a Web page to sell a product that they came up with called ''soft powder.''
''We wanted to advertise it and get money,'' said Melanie, a fourth grader. So, with the help of her father, Robert, who runs an Internet security company from his home, she and her friends got to work on the project, writing an advertisement and drawing pictures to load on the Web.
The pictures never made it on the Web site. ''We never got to see any pictures 'cause it was really hard,'' Melanie said. Then Melanie accidentally spilled the powder and the girls had nothing to sell. The business and the Web site fizzled.
