The White House insisted on Wednesday that President Bush's State of the Union speech was not the opening shot of his re-election campaign. But that did not stop the president from taking a relatively small job-training initiative that he included in the speech to two of the most hotly contested states in the coming election, Ohio and Arizona.
At community colleges in both states, Mr. Bush argued that a series of programs in his forthcoming budget, totaling a little over $500 million if Congress approves them, would help improve the skills of workers and qualify them for higher-paying technical jobs. The details sounded much like the kind of job retraining efforts that President Bill Clinton regularly promoted around the country in the 1990's.
''I fully recognize in Ohio there are still troubled times,'' Mr. Bush said at the Owens Community College in Perrysburg Township, near Toledo. ''People who rely upon a steady job in the manufacturing sector are hoping to be able to realize their hopes by finding work elsewhere.''
In Ohio and here in Arizona, Mr. Bush sat in front of banners that read ''Jobs for the 21st Century.'' But the strategies he described did not involve job creation; instead, they are focused on education programs, particularly at community colleges, that improve basic skills.
''It's $250 million of direct money to help on these programs which match workers with employers,'' Mr. Bush said of one of his training programs that is specifically directed at community colleges.
But clearly, the political importance of Mr. Bush's message was as much where he was speaking as what he was saying. He carried Ohio in 2000 by a mere 165,000 votes and Arizona by even fewer, roughly 100,000 votes.
Democrats argued that Mr. Bush's State of the Union speech lacked many new initiatives. Representative George Miller of California, the senior Democrat on the House Education and Workforce Committee and an early ally of Mr. Bush on education issues before he became disillusioned with the White House, said trips like the one to Toledo did not mean much.
''Job training is important and it is necessary,'' Mr. Miller said. ''But what is even more important is job creation, and the president's speech and his program continue the failed policies that have cost us nearly three million jobs in the last three years.''
