CHOI sum gai fan, stir-fried Chinese broccoli and chicken on rice, is a humble dish. But in the same way that a consistently sublime burger separates the classic diner from the common greasy spoon, the chicken-and-broccoli plate is a litmus test for budget restaurants in Hong Kong. If a chef cranks out a delicious plate, his other menu offerings are probably worth ordering.
Construction workers and budget-conscious diners in Hong Kong favor it as a simple one-dish lunch. Served in a heap, usually on a plastic plate, it is cheap, ubiquitous and delicious when cooked right.
Slices of raw chicken, often ''velveted'' -- coated beforehand in a mixture of cornstarch and egg white -- are tossed into a hot wok with stalks of Chinese broccoli. Seasoning is minimal: a few strips of ginger, a splash of chicken stock, a little sesame oil, sometimes a squirt of soy sauce, cornstarch to bind, and yes, a spoonful of monosodium glutamate. Occasionally, there are a few flourishes, like julienne carrots and a mushroom or two.
As I found upon my return to New York City after working as a reporter in Hong Kong, a great choi sum gai fan is hard to find here. The heavily trafficked restaurants in Chinatown, which focus on big-ticket dishes tourists favor, usually offer a bland and gelatinous version.
Excellent Dumpling House, on Lafayette Street just south of Canal, serves a creditable rendition of the dish with baby bok choy in white or brown sauce, for $4.50. Proton Saga, a Malaysian-Cantonese restaurant at 11 Allen Street (named proudly, and oddly, for Malaysia's first domestically produced car), serves an even better version, with more ginger. It costs a little less than $5.
After more than a year of hunting, I stumbled onto a no-frills place at Canal and Essex Streets, far from the tourist stomping grounds to the west. Everybody Happy Restaurant is the name printed in yellow Chinese characters on the weathered red awning. On the menu, the name is rendered in English as Ipoh Restaurant.
Ipoh's choi sum gai fan marries economy with excellence. Its flavors are subtle. It comes hot, hot, hot on a mound of steaming white rice. The chicken is firm, and the Chinese broccoli crunches. Fresh ginger slivers are sprinkled generously on top.
And all for $3.50.
BRIAN PALMER
Choi sum gai fan is available at Proton Saga, 11 Allen Street (Canal Street), (212) 625-1153, noon to 2 a.m., closed Thursdays; Excellent Dumpling House, 111 Lafayette Street (Canal Street), (212) 219-0212 or (212) 219-0213, 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily; Ipoh Restaurant, 25 Canal Street (Essex Street), (212) 388-0264, 5 a.m. to 10 p.m. daily.
TEMPTATION
