Buoyed by a brightening advertising climate during the holiday season, The New York Times Company and Dow Jones &amp; Company reported increases in fourth-quarter earnings yesterday that exceeded analysts' expectations. But both companies cautioned that it was too soon to conclude how much of that advertising rebound, if any, would continue in the current quarter.
The Times Company posted net income of $110.9 million, or 73 cents a share, in the most recent quarter, up 3.1 percent from the fourth quarter of 2002, when it reported profit of $107.5 million, or 69 cents a share. Revenue at the Times Company rose 5 percent in the latest quarter, to $882.3 million, from $840.2 million a year earlier. In addition to The New York Times, the company owns 18 other newspapers (including The Boston Globe and The International Herald Tribune) and 8 network-affiliated television stations.
Dow Jones -- which publishes The Wall Street Journal as well as Barron's, The Far Eastern Economic Review and the 32 community newspapers in the Ottaway group -- reported net income of $44.3 million, or 54 cents a share. That represents an almost threefold increase from the period a year earlier, when it reported net income of $15.2 million, or 18 cents a share.
Excluding special items, earnings were $35 million, or 43 cents a share, in the fourth quarter, compared with $28.2 million, or 34 cents a share, for the fourth quarter of 2002.
Revenue at Dow Jones rose 6 percent, to $420.7 million, from $396.9 million.
The results at both companies -- as well as those reported in recent days by other newspaper companies, including Knight Ridder and E.W. Scripps -- reflect an upturn in some advertising categories, especially in December, said Paul Ginocchio, an analyst at Deutsche Bank.
''The New York Times benefited in the fourth quarter from the trends at higher-end retailers -- Neiman Marcus, Saks, Nordstrom -- that's why they delivered better,'' Mr. Ginocchio said. ''The improved profitability of technology firms, and the pickup in corporate activity, particularly mergers and acquisitions, has led to a rebound in advertising at Dow Jones.''
If there was an ominous trend in the Times Company's report, it was that help-wanted advertising has yet to bounce back at its flagship paper. The company said such advertising was down 17 percent in December. Christa Sober, vice president for equity research at Thomas Weisel Partners in San Francisco, said of the category, ''Its persistent weakness has really caused overall results to be muted.''
The Times Company also said that it was moving forward with construction of its new headquarters on Eighth Avenue, a project that was delayed in the fall as the company's development partner, Forest City Ratner, sought financing. Leonard P. Forman, chief financial officer of the Times Company, said Forest City was ''very close to signing'' a ''firm financing deal.'' The Times expects to move in 2007, Mr. Forman said.
At Dow Jones, executives said advertising remained volatile.
''Even within a month,'' Richard F. Zannino, chief operating officer of Dow Jones, said in a conference call with analysts, ''we've seen ad buyers turn their spending spigots on -- as they did in September and December of 2003, where we came in north of our expectations -- and off, as they did in November.''
For these reasons, among others, Dow Jones said that it expected per-share earnings for the first quarter of the current year to be ''in the mid- to upper teens,'' lower than what Wall Street had predicted. The company said that it preferred not to give guidance for the year until trends in advertising, among other areas, stabilized.
The Times, which did not provide guidance for the quarter, said it expected per-share earnings to rise ''in the low- to mid-single digits'' for the year.
Dow Jones's shares closed at $49.59, down $1.88. Shares of the Times Company closed at $47.40, up 45 cents.
