He had skipped the Iowa caucuses. He had lived in an apartment here for almost a month and stumped tirelessly for weeks, visiting diners, playing host at town hall sessions and putting up an optimistic, often jubilant, front.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut had even broken out the unfashionably wide maroon tie, its white polka dots now yellowed with age, that he credits with victories in every contest in which he wore it in his political career since 1970.
But even as the returns came in and he appeared headed toward a disappointing fifth-place finish on Tuesday, Mr. Lieberman, the man who was Al Gore's 2000 running mate, refused to concede defeat.
Addressing staff members and volunteers who hours earlier were comforting one another with words about what should have been, Mr. Lieberman gave the thumbs-up sign and delivered what sounded like a victory speech. ''Let me ask you this,'' he began. ''Is New Hampshire a great state or what?''
''Thanks to the people of New Hampshire, we are in a three-way split decision for third place,'' he said.
But given his showing here, especially after such an intense effort, Mr. Lieberman, who began the race with the highest national profile of any Democrat in the contest, was again facing serious questions about his viability.
But he brushed them off. ''My friends, we're getting on that plane and we're going to Oklahoma,'' he told his supporters.
He said he had spoken to campaign leaders in the seven states with primaries and caucuses next Tuesday, adding, ''And each and every one of them said to me we demand that you carry the flag for our state.''
Arguing that he is the moderate in the race between extremes, he said, ''I am the one Democrat who can and will deny this president a second term and give America a fresh start,'' as supporters screamed wildly.
He campaigned nearly until the end, calling undecided voters from his Manchester headquarters and stopping by restaurants and polling spots to sway anyone he could.
''A lot of people are undecided kind of down to the wire and I wanted to reach out to you,'' he said to a woman over the telephone from his headquarters here. ''Are there any questions I can answer?''
Hanging up the telephone, he exclaimed: ''That was great. That was one vote. She had questions, I got her.''
Indeed, Mr. Lieberman had been encouraged throughout the day as he came across several people who said they had cast their votes for him. One of them, Mary Ellen LaPoint, told him, ''I liked the conservative side of your campaign.''
''I think he's a great American,'' she said later. ''We need someone who is as experienced as he is, someone who is so strong on values.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONNECTICUT SENATOR
