Three years after leading the movement that ousted Slobodan Milosevic from power, one of Serbia's leading politicians said in an interview on Tuesday that he may be forced to consider sharing power with the former dictator's Socialist Party.
Vojislav Kostunica, head of the Serbian Democratic Party, said no talks had yet been initiated. But even the prospect of a return to power by the Socialist Party this soon was a telling measure of Serbia's political gridlock.
A month ago nationwide elections left no one party with control of Parliament, and Serbia's bitterly divided politicians have been struggling since to form a government.
Mr. Kostunica, whose party finished second, said he could join forces with Mr. Milosevic's party ''in order not to stymie the creation of a new government and face the people with new elections.''
Mr. Milosevic was voted out of office in October 2000 and is currently a prisoner at the International Criminal Court for Former Yugoslavia in The Hague, where he is on trial for war crimes.
The election's biggest winner was the hard-line nationalist Radical Party, which profited from a wave of anti-government sentiment to gain 82 seats in the 250-member assembly, still shy of a majority.
The Radical Party leader, Vojislav Seselj, is also facing charges at The Hague, and the results alarmed many Western diplomats who saw the election returns as evidence of a resurgence of nationalism.
Pro-reform groupings led by Mr. Kostunica are hoping to prevent the nationalists from taking office by forming their own coalition.
But the reformers themselves are deeply divided, leaving Mr. Kostunica with few good options to form a government of his own.
The divisions became evident on Tuesday when the new Parliament convened for the first time and was unable to appoint a speaker after another reform party, the Democratic Party, refused to support either Mr. Kostunica's candidate or that of the Radical Party.
Mr. Kostunica has refused to form a coalition with the Democratic Party, which he said would ''discredit'' the new administration among voters who opinion polls showed had voted with the nationalists to protest the Democratic Party's record on the economy and corruption.
The inclusion of Mr. Milosevic's Socialist Party, however, may prove to be no less controversial a choice. But a deal with the Socialist Party could also have its merits in that its members have ''administrative skills that we opposition parties are all lacking,'' Mr. Kostunica said.
--------------------
Serb Pleads Guilty at The Hague
AMSTERDAM, Jan. 27, (AP) -- A former Croatian Serb leader, Milan Babic, pleaded guilty on Tuesday to persecution for helping remove non-Serbs from Croatia in the first Balkan war, and he expressed ''a deep sense of shame'' for his crimes.
In exchange for Mr. Babic's guilty plea, prosecutors agreed to drop four other charges of war crimes. But the tribunal hearing the case in The Hague said it would rule later on whether to accept the deal.
As part of the bargain, Mr. Babic agreed to cooperate in other war crimes trials, and he has already appeared as a witness against Mr. Milosevic.
