A day before his board was scheduled to consider an unsolicited $60 billion takeover bid, the chief executive of the French drug company Aventis dismissed the offer from Sanofi-Synthélabo as nothing more than ''a life insurance policy, almost free of charge'' for the bidder.
Sanofi made the hostile offer on Monday because it ''does not have critical mass in global research and development'' or the bulk to operate in critical markets like Japan, the Aventis chief executive, Igor Landau, said in a conference call with investors and analysts. ''They need us, but we don't need them,'' Mr. Landau added.
Aventis's management committee rejected the offer on Monday, and the company's supervisory board -- a representative of Aventis's biggest shareholder, the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation -- will meet Wednesday to vote formally on it. To defend itself against Sanofi's effort, Aventis said it would expand its Feb. 5 earnings presentation in London to stress the company's research and development prospects and earnings potential.
Aventis's stock gained another 0.25 euro, or 0.42 percent, to close at 59.50 euros in Paris. That is up more than 4 percent from Aventis's price before Sanofi's bid, but still below the actual offer of 59.63 euros a share.
Sanofi is unlikely to be dissuaded easily, in any case. It enlisted the advertising agency Publicis to help it sell the deal to the French public. Sanofi ran two full-page advertisements in Le Monde, Le Figaro and other major newspapers on Tuesday that implied the merger was integral to the development of new drugs in France.
''For reasons of health,'' the first page said. The second page was dominated by a photo of a blond boy in a hospital bed, with a caption that read, in part, ''Who's going to tell Louis that the medicine that can cure him will not be ready for the next 20 years? You? No. Nobody.''
Analysts said that Mr. Landau's dismissal of his suitor meant the deal would be unlikely to happen on Sanofi's original terms.
''He was pretty convincing,'' Marie Helene Leopold, an analyst at SG Cowen, said from Paris. ''He does not want Aventis to be part of this new group.''
Unions have said they are planning demonstrations at French plants that may be shut if the deal goes through.
Too much negative publicity could discourage Sanofi investors who originally approved the bid, said an executive close to one of Sanofi's largest investors.
One investor that may have a big influence on the structure of any deal is Kuwait Petroleum, which was integral to the 1999 merger of Rhône-Poulenc and Hoechst that created Aventis and has been the largest shareholder since.
The Kuwaiti oil company has been criticized for investing in Aventis, particularly after Aventis's share price dropped in 2002.
Seham Razzouqi, managing director for financial, administrative and internal relations affairs at the oil company and a member of the Aventis board, defended the investment in last September by noting that when the petroleum company first invested in Hoechst in the 1980's, it was a petrochemical company.
