Leaders of the Israeli settlement movement said Tuesday that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon had proposed dismantling seven isolated settlements as part of a plan of ''unilateral disengagement'' from the Palestinians.
The settler leaders said Mr. Sharon promised in exchange for their support to seek legislation banning the removal of more settlements before a final agreement with the Palestinians.
Mr. Sharon said any report of such negotiations was false. ''I have no intention of legislating any law that would tie the government's hands,'' he said. He said his advisers had just begun drawing up his plan.
The settler leaders said they rejected the offer at a meeting in recent days with a representative of Mr. Sharon. Bentzi Lieberman, the chairman of the Yesha Council, the main settlers group, told Israel Radio that the proposal amounted to ''the unilateral transfer of Jews.''
A public fight between the settlers and Mr. Sharon could potentially serve the interests of both. For the settlers, it could signal the right-wing elements of Mr. Sharon's government to stiffen their opposition to his plan; for Mr. Sharon, it could signal Washington that he has limited political room to maneuver.
Without identifying any settlements, Mr. Sharon has said he would evacuate some Jewish communities as part of his unilateral plan, which he has said he will impose if he judges that the peace plan known as the road map, an initiative sponsored by the White House, has failed. Israel is building a barrier against West Bank Palestinians that Mr. Sharon says is part of his plan. Ehud Olmert, the vice prime minister, has said Mr. Sharon could start implementing his plan in June.
President Bush announced the road map at a meeting with Israeli and Palestinian leaders in Jordan last June, but it has gained little traction. After an absence of four months, John Wolf, Mr. Bush's special envoy to promote the initiative, returned here today and said, ''Both sides need to continue to do more.''
The Bush administration has been critical of Mr. Sharon for failing to comply with commitments to remove settlement ''outposts'' set up in the West Bank during his tenure. The administration has also criticized the Palestinians for failing to abide by their commitments under the plan, including a pledge to start breaking up terrorist groups.
According to Israeli news reports, settler leaders said Mr. Sharon proposed to remove four settlements in the northern West Bank -- Homesh, Ganim, Kadim and Sanur -- and three in Gaza -- Kfar Darom, Morag and Netzarim. The communities are believed to have fewer than 1,500 residents in all.
There are about 230,000 settlers living in 145 settlements in the West Bank and Gaza, not counting the roughly 100 outposts. The United States has traditionally resisted Israeli settlement in the West Bank and Gaza, which Israel occupied in the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
Dror Etkes, a spokesman for Peace Now, an Israeli group that monitors settlements, called the withdrawal from the seven sites ''disengagement from a very, very small part'' of the West Bank.
In Ramallah, in the West Bank, the Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Maher, met Tuesday with Palestinian leaders to press for an agreement among Palestinian factions to halt attacks on Israelis.
Yasir Arafat, the head of the Palestinian Authority, said the men had agreed on ''various important steps,'' but he did not elaborate.
Mr. Arafat also thanked the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah for including Palestinians in a prisoner exchange with Israel that is to take place on Thursday. Israel agreed to free 435 Arab prisoners in exchange for an Israeli businessman and what are expected to be the remains of three Israeli soldiers held by Hezbollah. The soldiers have been believed dead since they were abducted on patrol along the border in 2000.
