Iowa and New Hampshire may have been tough slogs for Senator John Kerry, but his aides say they hope that his winning those two early states will give him the lift he needs to sweep through the rest of the country and capture the Democratic nomination.
As Senator Kerry put it to his supporters on Tuesday night after his victory in New Hampshire, ''Now this campaign goes on to places all over this country.''
But many Democrats say the road to the nomination is filled with many new obstacles.
Seven states vote in one week. Just a few weeks ago, none of them had seemed particularly hospitable to Senator Kerry, who is from Massachusetts.
''He's winning, and that's one hell of an advantage,'' Bill Carrick, a Democratic strategist in California, said Tuesday night. ''The voters just want to beat Bush; that's their whole mission in life. And Kerry is the only one who has won anything so far.''
With Iowa and New Hampshire under its belt, the Kerry campaign embarks on an aggressive strategy to take his candidacy national.
Kerry aides said the campaign would begin an intense advertising push on Wednesday in all seven states that vote on Feb. 3. While the other candidates have run commercials in those states, the Kerry campaign has held back.
A total of 269 delegates are at stake next week. The states and their number of delegates are: Arizona, 55; Delaware, 15; Missouri, 74; New Mexico, which holds a caucus, 26; North Dakota, also a caucus, 14; Oklahoma, 40; and South Carolina, 45.
The candidates' tentative schedules reveal a lot about where they think their strengths lie. But they also underscore how important money is in this new phase of the campaign, which will see the candidates racing across much of the country.
Senator Kerry heads first to Missouri, where he is to pick up some local endorsements and showcase an entourage of supporters, including Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, former Senator Max Cleland of Georgia, and the singer Carole King.
The withdrawal from the race of Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri last week put the state up for grabs.
It could prove to be a windfall for Mr. Kerry. Of all the states that vote on Feb. 3, Missouri has the most delegates and could prove the most hospitable to the Massachusetts senator.
After his visit to St. Louis, Mr. Kerry is scheduled to arrive in Greenville, S.C., for a town hall-style meeting. All of the candidates are to gather in Greenville on Thursday night for a debate.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has said he must win South Carolina to keep his candidacy alive.
On Wednesday, Mr. Edwards begins his campaign here, in the state where he was born. He starts at a rally in Orangeburg, then flies to Tulsa, Okla., and then heads to Missouri, stopping in Springfield and St. Louis.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who grew up in Little Rock, Ark., and has said that his Southern and military credentials make him the most electable candidate, also begins his day here. He is then off to St. Louis, Albuquerque, Phoenix and Oklahoma City.
Howard Dean was more circumspect about where he would campaign after spending Tuesday night at home in Burlington, Vt.
His aides said only that over the next five days, Dr. Dean would visit two cities in South Carolina (Greenville and Columbia), St. Louis, Albuquerque and Phoenix.
Even in the best of times for Dr. Dean, the Feb. 3 states did not look terribly hospitable for him. Now with his drubbing in Iowa and New Hampshire, he needs to find a state where he can win. His aides said that he needed to leapfrog ahead to Michigan, Washington and Wisconsin to find such a state and that his long-term strategy was to survive until California and New York vote on March 2.
Michigan has a history of giving a boost to determined underdogs. Dr. Dean has established a strong presence there and may benefit both by Mr. Gephardt's withdrawal and by the ability of Michigan Democrats to vote via the Internet, the vehicle with which he built his strength.
One Dean supporter in South Carolina said the former Vermont governor had no choice but to look beyond South Carolina.
''If you've got Edwards saying he has to win it, and you've got Clark, who's got to win something, and you've got Kerry, who's clearly the front-runner, doesn't it make sense to go ahead and start picking your states beyond Feb. 3?'' this supporter said. ''Because this is now all about delegates. It's clearly going to go to Michigan, and probably beyond. But none of these guys can look as if they're writing off the South.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who came in fifth in New Hampshire, is making no effort to compete here in the South. He was scheduled to go to Delaware but postponed that trip because of bad weather and is heading to Oklahoma.
The Rev. Al Sharpton has spent the last few days in South Carolina. Mr. Carrick said Mr. Sharpton was a ''wild card'' in South Carolina, where half of the Democratic primary voters are African-American.
The Kerry campaign would not say how much it would spend on its new round of commercials. Stephanie Cutter, a spokeswoman for Mr. Kerry, said that in most of the Feb. 3 states the campaign would run an advertisement that has run in both Iowa and New Hampshire. In it, a crewmate who served on Mr. Kerry's riverboat in the Vietnam War praises his leadership.
The Kerry campaign said the campaign intended to capitalize here on the senator's recent endorsement by Ernest F. Hollings, South Carolina's senior senator and former governor, and would bring four busloads of military veterans from all over the South.
General Clark is also making a strong bid for support from among the state's 400,000 military veterans. In his speech on Tuesday night, he called himself ''a soldier of the South'' and told his supporters:
''So we're heading south. We're heading west. And we ain't slowing down until the final buzzer sounds.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NEXT CONTESTS  Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Wednesday about Senator John Kerry's primary victory in New Hampshire referred incorrectly in some copies to the states with the most delegates at stake in voting today. They are Missouri and Arizona, not South Carolina.
