Prime Minister Tony Blair narrowly defeated a revolt in his own Labor Party on Tuesday night over legislation in Parliament to revamp the country's higher education system, thus avoiding a political humiliation that threatened to bring down his government.
The close vote, 316 to 311 in favor of substantially raising tuition fees, gave an important lift to Mr. Blair on the eve of a potentially greater challenge to his government on Wednesday, when Lord Hutton issues the findings of his investigation into the events surrounding the death of Dr. David Kelly. He was the specialist on Iraq's weapons whose concerns, privately expressed to the BBC, formed the basis of news reports that Mr. Blair and his aides had overstated the intelligence on Iraq's illicit weapons programs to make a stronger case for war.
The university financing bill will require British university students, who like most Europeans make only nominal tuition contributions toward the cost of a college degree, to begin paying as much as $5,500 a year starting in 2006.
The existing tuition, which is means-tested and therefore paid by fewer than 50 percent of students, was put in place by Mr. Blair in 1998. It has been the object of protests and demands for repeal.
The bill on Tuesday essentially calls for tripling those fees, and adds a number of features to convert them into loans and defer repayment.
The bill set off a rebellion within the Labor Party when 159 members declared opposition last month and forced a series of concessions and negotiations.
The Conservative Party, departing from its traditional free-market stance, joined the opposition and called for a complete rollback in university tuition. After the vote was tallied Tuesday evening, Tim Yeo, who led the Conservative Party in the debate, called the five-vote margin of victory an ''utter humiliation for the government.'' He later told the BBC that it appeared that Mr. Blair was ''losing control'' of his party.
Mr. Blair did not speak during the debate on Tuesday. But he indicated in an interview with The Observer on Sunday that he had reached a point in his premiership where he understood that the convergence of any series of political crises risked toppling his government. ''I think in this job you spend the entire time at risk, so there is not a moment when you are not,'' he told the newspaper.
Almost from the outset, the legislation on university finances became a referendum on Mr. Blair's hold over the party after six and half years in office, and a reflection of deep discontent both with his Iraq policy and his style of governance.
Clare Short, who quit her ministerial post last spring over the war in Iraq, accused Mr. Blair of acting more like a president than a prime minister on Tuesday, by not consulting the party before introducing major social initiatives. Alan Johnson, Mr. Blair's minister for higher education, told several television interviewers after the vote, ''We could have handled it better.''
Still, Mr. Blair worked the telephones feverishly, demanding loyalty from backbenchers and engineering, by a slim margin, the rescue of a flagship piece of legislation. The higher education funding bill is part of the broader social reform agenda Mr. Blair would like to extend to the national health system and the beleaguered railways. But the vote on Tuesday calls into question whether Labor is capable of the kind of consensus necessary to move forward on large legislative projects.
Part of the revolt seemed inspired by supporters of Gordon Brown, the chancellor of the exchequer who is regarded as Mr. Blair's most likely successor if he should step down. But the burgeoning popularity of the Conservative Party under its new leader, Michael Howard, makes the prospect of new elections a threat for the first time in years -- a factor in whipping Labor narrowly back into line.
The debate on Tuesday began with a signal that the knot of opposition to Mr. Blair was loosening when Nick Brown, a leader of the opponents and a loose associate of the chancellor, declared that he would vote in favor of the bill. But 71 opponents voted in opposition and 24 more abstained, suggesting that Mr. Blair's troubles in holding the party together may continue.
Charles Clarke, Mr. Blair's education secretary, began the seven-hour debate on Tuesday by telling the House that their decision ''will determine the future of our universities and so determine the future ability of this country to prosper in the increasingly competitive global economy.'' He said that as more students enter the system, ''we cannot continue to rely on the taxpayers alone'' to finance university education.
