The boxy white garbage truck lumbered along West 96th Street in Manhattan yesterday and stopped just short of four bins full of trash.
Then the truck, a front-loader with two heavy steel prongs jutting out like the horns of a charging bull, nosed forward to lock onto one bin as a city sanitation worker waved the vehicle forward like a nervous matador.
He shooed away several onlookers as the truck, with a jerk, lifted the Dumpster full of recyclable trash. Its heavy steel levers jacked up the big metal box in an arc over the windshield as the sanitation worker driving the truck, Harold Frazier, kept his eye on his jittery partner.
''His life is in my hands; If I lose my attention for a second, it's over,'' Mr. Frazier, 51, a 19-year veteran, said from his seat. ''I've had my own jacket caught up in the lift. Luckily it tore off, or else I wouldn't be here right now.''
The truck, known as an EZ Pack, is the type of front-loader that killed a sanitation worker, Eva Barrientos, 41, in Brooklyn on Monday. Ms. Barrientos, a mother of three, had apparently tried to clear some trash that had jammed the truck's compactor.
She was crushed by a lever lifting a steel trash bin and became perhaps the first female sanitation worker in the city to be killed on the job.
City garbage collectors interviewed on the street yesterday called Ms. Barrientos's death unnerving and sad. But a reminder of how dangerous the job is? None called it that.
''Maybe to the public it's a reminder, but anyone who works this job is reminded every day how dangerous it is,'' said Andy Roth, 54, who was loading trash bags into the back of a garbage truck yesterday morning on Manhattan Avenue near 103rd Street.
''I guess people don't realize: you have reckless drivers racing by you all the time,'' said Mr. Roth, a Staten Island resident with 19 years on the job. ''You have all kinds of things in these black trash bags, and if you're loading bag after bag into the truck you can easily get cut up by glass sticking out, or anything.''
As a ''section man,'' Mr. Roth loads trash. His partner, Luis Rodriguez, 47, moves the truck and often helps load on larger pickups.
''We're starting and stopping this truck all day on crowded streets,'' Mr. Rodriguez said. ''Each time, you have to check if anyone's in front or back of the truck. Is there a kid near the wheels?''
Each time the truck is stopped for a pickup, he explained, an automatic parking brake engages before the hydraulic rear gate of the hopper can be activated. That gate pulls back trash like a big metal tongue, but there is nothing soft about it. Compacting trash into the back of the truck, it squeezes the bags and they routinely pop and shoot a flurry of debris.
While Ms. Barrientos's death was believed to be the first to involve a female city sanitation worker on the job, other Sanitation Department employees have lost their lives to different causes. In 1996, a worker died after inhaling acidic fumes from a discarded container that burst.
The truck that killed Ms. Barrientos focused attention on the risks of the department's front-loaders. The levers for lifting and closing the gate are near the truck's rear corner, and workers are taught to stand on the side of the truck, never in back of it.
Sanitation workers said yesterday that there were numerous other risks on the job, like slips on the ice while lugging trash cans or bags, or getting hit by car mirrors as vehicles speed by. Most of the men generally wear heavy canvas gloves and steel-tipped boots.
''You try to stay safe, if you can call hanging off the back of a truck all day safe,'' said Gary Garvey, 34, who was emptying sidewalk trash cans yesterday on Fordham Road in the Bronx.
''You try to let the cars squeeze by, and they zoom right by and almost take off your leg,'' said Mr. Garvey, a Queens resident with 11 years on the job. ''Especially in Manhattan, they're always in a rush. They tell us we got a lot of nerve stopping in the street, and here we are picking up their garbage. You'd be surprised at how many guys in our garage get hit by cars every year.''
A wake for Ms. Barrientos will be held tomorrow and Friday at 2 p.m. at Cobble Hill Chapels, 171 Court Street in Brooklyn. A Sanitation Department spokeswoman said yesterday that there was no information to report on the investigation into the accident.
All sanitation employees, she said, receive several days of safety training when they are hired, and take additional safety courses specific to tasks and equipment. Also, supervisors regularly issue safety reminders at roll call.
Roughly 60 of the city's 1,200 sanitation trucks are EZ Packs. With their massive mechanical arms, the trucks lift bins more than 10 feet in the air to empty them. The trucks are efficient, but dangerous if operated improperly, said Mr. Frazier.
''This thing can crush a car,'' Mr. Frazier said, nodding toward the Dumpster he had levitated off the street. ''Yet you still have people who walk right under it, talking on their phones or walking their dogs. These things can slip off, especially in this kind of icy and snowy weather.''
