FOR the last 10 years, Karen Klein has had the most powerful people in New York at her fingertips. She has been responsible for setting up the seating charts at the Four Seasons restaurant.
As a manager of one of the city's blue chip dining arenas, Ms. Klein has winked at ''knee problems'' that made tables in the Siberia of the balcony too challenging. She has had to remain unruffled when an industrialist or media mogul brought an unexpected celebrity guest, or when customers became enraged when they felt their tables didn't befit their sense of worth, or when they could get no table at all. And when she found couples doing more than merely necking in the phone booth she tactfully suggested that it was time to leave.
''Doing this job is like being a discreet madam,'' she said. ''Every customer has to know I have secrets I will take to the grave.''
Or at least upstate. She has retired and is living with her fiancé in Chester, N.Y. Her last day on the job after more than 10 years was Saturday. In June, Ms. Klein, 39, is marrying Steven Hirsch, a systems manager with Hachette Filipacchi Media. Her next career move is undecided.
Julian Niccolini, an owner of the restaurant, said it will be hard to replace her. ''We'll have to find someone who looks like her,'' Mr. Niccolini said, ''so maybe no one will know.''
Someone who is a 5-foot-10 brunette with a ready smile and a talent for diplomacy. Someone who ''would not put Sandy Weill next to James Dimon,'' Ms. Klein said of the chairmen of Citigroup and Bank One. ''I've been part of this place for nearly 10 years, but it will be very nice to have a normal life after working from 10:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m., and sometimes even later, six days a week,'' she said.
There were times, she said, when she left in tears. ''People have cursed at me, insisted that I ruined their lives,'' she said. ''For a table in a restaurant? Come on.''
Ms. Klein's restaurant career began 18 years ago, when she was in acting school. ''To me, the restaurant is like theater,'' she said, ''every night is an opening night.''
Her father, the editor and writer Edward Klein, introduced her to the restaurateur George Lang, who then arranged for her to meet with Adam Tihany, the architect, who was about to open his restaurant, Remi. She started as a waiter and soon became the restaurant's manager, and quit the theater.
When she felt it was time to move on after seven years, Mr. Niccolini volunteered to help. He wound up hiring her.
''He knew that I knew who a lot of the customers were, through my father and from growing up in New York,'' she said. She began managing the Pool Room and soon became one of two managers for the entire restaurant. She was also in charge of the staff.
''I also think having a female presence at the front desk has helped,'' she said. ''This is an expensive, often intimidating place, and having a big smile is half the battle.''
Despite the celebrity quotient, she said, she is usually not star-struck. But then there was that evening when the actor Aidan Quinn came for dinner in the Pool Room. ''Aidan Quinn had the bluest eyes I have ever seen,'' she said.
But he was not wearing a jacket. The restaurant does not have a strict dress code, but it does keep about 20 men's blazers on hand because it prefers jackets in the Pool Room.
''He looked right at me and asked if he needed to put on a jacket,'' she said. ''I could barely speak. And then I blurted out, 'You could sit stark naked for all I care,' and I seated him. No jacket.''
