''I WOULD like to see people drinking Krug at picnics,'' said Rémi Krug, the man who makes Krug Champagne. ''The wine is too revered, overworshiped. How often have I heard someone say: 'I've had a bottle of Krug for years. I'm saving it for something special'?''
We were sitting in an austere reception room at the Krug winery here one January day, Rémi, 62, and his less voluble brother, Henri, 65, and before us on the table, like some precious icon, a bottle of Krug's 1990 Vintage, which is just now being released.
As a chill winter rain rattled the windows, Rémi Krug described a cricket match he attended in England not long ago when the players refreshed themselves between wickets with Krug 1961. ''I loved it,'' he said, ''and I'd love to see more of it. People enjoying Krug, not just praising it.''
Yes, yes, of course. But Mr. Krug is a romantic. His least expensive Champagne, at something like $100 a bottle, is more costly than the top of the line at other houses. Krug at a picnic? Why not caviar at a Knicks game or pheasant for breakfast? Occasional reverence is a small price to pay for Krug's extraordinary reputation, one the Krugs themselves have nurtured carefully for five generations.
I had long wondered about the Krug reputation. Was it justified? The wines are magnificent, but there are other great Champagnes: Bollinger, Salon, Moët's Dom Perignon, Roederer's Cristal. Even so, critics with far more experience than I invariably place Krug ahead of all of them.
So I came out from Paris to learn the secret, and finally, in that studiously dull tasting room, listening to Rémi Krug talk about commitment and passion, I began to understand. For one thing, there before us and in our glasses was the 1990 Vintage, a Champagne made 13 years earlier, in the days of the elder George Bush, just now being released. There has to be something special about a business that makes a product, then waits 13 years before selling it. In fact, all Krug Champagnes are aged at least six years before they are released.
And then there is the 1988 Vintage, held back until well after the 1989 was released. ''We just didn't feel it was ready,'' Henri said, ''and the 1989 was.'' What's more, ''ready,'' in Krug parlance, means ready to sell.
A Krug Champagne can be drunk as soon as it is released, but Krug fanatics insist the wines should be held a decade or more before opening. Actually, part of Krug's vintage production is always held back for long aging in the cellars here in the Rue Coquebert. The wines are eventually sold to the most loyal of all Krug fans, known as Krugistes, who eagerly pay $350 or more a bottle for 30-year-old wines. Krug Champagnes seem to last forever. The family's own favorites include 1928 and 1959, both, they maintain, still lively and fresh. I can vouch for the 1959, a wonderful wine 10 years ago, but not yet for the 1928.
Despite all the talk of vintages, the star of the Krug cellars is the Grande Cuvée, a nonvintage blend, which may include wines from 20 crus and 10 vintages. It is a dry Champagne of great depth and power with immensely complex flavors. To one commentator the Grande Cuvée is as detailed and textured as a Gobelin tapestry. There is a nonvintage Rosé Brut and, for true Champagne connoisseurs, the legendary Clos du Mesnil, a vintage Champagne that first appeared in 1979. All Krug Champagne is fermented in oak barrels, a practice begun when the company was new. ''But we don't do it because our grandfather did,'' Rémi Krug said. ''We do it because wood brings out the Krug taste.''
Wine purists complain that Champagne, being invariably a blend of wines from all over the Champagne region, cannot possibly express the native soil from which it springs, as in Burgundy and, more and more, in California, too. There are exceptions in Champagne, and the Clos du Mesnil is one of them.
Its 4.5-acre walled vineyard in the center of the town of Mesnil-sur-Oger was once part of a Benedictine monastery. It is entirely planted in chardonnay, making it one of the most exclusive of all blanc-de-blancs Champagnes. Only a few thousand cases are made in years when a vintage is declared. Most of it is reserved for restaurants and special customers, and what is left usually sells for $250 to $300 a bottle.
Krug was founded in 1843 by Joseph Krug, who came from Mainz in what is now Germany and worked for other Champagne houses before setting up his own business. He was said to have exceptional skills as a blender and for many years made Champagne cuvées for other houses. Evidently, he passed his blending skills on to his descendants.
Neither Rémi nor Henri is an oenologist, but they alone are responsible for the Krug style. Remarkably, Krug has maintained its individuality even though it has been owned by others for almost 30 years. In the mid-1970's, the house was sold to Rémy-Martin, later Rémy-Cointreau, the Cognac producers. In 1999, Rémy-Cointreau sold its interest in Krug to LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, which also owns Veuve Clicquot, Ruinart, Mercier, Pommery and Canard-Duchêne.
The outside owners, whatever their influence on Krug's business practices, appear to have had no impact at all on the Krug style. The Krugs themselves rarely refer to their corporate masters, preferring to concentrate on their shareholders. The only visible sign of outside corporate policy may be Henri's mandatory retirement this year. He will continue to be a consultant while his son Olivier, who has joined the company, hones his own blending and tasting skills.
Henri's career marks a change from the days when his grandfather Joseph Krug II was running the company. He took over in 1910, but in 1915, as an artillery captain in World War I, he was severely wounded in the Ardennes and taken prisoner. After the war, his health was so poor that a nephew took over the business. He recovered, however, and remained head of the firm until 1959, when he was 90. Even then, he remained as a technical adviser until 1965, when he was 96. Paul Krug, the father of Henri and Rémi, continued to join final-blend tastings until his death at 85 in 1997.
Nor was Joseph II the only strong-willed Krug to head the firm. When he was taken prisoner, his wife took over. She made several vintages of Krug in her own style, which apparently leaned toward more red grapes than her husband liked. In fact, according to Patrick Forbes's ''Champagne: The Wine, the Land and the People'' (Gollancz, 1977), she used mostly red grapes because it was difficult to get white grapes from outlying vineyards in the middle of the war. She ran a dispensary for wounded soldiers in the Krug cellars and was gassed twice. In World War II, she hid downed British airmen here until the Gestapo caught on and jailed her.
Krug is a small Champagne house, producing less than 50,000 cases of wine a year. The Krugs would like to grow, ''particularly in America, which was the biggest Krug market before Prohibition -- but not at the expense of quality,'' Rémi Krug said.
''We could double our American sales,'' he added, ''but not at the expense of quality.''
''Often people say to us, 'I remember the first time I had Krug.' I never want to hear anyone say, 'Krug was not what I expected.' Our clients expect so much of us. We feel we have a commitment. This is very personal with us.''
WINE TALK
