He has outlasted three owners, five head coaches and innumerable players, all in a league with a culture that promotes the peripatetic pursuit of a career. But that longevity was not going to provide a cocoon of comfort that would make media day any less excruciating for Dante Scarnecchia.
Since 1982, Scarnecchia has spent all but two seasons as a New England Patriots assistant coach, an anomaly among coaches who spend most of their careers with one bag packed and a change-of-address form in hand.
Still, Scarnecchia, who has coached everything from special teams to linebackers and now the offensive line, stood amid the maelstrom of media day Tuesday as a nearly anonymous figure in a leather jacket, diminutive enough that he could be swallowed up in a crowd, reticent enough to discourage questions. He folded and unfolded his arms across his compact body, looking around as if searching for an escape route.
Scarnecchia, 55, has declined most interview requests for years, and on Tuesday, he could hardly bear to talk about a career with the Patriots that has seen him endure a game decided by a snowplow, a 2-14 season in 1992 and, with this trip to Houston, four Super Bowls.
''I've been really fortunate,'' Scarnecchia said. ''A lot of things have happened that are the result of circumstances, why you're kept when you don't think you should be kept by guys that come in you don't even know.''
Scarnecchia speaks in the same clipped monotone that Coach Bill Belichick uses to effectively short-circuit most conversations. But for all of his discomfort in the spotlight, he has clearly found a comfort zone in New England. He is the anti-nomad, a coach who has ignored all but one opportunity to move on -- perhaps to the detriment of his long-term career progression -- but who notes that his children, Lisa and Steve, were not uprooted from their schools.
Coaches who want to advance frequently hopscotch from job to job. But upheaval is also forced upon assistants with each change at the top. Scarnecchia has been an assistant under six head coaches, arriving in 1982 with Ron Meyer and continuing with Raymond Berry until 1988, when he left to join Meyer in Indianapolis for two seasons. He missed perhaps the worst year of the Patriots' recent history, the 1-15 season in 1990 with Rod Rust as head coach. But Scarnecchia returned in 1991 to Dick MacPherson's staff and has stayed since.
He was most surprised when Bill Parcells, whom Scarnecchia did not know, retained him in 1993, making him the only assistant kept from the previous staff. He was made a special assistant but later became a defensive assistant for linebackers, the first time he had coached defense in the N.F.L. Pete Carroll made him a special-teams coach in 1997 and switched him in 1999 to the offensive line, Scarnecchia's specialty (he played guard and center at California Western University).
When Belichick arrived in 2000, he and Scarnecchia spoke about the structure of the offense. When they found common ground, Scarnecchia stayed on and Belichick made him an assistant head coach. Belichick calls Scarnecchia one of the best coaches he has ever worked with.
This season may mark one of Scarnecchia's best coaching efforts. He has forged a steady offensive line that mocks the conventional wisdom that a line needs several years together to jell. The Patriots have had four different starters at left guard. That includes Russ Hochstein, who began the season on the practice squad and will make just the third start of his career in the Super Bowl. It also includes a rookie center. Just one starter, left tackle Matt Light, has played every game at the same position all season.
''He knows this game,'' guard Joe Andruzzi said of Scarnecchia. ''He knows his players. He gets everybody ready, no matter who it is.''
Belichick credits Scarnecchia's longevity to his flexibility and ability to work with different styles of coaches and offenses. ''Part of it probably comes from people giving up some of their career aspirations for the sake of continuity,'' Belichick said. ''Sometimes you need to move to have a career promotion or advancement. Some people would rather not make that move.''
Scarnecchia has wanted to be a football coach since he was a child. But it is clear that some opportunities have passed him by because he chose to remain with the Patriots.
He admits, though, that he could not have imagined the success the Patriots have had since he arrived. Two Super Bowl titles in three years would indeed be a rarity in the N.F.L.
''I really believe that when you have the opportunity to go other places, the grass isn't greener,'' Scarnecchia said. ''You try to make the most of what you have.''
PRO FOOTBALL
