The red carpet has yet to be unrolled for the Academy Awards next month, but studio executives are already thinking about next year. Taking cues from the Oscar nominations announced on Tuesday, the studios say they expect big changes in how they will market movies in the years to come.
Most notably, the studios will be looking to tie their Oscar campaigns to the release of a DVD, following ''Seabiscuit's'' lead. Despite a June release and little Oscar buzz as recently as last month, ''Seabiscuit'' -- the tale of the Depression-era racehorse -- was nominated for seven awards, including best picture, after an intensive advertising campaign coupled with large DVD sales and rentals.
Studios are also rethinking their practice of sending out promotional videos, called screeners, to voting members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science. Last fall the industry was thrust into turmoil after its main lobbying organization, the Motion Picture Association of America, tried to bar studios from distributing screeners in an effort to thwart piracy. The effort failed after art-house studios balked.
Still, many people in Hollywood are unsure if they will be able to send out screeners next year, particularly after those given to an Academy member were recently found pirated online.
To complicate matters, a glut of films released in December made it harder for Academy voters to see all the films in an already shortened awards season. (The Academy Awards broadcast was moved up to enhance ratings.) Studio executives who did not anticipate the impact of the shorter season on profits are being forced to come up with new strategies to adapt. As a result, many in Hollywood predict that releasing Oscar-worthy films throughout the year will become more common and that more Oscar campaigns will be tied to DVD releases.
''It's very dangerous to release movies in December, especially now with the shortened season,'' said Russell Schwartz, president of domestic marketing at New Line Cinema, which distributed the third installment of ''The Lord of the Rings,'' which received 11 nominations. ''No longer will screeners be used as a marketing crutch, and movies will be spread throughout the year.''
''Seabiscuit,'' a Universal Pictures release, was largely unaffected by the effort to ban screeners in the fall. By then the movie was already on track for a wide release on DVD in December, when much of the awards season voting began. Already it has sold 6.5 million copies -- five million in its first six days -- surpassing the $120 million that the movie took in its domestic theatrical release and making it one of the best-selling dramas in DVD history.
''This is a brave new world,'' said James Schamus, co-president of Focus Features, which released ''Lost in Translation'' in September. It was nominated in four categories, including best picture, and is scheduled to be released on DVD next month. ''We aren't just talking about putting a little extra in the tin for a cup of coffee,'' he said, referring to DVD sales.
Oscar fare has traditionally been released in theaters at the end of the year in the hope that a nomination would increase moviegoers' interest. From 1991 to 2001, the average increase in box office revenue for a best picture winner from the day it was nominated until it received the Oscar was 14 percent, or $19.2 million, according to Nielsen EDI, which tracks domestic ticket sales. The average increase in box office revenue after a film won best picture was 11 percent, or $15.1 million.
Twentieth Century Fox said Tuesday that it would expand the number of theaters that ''Master and Commander'' is playing in to more than 1,000, from 201. The movie was nominated for 10 awards, including best picture and best director. ''We think it is the right time to bring it out, given there will be so much focus on Oscar-nominated movies that some people haven't had a chance to see,'' said Jeffrey Godsick, executive vice president for marketing at Fox.
Ted Hope, the producer of the Oscar-nominated ''American Splendor,'' agreed. ''It's clear a lot of movies got overlooked and weren't seen because of the shortened awards season,'' he said, mentioning the well-reviewed art-house movie ''Shattered Glass.''
''Specialty films are designed to be released at the end of the year,'' he said. ''Release patterns are going to have to change.''
They already are changing. Mr. Schamus, whose Focus Features is a sister company of Universal, said he was releasing a new film, ''Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind,'' in March with an eye toward releasing the DVD just in time for Oscar season. ''A lot of people were fairly skeptical for the last two months,'' he said of ''Seabiscuit's'' prospects. ''Look who's laughing now.''
But tying a campaign to a DVD release could also have a far-reaching effect on Oscar campaign spending. ''Seabiscuit'' has been one of the most heavily advertised movies in trade publications so far this season, a fact not lost on any Academy member who reads Variety or The Hollywood Reporter. The Academy imposed new rules this year to curb rampant advertising and lavish promotional parties, but so far has had little success, said the Academy's executive director, Bruce Davis. ''It has had no effect on the amount of trade advertising being bought,'' Mr. Davis said. ''We are monitoring this.''
In its guidelines the Academy says it does not object to ads directed at Academy voters, ''so long as they are deployed with taste and some semblance of restraint.'' But studio analysts who count ads in trade magazines say Universal Pictures has spent more than $2.5 million to promote ''Seabiscuit,'' including nearly 30 full-page ads and more than 30 glossy covers in trade magazines. Industry executives say Universal spent significantly more than other studios paid to advertise films like ''Master and Commander'' and ''Lost in Translation.''
Universal executives have declined to comment on what they are spending to promote ''Seabiscuit.'' But two weeks ago in an interview about the movie's advertising, Marc Shmuger, a vice chairman of Universal Pictures, said the campaign was meant to remind Oscar voters of what audiences liked about the film when it was released eight months ago to mostly warm reviews.
