German leaders expressed concern on Tuesday that the takeover battle of two French drug giants could trample jobs here, where the target company, Aventis, has major operations.
The prime minister of the state of Hesse, Roland Koch, called on the German government to use its influence with French officials to block the unsolicited $60 billion bid for Aventis by Sanofi-Synthélabo, which he said could deprive Germany of jobs and research.
''The federal government has to bring its influence to bear against it,'' Mr. Koch said. ''It's not just a question of exchanging shares, it's also about chances for jobs and research in the future.''
Germany's economics and labor minister, Wolfgang Clement, said that Berlin would defend the company's jobs in Germany. A spokesman said the ministry was in contact with the French government about the situation.
''We can't influence events in the stock market, but Germany has a definite interest in preserving Germany as Aventis's business location,'' Mr. Clement said to reporters in Berlin.
Mr. Clement's comments reflect a frustrating reality for Germany: it is on the sidelines of this corporate tug of war, even though Aventis itself was created in 1998 from the merger of one of Germany's largest pharmaceutical companies, Hoechst, with a smaller French rival, Rhône-Poulenc.
Today, the French government is pushing the merger of Sanofi and Aventis to create a ''national champion,'' which would catapult France into the top tier of global pharmaceutical players.
''This is basically a deal between two French companies,'' said Boris Boehm, an asset manager at Nordinvest in Hamburg. ''The German government does not have much of a chance to intervene.''
Job losses are a sensitive issue in Germany, where the unemployment rate hovers above 10 percent. When Procter &amp; Gamble expressed interest in buying a Hamburg consumer-products company, Beiersdorf, local authorities used the specter of layoffs to rally a rival bid to fend it off.
Given the lack of details presented by Sanofi in its offer, it is not clear how many German jobs would be at risk if Aventis were acquired. Of the company's 70,000 employees worldwide, 9,000 are in Germany -- 7,800 of them at Hoechst's sprawling plant in Hesse, on the outskirts of Frankfurt.
Representatives of Aventis's German employees came out strongly against the bid. They said Sanofi could achieve its stated goal of 1.6 billion euros ($2 billion) in synergies only through deep job cuts. And they noted that the French government had already ruled out such reductions in France.
''We are against an unfriendly takeover,'' said Monika Reiter, vice chairwoman of the workers' council in Frankfurt, ''and even more so by a smaller company, a company which is in trouble.''
Ms. Reiter was referring to the patent on one of Sanofi's top-selling drugs, Plavix, which is being challenged in a United States court. Some analysts have speculated that the potential loss of that patent drove Sanofi's chief executive, Jean-François Dehecq, to seek a major acquisition.
But people close to Aventis's German operations expressed skepticism that a new owner would concentrate cutbacks here. Aventis produces a successful insulin drug, Lantus, in an ultramodern Hoechst plant near Frankfurt, which has become something of a showpiece for Aventis.
