When Howard Dean entered the crowded college gymnasium after his defeat in Tuesday night's New Hampshire primary, a full three minutes passed before he uttered his first word.
He thrust his arms out and pointed his fingers at more than 1,000 supporters who were chanting his name, many in gold or red wool caps bearing his campaign logo. He held the microphone toward the bleachers, where hundreds stomped their feet.
This time, it was the crowd that screamed, not the candidate.
''We really are going to win this nomination, aren't we?'' Dr. Dean said finally. Screams erupted anew.
He was insistent that his outsider message would yet prevail, promising a renewed fight in states like Michigan, Arizona and New Mexico in February. Though he had lost, he seemed unbowed and committed to continuing his insurgent race.
''The people of New Hampshire have allowed our campaign to regain its momentum,'' he told his supporters in a 20-minute speech that did not include a mention of the winner, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
''Those of you who believe that America needs real change, and someone in the White House who's delivered change, were all together in this. Stand with us until the very end, which is January 20th, 2005.''
Dr. Dean declared his double-digit deficit ''a solid second,'' and his aides spent the afternoon searching for the best term for the finish, playing with medical metaphors like revival, remission and resuscitation.
But if they saw the results as a comeback, the campaign still sits at 0-2, with Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, having collected the first two losses of his political career in just nine days. Only a few weeks ago, the Dean camp was confident that victories here and in Iowa would send them sprinting toward nomination. Now, with two states in Mr. Kerry's column, they will have to race to catch his heels.
The loss here is particularly painful. Not only did Dr. Dean spend 82 days campaigning in New Hampshire over the past two years but, as he reminded people throughout the last week, this state's voters had a front-row seat for his near 12-year tenure as the governor-next door.
In an interview Monday evening, Dr. Dean said, ''I think I know New Hampshire voters better than most any other voters in any primary other than the Vermont primary.''
Dr. Dean has long promised to stay in the race until its bitter end, painting his campaign as a grass-roots movement to change America. He is already looking beyond next week's seven-state showdown, planning campaign appearances in the coming days in Michigan, Washington and Wisconsin, which vote later. Five minutes before the polls closed here, he joined a conference call with supporters in two dozen states.
''We did what we needed to do tonight,'' he said at his primary-night party here at the University of Southern New Hampshire, where he read some of his speech from notes and kept his suit coat on, in contrast to the explosion of emotion that followed his third-place showing in Iowa last week.
''We are going to win the nomination, we are,'' he said. ''The reason we're going to win the nomination is because of you.''
That confidence was hardly universal in the crowds around the television screens in the gymnasium, left to cheer when the few precincts where Dr. Dean bested Mr. Kerry were flashed across CNN.
Throughout the fall, Dr. Dean dominated the polls and the press coverage here in New Hampshire, opening a lead as wide as 30 points over Mr. Kerry, whose home in neighboring Massachusetts had originally made him the favorite.
Even as Dr. Dean traveled coast-to-coast cultivating his 50-state campaign, his New Hampshire director, Karen Hicks, built an enormous network of volunteers.
For months, Dr. Dean and his advisers have argued that they were the only ones running a national campaign. But they spent more time and probably more money in New Hampshire and Iowa than anyone else. Now, with the money and campaign organization to play in all seven of the states that vote next week, they have no clear path to a sure victory in any one.
So on Wednesday, Dr. Dean plans to spend the day at home in Vermont to regroup.
Rather than commit to one place, Dr. Dean is scheduled to pipe into television stations in all seven states. Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Joe Trippi, said the candidate also wanted to attend his 17-year-old son's hockey game Wednesday night.
''We tried for a quick knockout and it didn't work,'' Dr. Dean said in the Monday interview. ''So now we've just got a long drawn-out process.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
