At the urging of state and city officials, the Jets have redrawn their plans for a $1.5 billion football stadium on the West Side of Manhattan so that it will not compete for events with Madison Square Garden.
The Jets had designed a 75,000-seat stadium with a retractable roof that could be converted into a combination exhibition hall and arena, for which the team hoped to book conventions, ice shows, circuses and other sporting events. The stadium itself would face the Hudson River and sit on a platform over the West Side rail yards, between 11th and 12th Avenues, from 30th Street to 34th Street.
The Garden's complaints emerged as the developer Bruce C. Ratner signed a contract to buy the Nets for $300 million and move them to a proposed $485 million arena in downtown Brooklyn.
But the Dolan family, which controls Cablevision, the publicly traded company that owns Madison Square Garden, the Knicks and the Rangers, expressed its misgivings about the Jets project in a meeting with Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg this month and with the Pataki administration, according to state and city officials. They feared that the Jets would be chasing the same kind of events as the Garden, effectively cannibalizing the market.
The Jets, in turn, have reconfigured the stadium, eliminating plans for an arena and re-emphasizing its connections to the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center by providing even more space for conventions. Jets executives say that under the new arrangement the stadium could provide 200,000 square feet of exhibit and meeting space, up from 110,000 square feet under the previous version.
''There's been a lot of cooperation between the state, the city and the Jets about the stadium,'' said Charles A. Gargano, chairman of the Empire State Development Corporation and the Convention Center Development Corporation. ''This will alleviate the Garden's fears -- and keep the stadium available for as many dates as possible for Javits Convention Center use.''
L. Jay Cross, president of the Jets, said that the team had been moving away from the arena concept as it learned more about the convention business. Eliminating the arena, he said, saves money and allows them to enlarge the exhibition space, allowing them to book more shows.
''If our neighbors are happier too, it's a bonus,'' Mr. Cross said. ''We've come to believe more fully in the building as a convention center. The sweet spot for convention business is about 200,000 square feet, the median size of a trade show.''
Cablevision, which has not taken a public position on the proposed stadium, declined to comment on the latest development. But the company is continuing to review the project. Still, according to government officials and real estate executives, the Garden is talking to Brookfield Financial Properties about building a new garden on Ninth Avenue and 31st Street and with Related Companies about a nearby site, at the back of the James A. Farley Post Office.
The reconfiguration is only the latest attempt by the Jets and state and city officials to appease potential opponents of the stadium, which would require at least $600 million in public funds.
The hotel industry, for one, has long wanted to expand the Javits Convention Center, which runs between 34th and 38th Streets to 42nd Street in order to attract larger, more lucrative conventions and fill hotel rooms and restaurants. They feared that doubling the size of the Javits to roughly 1.34 million square feet would lose out to the city's push for the stadium, which also figures in New York's bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics. Some industry executives also doubted that the stadium would be used much as a convention hall.
Hoteliers became alarmed weeks ago when city and state officials proposed a smaller, or two-phased, convention expansion that would go only up to 40th Street. To try to mollify the hotel industry, the Jets and city officials had talked about building a convention hotel and ballroom at 34th Street. That has been scrapped.
State and city officials now say that the current proposal for Javits expansion, nicknamed Javits Lite, would provide a total of 1.1 million square feet, with another 200,000 square feet at the stadium.
There are still some concerns about using the stadium as a convention hall. State and city officials are proposing to raise the city hotel tax by $2 per night per bed to pay for the expansion. The hotel industry favors a mechanism that would include a tax on restaurants and taxis.
''It may not be the perfect solution today, but it's definitely a partial solution'' said Jonathan Tisch, chairman of NYC &amp; Company, the city's convention and visitors bureau, and chief executive of Loews Hotels. ''It gets us closer to where we need to be as a competitive convention city.''
