Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein called yesterday for sweeping changes in the way teachers are paid in New York City, advocating bonuses based on student achievement and higher salaries for teachers who agree to work in troubled schools and for those in fields where there are staff shortages, like math and science.
Mr. Klein gently praised the teachers' union for offering to try a streamlined contract, in a limited number of schools, that would do away with most work rules. He also applauded a proposal by the union president, Randi Weingarten, to speed the disciplining and dismissal of incompetent teachers.
Addressing a breakfast forum sponsored by Crain's New York Business, Mr. Klein was unrelenting in his demands for a complete overhaul of the way teachers are compensated. ''We have to change the culture of our schools,'' Mr. Klein said. ''We don't have a culture of excellence.''
Contract talks with the union, the United Federation of Teachers, are to resume next week.
In his speech, Mr. Klein endorsed a recent report by the Teaching Commission, a group led by Louis V. Gerstner, the former chairman of I.B.M., that urged incentive pay and other bonuses for public school teachers, as well as greater authority for principals in personnel decisions, including hiring and dismissing teachers.
''I think this is a seminal document,'' Mr. Klein said, adding that he had arranged for copies of the report to be distributed to the audience of 350 business leaders. Even though he praised the report, Mr. Klein declined to embrace one of its major recommendations: that base pay for teachers be increased across the board.
The report's No. 1 recommendation says: ''We call on school districts and unions to address the critical problem of low base compensation while also ensuring that a significant portion of future increases in teachers' total compensation is tied to improvements in student performance.''
It continues: ''Districts and unions should also establish career advancement tracks that provide greater compensation for teachers who take on leadership roles and additional responsibilities. Finally, districts and unions should ensure that teachers who agree to teach in hard-to-staff schools or in shortage subject areas are offered higher pay.'' In a question-and-answer session after his speech, Mr. Klein said he did not view systemwide raises as something the report called for immediately. ''It seems to me over time, in looking as I think the report does look, to draw a new generation of teachers, we need to think about commensurate salaries across the board, but we can't let specific problems prevent us from doing the best we can, given the resources.''
Mr. Klein's praise of the teachers' union was modest. ''There are also encouraging signs that the teachers' union is beginning to recognize the need to develop a new paradigm in the way in which our teachers are recruited, supported and compensated,'' he said. And he quoted Ms. Weingarten's own words on a streamlined contract. ''I agree, that's the right model,'' he said. ''Trust, fairness and collaboration substituting for lockstep rules.''
But his criticism of the general state of the school system was relentless. ''We have become not surprisingly an excuse-based culture,'' he said. ''I cannot tell you when I walk around how often I hear it's the kids, it's the parents, it's the school system, it's the principal, it's the supervisor, it's anyone but me. Try to produce effective outcomes in that kind of culture.''
He added: ''At the heart of the problem are the three poles of civil service: lockstep pay, seniority and life tenure. Together they act as handcuffs and prevent us from making the changes that will encourage and support excellence.''
The criticism and his references to defenders of the status quo, a phrase he has often directed at the union, did not win him any praise from Ms. Weingarten. ''I am really disappointed about the speech,'' she said. ''It's time to stop the rhetoric and roll up your sleeves and work with us to help the kids.''
