The Rangers finally had a quiet day on Tuesday. Coach Glen Sather called an optional practice, and many players took the option of not practicing, even though their chase for a playoff berth continues.
One of the handful of players who did practice stood at the goal at the far end of the ice, facing a barrage of shots. It was an important practice for goaltender Mike Dunham. He missed the last two games with a concussion, and he said he was not fully recovered.
The Rangers (19-20-7-4) will not have Dunham when they play host to the Washington Capitals on Wednesday. But he is hoping to return to his defensively challenged team by the end of the week.
''Whenever my head feels 100 percent, that's the day,'' Dunham said.
Wednesday's game has marquee appeal because Jaromir Jagr will be facing the team that traded him last Friday. But it is also the Rangers' second game of four in the span of a week against opponents who would not now qualify for the playoffs. The Rangers need to work fast.
Dunham, 31, has an 11-17-6 record with a 2.75 goals against average. He was 0-3-2 in his last five starts, which included a 4-2 loss to Philadelphia last Thursday. Flyers left wing John LeClair rammed Dunham in the face with his shoulder in the second period of that game.
Dunham had not been playing well before he was injured, and the news of his concussion was overshadowed by the Rangers' attempts to trade for Jagr. But the Rangers lost their first game without Dunham, though with Jagr, to Ottawa on Saturday, 9-1.
Goaltender Jussi Markkanen made 38 saves in a 5-2 Rangers victory over Florida on Monday. Although Dunham participated in the morning skate earlier that day, Tuesday was the first day he did, in his words, ''a lot of stuff.''
He has had the classic concussion symptoms: a headache, some dizziness, a foggy feeling. Goaltenders might be considered more impervious to concussions than other players because they do not seek contact, but Dunham said anyone was susceptible.
''You'd expect that crease area to be your safety zone, but it isn't,'' he said.
The Rangers have had problems protecting the crease area. Even after Markkanen's performance, only four N.H.L. teams had worse goals against averages through Monday than the 2.80 posted by the Rangers.
Dunham ranks 42nd among the league's 50 goaltenders who have played at least 720 minutes. He is eager to help a team that has been revitalized with the addition of Jagr to overcome a dismal month. But there are limits.
''You just don't want to go out and jar yourself,'' he said.
Dunham said he wanted to see how he recovered from the workout, which lasted about an hour, to re-evaluate his recovery. By his recollection, it is his third minor concussion as a professional. He does not want to rush anything.
''You want to, but you just can't,'' he said. ''If you'd go out, and you wouldn't be 100 percent, you'd be hurting more than helping. Your head is something you can never mess around with. They can't do anything for you to rehabilitate it.''
Rangers forward Jamie Lundmark also participated in Tuesday's workout as a way of gauging how his right knee felt. Lundmark, who had missed 23 games with sprained knee ligaments, played in the victory over Florida.
''The knee feels pretty great,'' Lundmark said. ''I don't think it can feel any better than it feels right now.'' Lundmark played 12 minutes 29 seconds Monday, which included 44 seconds on the power play. Lundmark finished at plus-1.
He said it helped that the game was not played at an extraordinarily fast pace. Jagr was the focal point Monday, but Lundmark's return was important, too.
''Right off the bat, we knew that these things heal up to 100 percent,'' Lundmark said. ''It wasn't a big concern of mine.''
HOCKEY
