TO us, good football food is like a strong defense. It sneaks up on you subtly, not revealing everything it has, and then bashes you over the head. Pizzas and chicken wings don't do that. Chili can, at its best, but chili is Texan, and the Dallas Cowboys lost to the Carolina Panthers in the first round of this year's National Football League playoffs.
For this weekend's Super Bowl, which is being played on Sunday, in Houston, we asked a couple of chefs, one from the Carolinas and one from New England, to give us their favorite one-pot game-day recipes.
We got a couple of blockbusters in return. And if Sunday's game isn't half as good as this food, it will not matter much: contented diners will probably be happily asleep on the couch. This is guy food of a particular sort. It is more complicated than burgers and guacamole, but brazen enough for fellows who wear Prada to the pregame.
First, your New England Patriots. Until he sold his share in the place last year, Steve Johnson was the chef at the Blue Room in Cambridge, Mass., a restaurant we consider among the top five in the world for Sunday lunch before watching a football game. Big flavors are Mr. Johnson's hallmark, executed with real finesse. Also, he understands priorities.
''You want food that's easy to make,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''As a cook, you don't want to be too distracted from your TV time.''
Mr. Johnson's recipe for pork and beans is that in spades -- it is also the death of that innocent-sounding dish, the one we first ate from a can. Even more to the point for lazy weekend cooks, it takes almost no work after an initial browning of bacon, cubed pork shoulder and onions. Baked at moderate heat with the cover off for the last hour, the top becomes dark brown, almost black, with the meat and some of the beans caramelizing and becoming incredibly flavorful. If it is made a day or two in advance and warmed on the stove, this flavor increases in forcefulness yet again.
Ease of preparation is also a marker of chicken bog, a rich and peppery stew that hails from the coastal plains of the Carolinas. The name derives from the way in which the pieces of chicken sit in the pot, like hummocks in a bog.
It has since spread across the two states, according to Kathleen Purvis, the food editor of The Charlotte Observer in Charlotte, N.C. ''Bog is one of those classic Carolina meals,'' she said. ''It's clumpy, it's delicious, and you see it everywhere -- at football games and Nascar race weeks alike.''
Jon Gray of Manhattan, a computer programmer who was reared in the Carolinas, said he made and ate bog throughout his childhood, while watching Clemson football games. Now a Panthers fan, he is excited to cook for the team's first attempt at a national championship. ''We've never had a Super Bowl to make bog for,'' he said. ''But I imagine it'll be as good.''
Recipes for bog are as various as the 146 counties of North and South Carolina. For ours, we turned to Robert Stehling, who runs the Hominy Grill in Charleston, S.C. Mr. Stehling's bog features just about every part of the bird you can name, save feet and cockscombs (and the latter would be not only an appropriate addition but a good one). For good measure, he throws in a ''little'' mixed sausage -- at least a pound or two of breakfast links, kielbasa and Italian sausage. (You might also add a ham hock, for good measure.)
''It's not one of those precise things,'' Mr. Stehling said. ''You just get it done, leave it on the stove and enjoy the game.''
As outlined in the recipe here, the dish serves about eight hungry people, but the proportions can be adapted by anyone who can do a little fourth-grade math.
Neither of these dishes requires a ton of attention, and with the exception of presoaking the beans in Mr. Johnson's recipe if you think of it (and if you don't, don't worry, just add some more stock and cook it a little longer), neither requires any advance preparation save a trip to the supermarket. None of the ingredients are fancy.
And both can be -- indeed, should be -- cooked sequentially. By this we mean, do not do any preparation work before starting to cook. Instead, start by browning whatever needs to be browned. While that is happening, prepare the ingredients for the rest of the recipe. Whether it's chopping onions or peppers or butchering pork, these are steps that can be taken care of once you have already begun cooking.
The result? Everything goes faster until the thing is on or in the stove, at which point you can crack a beer, relax and get in front of the television for the pregame show.
CAROLINA CHICKEN BOG  Adapted from Robert Stehling  Time: About 2 hours
3 tablespoons bacon fat, or neutral oil like corn or canola
3/4 pound minced chicken gizzards and hearts  Salt and pepper  2 medium green bell peppers, diced  2 medium red bell peppers, diced  4 medium-to-large white onions, diced  4 celery ribs, trimmed and diced  2 tablespoons minced garlic  1 cup dry red wine  1 35-ounce can tomatoes, with liquid, chopped  6 tablespoons butter  4 tablespoons flour  1 pound mixed sausages and cured meat, like kielbasa, Italian sausage, breakfast links, chorizo, diced ham or bacon  2 cups chicken stock  1 branch thyme
1/4 teaspoon red pepper flakes, or to taste  2 bay leaves  1 pound chopped chicken meat, preferably from thigh  8 chicken livers, trimmed and cut in half  1 tablespoon apple cider vinegar
1/2 cup Dijon mustard  Cooked white rice for serving.
1. Put fat or oil in a deep skillet or large casserole over medium-high heat. A minute later, add gizzards and hearts and cook until quite brown and sticking to pan, at least 3 minutes. Stir once, sprinkle with salt and pepper, then brown other side. Add peppers, onions, celery and garlic and cook, stirring occasionally, until vegetables are soft, about 10 minutes. Add red wine and tomatoes, bring to a boil, and adjust heat so mixture simmers; cook for about 10 minutes.  2. Meanwhile, melt 4 tablespoons butter in a small skillet or saucepan over medium heat. Add flour and stir until smooth. Cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture turns quite brown, about 10 minutes. Add this roux to simmering stew; cook 5 minutes.  3. Add meats, stock, thyme, red pepper flakes and bay leaves; cook at a lively simmer, stirring occasionally, for about 40 minutes. Add chicken meat and cook another 15 minutes or more (this can sit on stove, simmering, for hours; add a little water or stock if it threatens to dry out).  4. Heat remaining butter in an 8- or 10-inch nonstick skillet over medium-high heat. When butter foam subsides, add livers, 1 or 2 at a time, and cook until quite brown on one side; sprinkle with salt and pepper as they cook. Turn and brown on other side.  5. Stir vinegar and mustard into stew. Add livers and stir. Serve over white rice.
Yield: At least 8 servings.
BOSTON BEANS AND PORK  Adapted from Steve Johnson  Time: About 2 hours
2 cups cranberry, pinto, red, kidney or pink beans, rinsed and picked over  2 tablespoons neutral oil, like corn or canola
1/2 pound slab bacon, cut into  1/2-inch cubes  3 pounds boneless pork butt or shoulder  Salt and pepper  2 large yellow onions, peeled and chopped  4 cloves garlic, peeled and chopped  1 tablespoon tomato paste  2 tablespoons Dijon mustard  2 tablespoons maple syrup  2 tablespoons molasses  2 bay leaves  1 1/2 cups chicken broth (canned is fine).
1. Soak beans in water to cover for several hours, or combine them in a saucepan with cold water to cover and simmer for about 10 minutes.  2. Heat oven to 350 degrees. Put oil in a large casserole or Dutch oven, and turn heat to medium-high. Add bacon and cook, stirring occasionally, while you trim pork of excess fat and cut it into 2-inch cubes. When bacon is nicely browned, add pork, a bit at a time, and cook until nicely browned, sprinkling with salt and pepper as it cooks.  3. Add onions and garlic and cook until they soften a bit, then add remaining ingredients, including 2 teaspoons ground black pepper and drained beans. Stir and barely cover with water.  4. Bring to a bare simmer on stove top, then cover and put in oven. Cook for 2 hours, one with lid on, one with lid off. Check occasionally, adding a splash of water if necessary.  5. When beans are done, check for seasoning, adding salt if necessary. Serve immediately, or keep warm in a low oven or over a low flame, or refrigerate and reheat when ready to serve.
Yield: At least 6 servings.
