The hip-hop hero Slick Rick greeted his fans at the Knitting Factory with an unusual boast on Friday night: ''Fresh outta I.N.S., y'all,'' he said. Then he flashed his gold teeth and added, ''Y'all like the outfit?''
Until recently, it seemed that Slick Rick might never again perform in his adopted hometown. This rapper, who emigrated from Britain in 1976 (he was never naturalized), was convicted of attempted murder in the second degree in 1991 and served five years in prison. After his release he made a strong comeback album, ''The Art of Storytelling.''
Then, in the summer of 2002, he was detained by immigration officials after performing on a cruise ship, and he spent 17 months in detention, fighting deportation, until his residency was restored and he was released in November. ''Since I came outta jail it's like the planet gone bananas,'' he rapped, celebrating his freedom for the second time in his star-crossed life.
If any rapper has reason to be resentful about a senseless incarceration it's this one. Yet Slick Rick's half-hour set was full of cheerful jokes and optimism. He's known for his sing-song delivery and for his gentle British accent, which once seemed like a dandyish affectation but now serves as a reminder of how close he came to permanent exile.
Slick Rick's voice sounded pretty hoarse, so he let the audience shout some of his most famous lines. When he ran out of breath, he let his wardrobe do the talking. He first emerged in a pale yellow tie and a matching sweater vest, and his wife soon appeared bearing a platter of medallions fit for a strong-necked king.
Near the end of the show he made an unexpected presidential endorsement. ''It seems like Howard Dean is our last chance,'' he said. But unlike his favorite candidate, Slick Rick didn't roar or rail. He spoke briefly about the ''crazy and corrupt'' government, but his rhymes stayed playful, and his attitude stayed stubbornly upbeat. During his last song, ''Hey Young World,'' he rapped, ''Get ahead and accomplish things/You'll see the wonder and the joy life brings,'' and it almost seemed as if he still believed it.
HIP-HOP REVIEW
