FROM the arcane field notes of the sports reporter Lesley Visser, now in her 30th year of following the National Football League:
$(6$)''You want to be cold in January,'' says Ms. Visser, who files N.F.L. pieces for CBS. ''That means you're covering the playoffs. The best way to keep your feet warm is to wear a pair of socks, then a sandwich baggie, and then another pair of socks.'' In the study of her Manhattan apartment, she strides over to a suitcase that she keeps in perpetual readiness, unzips a pocket and pulls out plastic bags. ''See?''
$(6$)''The best pens are from the Ritz-Carlton hotels,'' adds Ms. Visser, who travels almost continually for 25 weeks during football season, which concludes this Sunday at the Super Bowl in Houston. ''I steal them off the housekeeping carts.''
$(6$)The toughest hurdle in ''The Star-Spangled Banner'' turns out to be the word ''glare,'' says Ms. Visser, who often interviews the singer who performs the national anthem at the Super Bowl. The performer Vanessa Williams explained to her that the ''g'' in ''glare'' closes the throat. So Ms. Williams revealed a trade secret: to hit and hold the note, she belts out ''And the rockets' red 'laaaaaaare.''
Ms. Visser, 50, a sort of Queen Mother of female sports reporters, shares these tidbits, plus she-was-there highlights from a career that has included covering tennis, college basketball, figure skating, baseball and horse racing, with the near-giddy zeal of a fan in an arrested state of fist-pumping.
''I've seen the Bears play the Packers at least 20 times,'' she says, ''but it's always different. Different coaches, different players, different weather. I'm never bored. Never! Exhausted? Yes!''
Unlike many journalists who consider sports a way station on the road to bigger and better assignments, Ms. Visser says that as long as she is offered bigger and better playing fields -- she will be on loan to NBC for the Olympics in Athens -- sports is exactly where she wants to be.
Small wonder: her apartment study suggests a life of dazzle and hard-earned triumph. One wall is blanketed with snapshots of Ms. Visser and A-list entertainment figures and athletes, and also inadvertently documents her gradual weight loss and changing hair color over the years. There are framed stories about her and by her (she started as a sports intern at The Boston Globe in 1974), as well as awards springing from her many first-woman achievements (first woman assigned to ''Monday Night Football,'' first woman Super Bowl sideline reporter, first woman analyst in the N.F.L. radio broadcast booth).
''I didn't want kids,'' says Ms. Visser, who is married to Dick Stockton, a sportscaster for Fox and Turner Broadcasting. ''That was never a debate for me. I have six godchildren and I love 'em, love 'em, love 'em, but sports reporting means travel. I couldn't have had my career if I had kids.'' She claims she has never cooked on a stove in any home she has shared with Mr. Stockton, 62, whom she married 21 years ago on a January day between the playoffs and the Super Bowl.
With women now reporting from across a spectrum of sports, it seems almost unimaginable that Ms. Visser was once often the only girl on the bus. ''Back in the 70's, there wasn't even a ladies' room in the press box,'' she recalls.
She would clock herself: ''As soon as the Patriots would have the ball at first and 10 on their own 20, I would take the press elevator down, go to the public ladies' room and hope to get back before they punted.''
GAINING the respect of athletes and coaches took years. But Ms. Visser, whose light, bright, practiced charm belies a workhorse determination, developed the confidence to give as good as she got. On camera after a college basketball game, she asked Bobby Knight, the combustible Indiana coach, how he had handled Temple's matchup zone. He shot her a withering look. ''We scored more points,'' he replied.
''Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah,'' she retorted, rolling her eyes.
Startled, Mr. Knight began laughing.
''The black players have always treated me the best,'' says Ms. Visser. ''They've said, 'We know what it's like being the only one in the room.' I don't pretend to be hip -- 'Yo, dog!' But they say to me, 'You're the truth.'''
Ms. Visser almost inexplicably became a sports nut early -- the Halloween that her girlfriends dressed in ''Sound of Music'' costumes, she ventured out as Sam Jones, legendary guard for the Boston Celtics. Her obsession served her well. Her father, an engineer, and her mother, a teacher, moved often; when Ms. Visser was in sixth grade, she attended three schools. She learned to make girlfriends quickly and, with sports talk as her lingua franca, got on with the guys, too -- skills critical to survival in network sports.
She's been in the business long enough to witness an erosion of sexism. But now, as she profiles sons of players she interviewed 20 years ago, she is confronting ageism. In 2000, when she was at ABC, she was replaced as a Monday Night Football sideline reporter by a less experienced, much younger woman and man. ''It was staggering to me,'' admits Ms. Visser.
Shortly thereafter, Ms. Visser emerged with a CBS contract. ''You can have a short career if it's based on looks and youth,'' she says, ''but legitimacy is what lasts.''
PUBLIC LIVES
