Senator John Kerry is now the unchallenged front-runner in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. But it would be ridiculous for the party to settle on a candidate because he managed to win the biggest slice of the vote in one small state that happens to be next-door to his home base. When larger, more diverse states start holding their primaries next week, the voters deserve to have a real choice.
Howard Dean may have a hard time figuring out what happens next after his second-place showing because New Hampshire was supposed to be the springboard that would propel him through more conservative states like Missouri and South Carolina. Yet the grittiness of his comeback fight after the disaster in Iowa was impressive. Dr. Dean also seems to be learning from his mistakes, and improving. He has expanded his message and appears to be finding at least a tentative balance between a flat policy speech and an angry harangue.
Senator Kerry is a formidable candidate, with the most all-around experience and a compelling personal story that his staff has translated into powerful television ads. But he generally seems wooden on the campaign trail, and it's important to see how voters take to him in the South and West, and in minority communities. If he stumbles, Senator John Edwards and former Gen. Wesley Clark will be waiting. So far, Senator Edwards has been the best of the field when it comes to personal campaigning. He seems to be the only one who understands that if an elderly woman in the audience tearfully announces that she is facing eviction, the right response is not to delineate the need to reorganize the federal housing department. But he has not been tested in the way some of the other candidates have. He certainly has not faced the merciless scrutiny that Dr. Dean faced in Iowa.
Representative Dennis Kucinich has every right to keep campaigning despite his minuscule vote tallies, but he should not be allowed to take up time in future candidate debates. Neither should the Rev. Al Sharpton, who is running to continue running, not to win. Sponsors should also consider whether Senator Joseph Lieberman will continue to be a credible candidate. Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Clark both skipped Iowa to concentrate on New Hampshire, without making much of a dent. But Mr. Clark's supporters have a right to hope that his candidacy will improve with experience. Since Senator Lieberman has already run for vice president, he appears to have hit his ceiling.
The serious candidates will not continue if their fund-raising starts drying up and they see prospects only for future embarrassment. But Mr. Kerry's ability to win the hearts of Democrats all around the country is not so certain that his strongest opponents should give up now. When the primaries come in from the cold, Mr. Kerry should not be running alone.
