MOST stews have elements of sweetness, much of the time from slow-cooked onions or carrots or other root vegetables. In many braised dishes from the Mediterranean, you will even find dried fruit.
This stew goes straight to the source: honey. It is a dreamy stew, sweet, nutty and crunchy, with an exotic aroma. What keeps it balanced is a Tunisian spice mix called tabil. There are many versions of tabil, but every one I've tasted had ground caraway seeds, ground coriander seeds, minced garlic and cayenne or chili. Ground coriander is easy to find, but not so ground caraway. You can get it at some specialty stores, or online (at, for example, www.penzeys.com).
Better, though, is to start with whole spices. Toast the caraway and coriander seeds together (I like to add cumin and fennel seeds to the mix, though they are not essential), along with a dried red chili, by shaking them in a dry pan over medium heat until fragrant. Then grind in a spice mill or coffee grinder; you can mix in minced garlic at that point, or, preferably, store the mix and add garlic to the dish as you need it. (If you make your own tabil, use about 1 tablespoon of it in place of the spices in the recipe, and add it along with the garlic.)
The stew itself follows the usual procedure: soften some onions in oil, then brown the lamb (you could use chunks of beef brisket or chuck, though the cooking time will be longer) and add the honey, spices and liquid. The toasted blanched almonds are added at the last minute and pull the whole dish together.
BRAISED LAMB WITH HONEY AND ALMONDS  Time: About 1 1/2 hours
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  1 large onion, roughly chopped  2 pounds boneless lamb, from shoulder or leg, cut into 1- to 2-inch chunks  Salt and pepper to taste
1/2 cup honey  1 clove garlic, minced  1 teaspoon ground coriander
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin, optional
1/4 teaspoon cayenne, or to taste  1 teaspoon ground caraway
1/2 teaspoon ground fennel, optional  1 cup chicken or beef stock  1 cup whole blanched almonds  Chopped fresh parsley leaves for garnish  Fresh lemon juice to taste.
1. Put oil in a large, deep skillet over medium heat. Add onion and cook until quite soft, about 10 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon and raise heat to medium-high. Add lamb chunks and adjust heat so pieces brown rapidly without burning. Season meat with salt and pepper as it browns.  2. Turn off heat and wait for pan to cool a bit; pour off excess fat. Turn heat back to medium and add honey; cook, stirring, until honey has thinned and coated lamb. Stir in garlic, then add spices, reserved onions and the stock. Cover and simmer until meat is tender, an hour or more.  3. Meanwhile, put almonds in a skillet, in one layer. Cook over medium heat, shaking skillet, until lightly browned and fragrant.  4. Taste meat mixture and adjust seasoning as necessary. Stir in almonds and serve, sprinkled with a few drops of lemon juice and garnished with the parsley.
Yield: 4 servings.
THE MINIMALIST
