Jim O'Brien, whose three years on the Boston Celtics' bench made him a relative dinosaur among Eastern Conference coaches, resigned yesterday, increasing the state of flux in a conference striving for respectability in the N.B.A.
John Carroll, a seven-year Celtics assistant, will assume Boston's head coaching duties on an interim basis.
Danny Ainge is in his first season as the Celtics' executive director of basketball operations, and his philosophical differences with O'Brien appear to have been the cause of O'Brien's abrupt resignation.
O'Brien's performance in Boston was strong. After Rick Pitino resigned in January 2001 after the team struggled badly, O'Brien turned the Celtics into an Eastern Conference contender almost immediately. He led them to the conference finals in his first full season and to the second round of the playoffs last season.
But when Ainge was hired in May, he began making questionable changes that have left the team (22-24) struggling to make the playoffs. While he gave O'Brien a two-year contract extension, he made trades that O'Brien disagreed with.
The departure of O'Brien, who had more than two years left on his contract, leaves only one club in the 15-team Eastern Conference with the same coach it had at the end of last season. The development makes Terry Stotts, the Atlanta Hawks' coach for the past 13 months, the dean of Eastern coaches. Paradoxically, the Hawks (14-31) are one of the league's worst teams, with the league's third-worst record entering last night.
''It's a crazy sort of circumstances,'' Stotts told reporters in Atlanta before last night's game against Phoenix. ''It's kind of a fluke-ish thing. I'm not sure what it says about our coaching profession.''
There were rumors last summer that Stotts would be replaced, but the Hawks' pending sale has helped him keep his job. AOL Time Warner is attempting to sell the club to Atlanta LLC, a group of eight investors headed by Steve Belkin. The ownership transfer of the Hawks and the Thrashers of the National Hockey League requires the approval of the N.B.A. and the N.H.L., which could occur in February.
While Stotts may survive the rest of the season, with his team floundering and several of his best players voicing displeasure, he would be considered fortunate to lead the Hawks into the 2004-5 season.
A team from the Eastern Conference has not won an N.B.A. championship since Michael Jordan retired from the Chicago Bulls in 1998. Eastern champions have won only 6 of the 26 games played during the finals over the last five years. With most of the dominant big men playing in the West, the league's balance of power is not expected to change any time soon.
''If you look at the Western teams, a lot of them are getting better,'' said the Indiana coach, Rick Carlisle, who was fired last year after two 50-victory seasons in Detroit. ''Most of those teams are competitive, and under those circumstances, there are not going to be as many changes.''
The coaching change in Boston comes one day after the Nets fired Byron Scott, who led them to the last two Eastern Conference championships. All together, 17 of the N.B.A.'s 29 teams now have different coaches than they had at the conclusion of last season.
PRO BASKETBALL
