Many Democrats are certain the Federal Reserve has a Republican bias. They point out that the Fed raised interest rates six times from June 1999 to May 2000, holding the economy back while Al Gore was running for president, but lowered them 13 times once George W. Bush defeated him.
Some Republicans have a chip on their own shoulders. They contend that in 1992, the Fed helped Bill Clinton defeat President Bush's father by not lowering interest rates fast enough in the face of a sluggish economic recovery.
Most economists dismiss such complaints of political favoritism. But the Fed is not totally above the fray. Indeed, there seems to be one clear political pattern in interest-rate decisions -- one particularly relevant to today's circumstances. Precisely because of the potential impact of changes in monetary policy, the Fed tries not to start raising interest rates in the months before a presidential election.
''The Fed considers itself apolitical, but that does not mean ignoring politics; rather, it means trying to avoid becoming a political issue itself,'' said Laurence H. Meyer, a former Fed governor who advises investors on monetary policy. ''It tries to do this by avoiding actions that are unnecessarily provocative.''
This year, avoiding provocation could be awkward. With the economy perking up and interest rates at historic lows, there is little doubt that the Fed's next move will be to raise rates, for the first time since May 2000.
But when? Starting to raise rates in September, at the last meeting of the Federal Open Markets Committee before the election, could be seen as a slap at President Bush. Raising rates at the November meeting, a week after the election, might elicit charges that the Fed waited to avoid harming Mr. Bush's electoral chances by putting the brakes on the economy. The committee meets again in December, but few economists expect sharp policy changes in a month when financial market activity traditionally tails off.
So if the Fed does not move by August, the betting is that it is not likely to do anything until next January. The futures markets are predicting that short-term rates will rise from the current 1 percent to 1.25 percent by the summer.
Evidence of the Fed treading carefully before presidential elections extends back at least 40 years. Gary Hufbauer and Paul Grieco of the Institute for International Economics found that from November 1959 to October 2003, the Fed changed interest rates only about half as frequently in the six months before an election as in other six-month periods. Most of the Fed's moves in the months before an election have involved staying a previously set course of raising or lowering rates.
''The Fed wants to maximize its long-term independence,'' Mr. Hufbauer explained. ''The way to keep your long-term independence is you don't do anything that seems highly political around the elections.''
That is not to say that the Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, will stay silent in economic policy debates. He angered Democrats by supporting President Bush's first round of tax cuts in 2001. Last year, he angered Republican backers of further cuts by warning about the long-range danger of continued fiscal deficits.
''He is marching into territory which is inviting a clipping of wings,'' Mr. Hufbauer said. ''He's walked to the edge and risked it.''
Despite the chairman's taste for the political, the Fed vehemently rejects the notion that politics affects its monetary policy decisions.
''The F.O.M.C. does not in policy or practice refrain from taking action on monetary policy in election periods,'' a Fed spokesman said yesterday.
Mr. Meyer -- who expects the Fed to raise interest rates in January of 2005 -- stresses that electoral considerations would not keep the Fed from acting if something drastic were to change in the economy, say a spike in inflation.
Dick Rippe, chief economist at Prudential Equity Group, noted that under Chairman Paul A. Volcker, the Fed reversed course on monetary policy and started a period of steep interest rate increases in September 1980. That move gets at least some of the credit -- or blame, depending on your politics -- for Ronald Reagan's defeat of President Jimmy Carter that November.
Mr. Rippe noted that Mr. Volcker's Fed acted during a period of very high inflation that could justify drastic action. ''Barring some sort of emergency,'' Mr. Rippe said, ''once beyond Labor Day, it would be hard to make a move. It would inject the Fed into the political debate in a way that they would not like.''
Do these political considerations matter in 2004? Alice M. Rivlin, a former vice chairwoman of the Fed who is now at the Brookings Institution in Washington, said that given the sluggish job growth and the virtual absence of inflation, the Fed has no reason to tighten monetary policy for quite awhile, regardless of the electoral calendar.
But Mr. Meyer said the calculation changes if the economy shows signs of further heating up. Then, to avoid acting at the height of the political season, ''the Fed might get uncomfortable and act sooner,'' he said.
Or, said Mr. Hufbauer, the Fed might make the perilous choice to delay action. In the past, he said, the most common monetary policy error has been failing to raise interest rates aggressively enough. This time, he argues, economic growth will probably justify a pre-emptive interest rate rise by the spring. Yet he worries that, given the election, the Fed governors ''will act less pre-emptively this year than they would normally.''
Market Place
