There was less than an hour left to Marat Safin's 24th birthday, and the crowd at Melbourne Park was serenading him with the obvious song. But Safin had already given himself the right present for a young tennis-playing millionaire who has everything: a victory over the world's No. 1 player.
In a quarterfinal match on Tuesday night that was the tennis equivalent of a heavyweight bout, the huge-serving and athletic Safin barely got the best of the huge-serving and athletic Andy Roddick, 2-6, 6-3, 7-5, 6-7 (0),6-4.
''I can't ask for anything else,'' Safin said. ''It's probably the best birthday I ever had.''
Safin's birthdays have not always been so festive in Melbourne. Two years ago, he turned 22 on the day of the Australian Open final and was upset by Thomas Johansson. He has experienced plenty of pain since then, tearing a ligament in his left wrist here last year, which forced him to withdraw from the tournament and which spoiled his season.
Yet despite struggling when he returned to the circuit at the end of 2003 and despite arriving in Melbourne ranked a lowly 86th and despite fears that the sport might have passed him by, his peers were still wary of Safin, a rangy Russian who walks with a longshoreman's swagger but becomes a sleek and graceful whippet as soon as there is a tennis ball to be chased down.
As it turned out, the opposition was right to be concerned. Safin has slowly hustled and muscled his way through the draw, breaking serves and wills with his rare blend of power and speed. He has been particularly dismissive of Americans, beating Brian Vahaly in the first round, Todd Martin in five intense sets in the third round, James Blake in the fourth round and now Roddick in one of the finest, most composed performances of Safin's uneven career.
''He's got one more American to go,'' said the United States Davis Cup captain, Patrick McEnroe, still shaking his head about the quality of what he had witnessed.
That would be Andre Agassi, the defending champion, who has not lost a match in Melbourne since 1999 and who had to win only one set in his quarterfinal on Tuesday against No. 9-seeded Sébastien Grosjean of France before Grosjean retired with a strained right groin muscle.
At 33, it never hurts to conserve energy, and the fourth-seeded Agassi now has an excellent chance of feeling fresher than Safin when they play Thursday night for the first time in more than three years. Safin has spent more than twice as much time on court in his five victories as Agassi, who has yet to lose a set.
''I could feel much better,'' Safin said. ''But it's O.K. I'm still young. It's not like I'm getting old, but I will have to be really fresh against Andre if I want to have a chance to beat him.''
Even though Grosjean beat Agassi twice in 2001, Grosjean has now lost three consecutive matches to him. Agassi took command of Tuesday's match from the beginning, ripping through the first set, 6-2, then breaking Grosjean in the opening game of the second after Grosjean missed an easy forehand at 30-30.
Down by 0-2, Grosjean walked to the net and surrendered. ''I would have preferred to finish the match, no question,'' Agassi said. ''It's not that I feel I'm not prepared for the next round. You just don't want any match to end that way.''
It was also unfortunate for those who bought tickets for Rod Laver Arena. The first women's quarterfinal of the day had already been canceled after Grosjean's compatriot Amélie Mauresmo withdrew with a back injury.
The ticket to have Tuesday was for the night session. Rarely have two men generated so much pace and so many gasps from the stands over five sets as Roddick and Safin. It was a slugfest between a former United States Open champion and the reigning United States Open champion, yet it featured much more than slugging. There were also neatly constructed rallies, timely topspin lobs, one spectacular diving volley and routinely terrific end-to-end defense as the combatants took turns tracking down each other's bolts.
As they took turns holding serve in the fifth, there were increasing glimmers of recognition in the stands, and one man held up a sign that read ''22-20.''
But it did not go that long, and in the end, Roddick was jogging to the net to wish his opponent a happy birthday.
Thanks to Safin, Roddick will lose the No. 1 ranking after this tournament to either Roger Federer or Juan Carlos Ferrero.
''No one can take away from me the fact that I was there and that I did have it,'' Roddick said. ''It's going to be jumping around I think a little bit this year, but that's what makes it exciting.''
Matches like Tuesday night's do not hurt the sport either.
TENNIS
