Leonard Bernstein once described Charles Ives as ''our musical Mark Twain, Emerson and Lincoln all rolled into one.'' That nicely captures this composer's blend of mercurial wit, maverick individualism and inspired vision of what American music could be. To this illustrious list Bernstein might have added Lewis and Clark, as Ives was also a relentless sonic explorer whose pioneering innovations cut a path deep into the terra incognita of music's future.
Listeners were reminded of all of this on Friday night, when Joel Sachs and the New Juilliard Ensemble opened Juilliard's 20th annual Focus! Festival with an all-Ives program. The festival, which runs through Friday, is exclusively devoted to Ives's music. It is also the start of a major Ives year, as ensembles and musical institutions, including the New York Philharmonic, mark the 50th anniversary of his death.
One of Ives's outstanding qualities was his brash confidence in the vitality of American music at a time when the country still lingered deep in Europe's shadow. Unlike so many of his contemporaries, Ives refused to genuflect to the European musical traditions he had mastered. Instead he used the materials of 19th-century Romanticism as glue for an all-embracing synthesis that could be positively Whitmanesque in its breadth and inclusiveness.
Ragtime was among the American sounds that caught Ives's restless ear, and Friday's program opened with a rough-hewn but animated performance of Four Ragtime Dances. Begun in 1899, these saucy works, full of dissonant clusters and funky, off-kilter rhythms, show that Ives was already a composer far ahead of his time. Years before others would turn to jazz, he was integrating a vernacular musical style, preserving its core vitality while at the same time making it his own.
Few works did more to define Ives's signature style than ''Three Places in New England,'' also on Friday's program. In the second movement, ''Putnam's Camp,'' he famously imagines the sights and sounds of a Fourth of July picnic in a park in Redding, Conn. Ditties and patriotic tunes like ''Yankee Doodle'' swirl around in a vast cauldron of sound, but the crowning moment comes when Ives orchestrates the meeting of two marching bands, each playing separate tunes. Rhythms, harmonies and tempos collide in a landmark moment of supreme musical chaos, perfectly controlled and amazingly realistic in effect.
The performance on Friday conjured just the right cacophony. Other parts of the evening were not equally polished, but the playing was generally fired with a visceral energy that is essential to this music.
Brian Mulligan was the capable soloist for a selection of five songs, and Mr. Sachs concluded the program with a vivid reading of the Symphony No. 3. Even this more conservative work, finished in 1911, had to wait more than three decades before receiving a premiere. In the interim American composers flocked to Europe to seek its counsel, a practice that Ives could not endorse. Three years studying in Rome, he once suggested, would not serve a composer as well as a single day in a Kansas wheat field.
The inferiority complex that Ives so colorfully lampooned has not completely disappeared from American classical music, which is just one more reason that it's good to have him back.
MUSIC REVIEW
