It is often said that the first step in curing an addiction is to admit having one. So it would appear that, perhaps this year, state lawmakers are poised to tackle their habit of passing late budgets.
If they miss their April 1 deadline again this year, it will be the 20th consecutive time they have failed to agree on revenues, spending, taxes, borrowing, state programs and all of the other complicated issues they handle as the fiscal caretakers of the state.
No other state has a record quite like New York's in passing late budgets, according to the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed watchdog group. This year, with the tone so despairing and the budget nearing the $100 billion mark, all sides agree that something has to change in New York.
Gov. George E. Pataki, a third-term Republican, set the tone in his annual address to lawmakers on Jan. 7, calling for ''a wide-ranging budget reform package that will enable New York to meet its budget deadline.'' Joseph L. Bruno, the leader of the Republican majority in the State Senate, passed a package of budget changes as the first act of the legislative session.
On Tuesday, Sheldon Silver, the Democratic speaker of the State Assembly, called a news conference, becoming the last of Albany's three big political leaders to present his ideas for breaking the habit of 19 straight late budgets.
Budget watchdogs have long said that New York State should plan better, adopt multiyear budgets with quarterly modifications, establish an independent and nonpartisan office to watch over fiscal deliberations, and add to the ''rainy day'' fund so more money is available during economic downturns.
This year, for the first time, all sides say they will now talk to one another in conference committees to figure out a way to make changes.
Government watchdogs, who have been pressing the state to reform its budget processes, point out that this year there is an added incentive for change: all 212 lawmakers are up for re-election in November, and some could be embarrassed by Albany's record when they try to get voters to send them back for another term.
Mr. Silver clearly thinks the conference committees, which would hold public meetings, will help. ''Without question, we would prefer a process that delivers this budget balanced and on time each and every year, regardless of who's in power, if for no other reason than to restore some measure of public faith in our government,'' Mr. Silver said at his news conference in the Capitol.
Three hours later, Mr. Bruno held a news conference to applaud Mr. Silver and to point out that over the past decade, the Senate has passed budget reform measures every year, in hopes of changing what he called ''a dysfunctional process,'' only to see the Assembly not follow suit.
So, with all the apparent cooperation, why, then, are so many budget watchdogs and other observers still so doubtful change will happen? Part of the answer is in the calcified way Albany has worked in the past. Conference committees have not been all that successful at resolving disputes. In this case, Jeff Stonecash, a political science professor at Syracuse University, said he did not doubt the intent or desire of the lawmakers to enact reform, but, he said, ''I am skeptical about the possibility.''
Mr. Stonecash said another common Albany problem is that issues often become entangled.
This year, the hot issues include the governor's series of Medicaid cost containment proposals and his plan to use gambling money to aid New York City's schools. In the past, such contentious issues would quickly be drawn into negotiations over nonrelated problems.
By itself, the issue of budget reform could be difficult. There are some competing components in the packages advanced by the Senate and Assembly. Some have led to disagreements that made it difficult to achieve budget reforms in the past, though there has never been an effort to resolve them through conference committees.
The Senate legislation calls for the state comptroller to issue a binding forecast on revenue for the new fiscal year if the legislative leaders and the governor cannot reach an agreement on revenue by March 1. By contrast, the Assembly, which plans to pass its bills in the next week or two, would create an independent, nonpartisan legislative budget office to analyze revenue and expenses. The Senate would allow the previous year's budget to be continued in the event no new budget is forged, while the Assembly would not.
Political Memo
