Allan Houston watched from the bench in the fourth quarter as his close friend Charlie Ward dropped a dagger 3-pointer to give his team the lead for good.
''That's Charlie; everybody here has seen it time and time again,'' Houston said, noting that such a sighting always came with Ward in a Knicks jersey. ''That's who he is.''
Ward was wearing the black and silver uniform of San Antonio, where he landed after being traded to Phoenix on Jan. 5, but he and Tim Duncan, the reigning N.B.A. most valuable player, might have been the only ones who showed their true selves last night.
Duncan's 30 points and 19 rebounds, combined with Ward's high-arcing shot and block of Michael Doleac's shot on the next play, allowed the Spurs to overcome 26 turnovers for a 77-67 victory over the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.
Houston was most certainly not himself. A painful right knee threw off his rhythm and he shot 2 of 13 and had six turnovers. By the time Houston came off the bench in the fourth quarter, after resting for 12 minutes, he was unable to contribute. Nor was Keith Van Horn, who left the game early in the third quarter because of a strained left shoulder.
Stephon Marbury scored 19 points, but the Knicks had nothing more to give. They were out of sync and out of answers, resulting in their lowest point total of the season. They shot 36 percent; the Spurs shot 38 percent.
''When everything isn't going well for us, we have to figure out what that second resort is,'' Houston said.
''My whole goal is to be what I'm supposed to be for this team,'' he added, about being a leader and a smooth shooter. ''That's what I've always been. If I'm not able to be that, I have to get back in the lab and keep rehabbing where it gets to the point where I can do those things.''
Houston said he would contemplate taking more than just practice off, even though he said that was what he sorely needed for his timing's sake. ''I play with a lot of pride, but sometimes pride can hurt you because your pride gets in the way of being smart,'' he said.
Marbury, who shot 8 of 21, said: ''You can make excuses about Allan not being able to play, but we still got to get it done. There are other guys capable of making shots and plays, also. We're in a two-game funk right now.''
Van Horn, who had been on a tear until last week, might go for X-rays today. There were two minutes left in the first half when Van Horn elevated for a left-handed dunk along the left baseline. Duncan's outstretched arm not only blocked the ball, but also jarred Van Horn's shoulder.
''There's a numbness in there and there's also a lot of pain in the joint,'' Van Horn said after receiving treatment. He did not have X-rays last night in the locker room. ''It's painful to lift up at this point.''
He expected to attend practice today and, depending on how it felt, said he might opt for further examination.
While the Knicks sank to 20-27 with their scorers mired in injury, the Spurs escaped despite their sloppy play. ''We're not really that good right now,'' Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich said before the game.
At one point in the first half, the Spurs had more turnovers than field goals. The Knicks made just a third of their shots in the second half.
''Our execution was abominable,'' Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens said. ''We were anxious. We missed so many wide-open shots. If we free you up, you've got to shoot the ball.''
The teams were tied at 57-57, with 8 minutes 46 seconds to play, when Ward sank a 3-pointer, as he was accustomed to doing in the Garden for 10 seasons. On the next play, Ward, a 6-foot-2 guard, blocked Doleac's shot, leading to a fast-break layup for Manu Ginóbili and a 63-57 lead.
When Bruce Bowen -- whose defense had stymied Houston and Marbury -- hit a shot in the corner with 5:39 to play, on an angle from behind the baseline, and drew the foul, it gave the Spurs a 65-59 lead. Bowen missed the free throw.
''We happen to be the worst free-throw-shooting team in the western world, not just in San Antonio or Texas,'' Popovich said. The Spurs averaged 66.3 percent coming into last night's game.
This was a team that won 13 games in a row in December, but Popovich dismissed that streak. ''It wasn't great; we didn't really play anybody,'' he said. ''I think people assume this is the team that finished last year picking up where we left off.''
The Spurs entered last night with the fifth-best record in the Western Conference. ''That team doesn't exist,'' he said.
The Spurs came into the game reeling after losing consecutive games at the buzzer, most recently at Milwaukee on Monday night. They were determined not to squander this opportunity.
In the first half, Duncan scored 21 points -- including a stretch of 13 consecutive in the second quarter -- to pace the Spurs to a 38-35 lead. Ward finished with 8 points in his return, which was graced by a tribute video.
The Knicks do not want to remember this game. ''We're going to get a whole lot better, I guarantee you that,'' Wilkens said. ''Everybody's got to get on the same page, as to what we're running and what we're doing.''
PRO BASKETBALL
