Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts won the Democratic presidential primary here Tuesday, dealing Howard Dean his second overwhelming defeat in nine days in a state where his campaign had once been confident of victory.
The back-to-back victories by Mr. Kerry in Iowa and New Hampshire completed a striking turnaround by the four-term senator from Massachusetts, whose beleaguered campaign just a month ago had been viewed by supporters and opponents alike as on the verge of extinction.
''I love New Hampshire -- and I love Iowa, too,'' an exultant Mr. Kerry said at a victory rally as supporters broke into shouts of ''Bring it on,'' the campaign theme that came to symbolize Mr. Kerry's assertion that he was the strongest Democrat to take on Mr. Bush.
''Thank you, New Hampshire, for lifting up this campaign and a cause of America that belongs not to the privileged, not to a few but belongs to all Americans, for all of the people,'' he said.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark were virtually tied for a distant third place behind Dr. Dean. And Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut trailed in fifth place. The distant showings by Mr. Lieberman and General Clark suggested that the two men had miscalculated in skipping Iowa and investing most of their time and resources into campaigning in this state during January.
With 97 percent of election districts reporting at 12:20 a.m. today, Mr. Kerry had 39 percent of the vote to 26 percent for Dr. Dean, 12 percent for Mr. Clark, 12 percent for Mr. Edwards and 9 percent for Mr. Lieberman. Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had 1 percent.
The campaign now turns into what is in effect a national primary next Tuesday, with contests in seven states stretching from South Carolina to New Mexico. Aides to Mr. Edwards, Mr. Clark and Mr. Lieberman said they believed that this was fertile territory for their relatively moderate appeal and vowed to offer Mr. Kerry a tough fight in the days ahead.
Dr. Dean, taking a page from presidential candidates from Eugene McCarthy to Bill Clinton, tried to portray his second-place showing as a win, noting that it had come just eight days after his third-place finish in Iowa. He, too, said he was confident that he could compete with Mr. Kerry, though his aides said they were looking to California and New York -- states that hold their votes on March 2 -- as a place where he would do well.
''Thank you -- my goodness!'' a nearly sedate Dr. Dean said, wearing a suit and tie and glancing down at notes for a speech that stood in obvious contrast to the tempestuous concession speech he gave last Monday that contributed to the difficulties of his campaign.
''The people of New Hampshire have allowed our campaign to regain its momentum, and I am very grateful,'' Dr. Dean said. ''And the people of New Hampshire have allowed all of you to hope again that we are going to have real change in America.''
Even before the polls closed, Dr. Dean's campaign announced that he would visit nine cities in states where there are Democratic contests next Tuesday, signaling his intention to continue with a campaign that just a month ago was viewed by many Democrats as nearly unstoppable. But as Dr. Dean's opponents headed out for South Carolina and Missouri, he planned to return home to Vermont for a day to rest and regroup.
Indeed, by any measure, the results on Tuesday were a tremendous setback for a candidate who had appeared to rewrite the rules of politics with his reliance on the Internet and his appeal to new voters. He had all but moved into New Hampshire and Iowa for the past year, in hopes of replicating Jimmy Carter's strategy by which a little-known governor wins his party's nomination and becomes president of the United States.
The turn of events presents him with a distinct challenge as the campaign moves into a very different phase: From the living rooms and small settings of Iowa and New Hampshire where Dr. Dean had excelled to campaigns that will be fought out on the network news and with television commercials.
Cars and buses will be replaced by airplanes as the remaining candidates run simultaneous campaigns in South Carolina, Missouri, Delaware, Oklahoma, New Mexico, Arizona and North Dakota, competing for 269 delegates. The immediate focus of most of the candidates are South Carolina and Missouri, which sprung into play after Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri dropped out last week after his fourth-place showing in Iowa.
Aides to Mr. Gephardt said on Monday that he would not endorse anyone before the contest there.
Mr. Kerry's victory here Tuesday marked a vindication of the unusual approach his campaign took to try to resuscitate his candidacy. With polls showing that he was facing a crushing defeat in neighboring New Hampshire, Mr. Kerry flew halfway across the country in the calculation that a victory in Iowa -- among people who do not know him as well as his neighbors in New Hampshire -- would revive his hopes in New Hampshire.
Mr. Kerry is only the third Democrat in the 32 years of the modern presidential selection system, running in contested nominating battles, to have won both the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary. The first two were Jimmy Carter in 1980, who won his party's nomination but lost his bid for reelection, and Al Gore in 2000, who also won his party's nomination but lost the presidency.
All the candidates who by most definitions might be viewed as having lost Tuesday sought to put the best interpretation on the results. Mr. Lieberman, who came in fifth place -- thanked the New Hampshire voters for ''putting me in the ring.''
''Thanks to the people of New Hampshire, we are in a three-way split decision for third place,'' Mr. Lieberman said. (At one point, Mr. Lieberman referred to the former governor of Vermont as ''John Dean,'' but quickly corrected himself.)
Mr. Edwards's showing came as a disappointment to the senator from North Carolina, coming a week after he placed second in Iowa last week. But his advisers noted that he had had less time here than he had in Iowa, where he had built up steam in the final days of that race, and that he was competing against two men -- Mr. Kerry of Massachusetts and Dr. Dean of Vermont -- from neighboring states.
''Look at what we've done -- this moment is extraordinary,'' Mr. Edwards said to supporters here tonight. ''And now we're going to take this energy and momentum that we saw in Iowa, this extraordinary energy and momentum that we have seen in New Hampshire, and we're going to take it right through February 3rd.''
The results emerged as a particular disappointment for General Clark, who with Mr. Lieberman had skipped Iowa to focus all his attention on this state. He had campaigned heavily here, taking advantage of the absence of his rivals in an effort to come in second place.
General Clark, whose eyes brimmed with tears, said: ''Never, never, never underestimate what a determined soldier can accomplish when he's fighting for this country. And I'm fighting for this country.''
In an interview with Larry King on CNN, Dr. Dean gave a hint at what presumably will be his line of attack on Mr. Kerry should this become the two-way race that aides to both men said they are looking for.
''I think the only way to beat George Bush is to have someone from outside Washington come down and do something for working families again,'' Dr. Dean said.
A survey of New Hampshire voters leaving the polls found that while there was overwhelming opposition to the war in Iraq, that was not a driving issue.
Instead, voters were much more likely to name health care as the issue upon which they based their votes here on Tuesday. And among those who opposed the war, Mr. Kerry, who voted for the Iraq resolution, had nearly as much support as Dr. Dean, who built his once high-flying candidacy on his opposition to the war.
The poll found that one-fifth of voters were looking for someone who they believed could topple Mr. Bush, and among those, Mr. Kerry won 6 out of 10 voters. But nearly a third said they were for someone who stood up for what he believed in, and Dr. Dean won more than half of those voters.
Health care was the top issue listed by New Hampshire voters, with one-third saying it was the most important issue in deciding how they voted. And nearly 4 in 10 of them voted for Mr. Kerry. The war in Iraq and the economy each was listed as the top issue by about 20 percent of the voters.
Those who describe themselves as liberal were more likely to back Dr. Dean, while those who describe themselves as moderate were more likely to support Mr. Kerry.
The survey, conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the National Election Pool -- a consortium of the five major television networks and The Associated Press -- interviewed 1,848 voters as they left the polls. For the full survey, the margin of sampling error is plus or minus three percentage points.
Campaign officials reported evidence throughout the day of a heavy turnout of voters on a frigid day under slate-gray skies.
In Manchester, Gladys Trautner, 81, and Eileen Pierson, 67, who are sisters, said they voted for Mr. Edwards because they believed he would have a better chance to defeat Mr. Bush.
''This is the worst I've ever seen our country,'' said Ms. Trautner, a retired accountant who lives in Manchester. ''I'm worried for the future of this country.''
Mrs. Pierson said: ''The reason we wanted Edwards to win is that he would demolish Bush in a debate. Kerry, he's good but wouldn't demolish Bush and Bush needs to be demolished.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
