So here I am, after all these years, after various airport delays and flying through dense fog and freezing rain, at my very first Super Bowl media day, and I find myself covering a mock wrestling match between a couple of Carolina special-teams players, defensive back Jarrod Cooper and the kick return artist formerly known as He Hate Me.
That's right, in front of an expanding and grateful contingent of reporters already bored by calculatingly courteous coaches and the strategic wonders of ball-control offense, Cooper and He Hate Me are demonstrating their peculiar bonding scheme whereby Cooper greets his new friend and attempts to flip him over his shoulder.
Then they hug because He Hate Me, known to his mother and assorted family and friends back home in Lakeland, Fla., as Rod Smart, is just so filled with unrestrained joy and so enamored of being a part of the ultimate football event, even if the staid N.F.L. (No Fun League) requires him to wear his birth name and not his appellation of choice on the back of his Panthers jersey.
''If they could just bend the rules a little bit,'' he said before making the argument that either designation fits him well. ''Would you guys be here talking to me without He Hate Me?''
Good point, Mr. Smart man. Without the most bizarre stage name in the history of sports, self-ascribed while Smart ran the ball for the Las Vegas entry in the short-lived N.F.L. antiworld known as the XFL, many of us would have been stumbling around matching bland utterances right out of Scott Layden land to the names and numbers on the backs of the jerseys.
Jaded colleagues have been warning me about this for years, but one must experience Super Bowl media day, sports journalism's most repellent day of the year, to really appreciate it, if that makes any sense.
It's getting worse, as evidenced by the presence here of the no-name Panthers and the scant-stars Patriots, both of whom, some say, represent the evolutionary endgame product of a league legislated to supreme parity, a sport in which success is increasingly predicated on not committing too many salary-cap resources to high-voltage stars.
Good luck selling these kinds of teams year after year and, speaking of luck, don't I deserve better after being too young for Namath and never making it for Montana, L. T. or Rice? Granted, Tom Brady, bidding to become the youngest N.F.L. quarterback to win two Super Bowls, has unmistakable marquee qualities, although his most animated moments Tuesday occurred while explaining why he attended George W. Bush's state of the union address last week (he went as a Patriot, not a Republican), when he fielded a couple of celebrity journalist's questions from the president's niece, Lauren Bush, and participated in a slapstick exchange with last year's flavor, the Buccaneers' Warren Sapp:
Sapp (from behind a news media gaggle): ''I was just coming to say hello. I can't get to you.''
Brady (up on his raised platform): ''That's the way I like it.''
Put a bowl of soup in front of Brady, rush the tape into production, and you've got a sweet, 30-second commercial spot for the big Sunday show. Namath guaranteeing a victory over the Baltimore Colts it wasn't, but that said, I am appreciative of the opportunity to be here, no matter how harrowing and embarrassing the trip.
Raise your hand if you know this feeling: It's late at night, you're riding a taxi in from the airport and it hits you that you didn't bring your wallet. You pay the cabbie with your few remaining dollars, frantically dial the cellphone, wake up your wife at 1:30 in the morning and beg for the fastest delivery since Jake Delhomme hit Steve Smith in St. Louis and FedExed these upstart Panthers into the National Football Conference championship game.
Since The New York Times is a more liberal institution than the N.F.L., my wife will officially be known in this space for the remainder of the week as She Hate Me.
It's a wonderfully wacky name that Smart dreamed up, even if I have no idea what it means and apparently neither does he. Asked repeatedly to explain it, he kept pointing to his heart and saying, ''It's from inside me.''
Comparatively speaking, this sounded deep on media day, when local television reporters went around interviewing well-known national sports journalists, when someone asked New England Coach Bill Belichick if he thought the Patriots would be distracted by the Martha Stewart trial, when an 11-year-old girl with a credential for Readers Digest admitted that before she was selected by her Houston elementary school to conduct interviews, she thought the Super Bowl was really the Olympics.
''I wanted to be a ballerina,'' the girl told another expanding and grateful contingent of reporters, ''but now I like football.''
Ballet. Football. Whatever. At least she was creative and fun, like Rod Smart, who already this season has won a game for Carolina by returning a kickoff 100 yards. In what experts expect will be a close, defensive game, Smart, the 27-year-old journeyman from Western Kentucky, could end up as more than a name.
''Somebody gonna hate me,'' he announced, which qualified as the boldest prediction on media day in Houston.
Sports of The Times
