Shandon Anderson, never one to complain or criticize, no longer has his migraine. But his pride is hurt because he believes Coach Lenny Wilkens has kept him in the dark.
Wilkens snapped Anderson's streak of consecutive games at 543 Friday when he did not insert him in the Knicks' tight victory over Atlanta. Anderson missed Saturday's game against Miami with a migraine that kept him out of practice until yesterday's shoot-around.
Anderson, the Knicks' backup swingman, said he was not as upset about the streak ending as his diminished playing time. Wilkens has been playing Penny Hardaway over him.
''I'm just in awe right now because I don't understand why I'm not playing,'' Anderson said at the shoot-around before the Knicks played the Spurs last night. He played seven minutes and did not score.
According to a person with knowledge of the Knicks' thinking, the team president, Isiah Thomas, is trying to trade Anderson, preferably as part of a package. Anderson was a second-round draft pick of the former Knicks president Scott Layden, with Utah. As part of the old regime, Anderson sounded almost as if he expected to get traded.
''I don't think they are going to let me sit on the bench making the money I make, just trying to be peaceful,'' Anderson said. ''I just want to play, just let me know something. I don't want to be the 12th man on the team. If that's the case, you know, just, make it happen, don't let me sit and not knowing what's going to happen the next day.''
In the 35 games before the Knicks obtained Stephon Marbury and Hardaway, Anderson averaged 8.4 points. In the last 9 games he has played, Anderson has averaged 4.6 points. He started 10 games this season, averaging 16.6 points.
Wilkens and Anderson spoke after the shoot-around, but Wilkens said it was just about Anderson's health. Anderson challenged his coach to give him a more detailed explanation of his situation.
''Be a man about it,'' Anderson said. ''I've been a man about everything that's happened to me, I expect the same thing.''
Yesterday morning, Wilkens said: ''He should want to play. I think that's a good sign. But until I say a guy's out of the rotation, we all should presuppose that. We're trying to win games and we're trying to use all our talent to the best of our ability, but it's very hard to play 12 people.''
A New York Homecoming
After spending more than nine seasons with the Knicks, Charlie Ward said he was not pleased with having been traded at first. But he is enjoying the change of scenery in San Antonio. He said the Spurs were more of a family.
He said he harbored no resentment toward Stephon Marbury, who once said that the Knicks would never win a championship with Ward at the helm.
''I'm still pulling for the Knicks,'' said Ward, who was acquired by San Antonio after the Phoenix Suns, who obtained him in the Marbury-Hardaway deal, released him.
Ward said he was dismayed by the firing of Don Chaney. ''After I had heard the way it had happened, he didn't deserve that,'' Ward said.
''I hate it for him because he put all he had into his job and he wasn't getting the results he felt like he should have been getting. Anyone who gets fired, especially a guy who's a good guy, I hated it for him.''
PRO BASKETBALL: KNICKS NOTEBOOK
