Investors in Australia, a country with a population slightly larger than that of New York State, acquired $2.4 billion worth of real estate in the United States last year, more than foreign investors from any country but Germany.
The Australian investment, while amounting to only a fraction of the $114 billion worth of American real estate that changed hands last year, represented a threefold increase from 2002 and was substantially larger than the direct investment from all other countries combined if Germany and the Middle Eastern countries are excluded, said Robert M. White Jr., the president of Real Capital Analytics, a New York research company that tracks sales of $5 million or more.
He said German investors bought $3.6 billion in American property last year, down from $4.4 billion in 2002.
The Australians have not been amassing trophy assets, unlike Japanese investors, who snapped up high-profile properties like Rockefeller Center in Manhattan and the Pebble Beach Golf Course in California in the 1980's and early 1990's (giving up control of the office complex, then bankrupt, in 1996 and selling the golf course in 1999). Nor have the Australians been buying property on their own. Instead, they have been entering into joint ventures with American companies and mostly making decidedly unglamorous investments in shopping centers anchored by supermarkets or drugstores and in industrial buildings.
About 80 percent of the money has been invested in retail space, Mr. White said.
For the most part, said Barry Vinocur, the editor of Realty Stock Review, a newsletter that focuses on REIT stocks, the Australians are buying stable properties, allowing American companies to diversify their sources of capital and providing funds that they can use for other investments with a higher short-term potential.
The American companies earn fees for managing the properties and get incentives for making them more profitable. ''Those of us who follow REIT's,'' Mr. Vinocur said, ''see this as a very significant trend.''
Taking the lead has been Macquarie Bank, the international investment bank based in Sydney. Since 2001, Macquarie has been forming relationships with companies like the Regency Centers Corporation of Jacksonville, Fla., the nation's largest developer of strip malls anchored by grocery stores, and ProLogis, a major developer of distribution centers, and creating property trusts listed on the Australian securities market.
Currently, the property trusts operated by Macquarie have a real estate portfolio in North America valued at $2.1 billion, said Mark W. Baillie, the head of real estate for North America.
In its largest deal so far, Macquarie acquired an 81 percent interest in a $730 million portfolio of shopping centers around the United States that are owned or co-owned by Developers Diversified Realty Trustof Cleveland.
Last month, Brandywine Realty Trust, a REIT based in Plymouth Meeting, Pa., that owns and manages office and industrial property, announced that it was selling an 80 percent interest in two office buildings in Wilmington, Del., to Macquarie Office Trust for $112.8 million. The companies said the buildings are fully leased.
In general, however, Australian companies have shied away from office properties because of the high vacancy rate. ''The Australian market has been quite negative on office,'' said Mark Steinert, manager of global real estate research for UBS in Sydney.
In another recent deal, CBL &amp; Associates Properties, a mall developer and manager based in Chattanooga, Tenn., announced the formation of a $387 million joint venture with Galileo America Shopping Trust, of Australia. When completed, the deal will give Galileo a 90 percent interest in 51 of CBL's big-box shopping centers and strip malls.
Following a different model, an Australian company, the Centro Properties Group, teamed with Watt Commercial Properties, a private real estate management and development company in Santa Monica, Calif., to buy a $488 million portfolio of 14 shopping centers across California, ranging in size from the 91,156-square-foot University Mall in Davis to the 411,726-square-foot Mira Mesa Mall in San Diego. As a result of the transaction, Watt's holdings doubled from three million square feet to six million, and the company hired 30 additional people, said Jim Maginn, the president and chief executive.
What has fueled the current investment wave, Australian real estate specialists say, is a retirement savings program known as the superannuation guarantee levy, which took effect in 1992. Similar to the 401(k) benefit in the United States, the program requires employers to contribute 9 percent (up from 3 percent at the outset) of a worker's wages to a retirement fund, an amount equal to about $30 billion a year, according to Mr. Steinert. Australian workers seeking safe investments have fewer options than American workers -- Australia has a relatively undeveloped corporate bond market; so, many people have chosen to put their money into real estate.
At the same time, Australia's listed property trusts, its version of publicly traded real estate investment trusts, have grown in number and now control about $38.8 billion in assets, including more than half the investment-quality real estate in the country, and account for about 8 percent of all the equity market, Mr. Baillie said.
With the Australian population growing very slowly (and occupying a mere 15 percent of the land mass), the pace of development is slow and real estate prices are high. What is driving investors to look oversees, said Tony Cooper, a partner on the Australian tax desk at Ernst &amp; Young in New York, ''is the fact that without the type of expansion you get with a wave of immigration, you're not going to get the growth of infrastructure to give you places to invest cash.'' Consequently, of Australia's $77 billion worth of real estate investment, about $20 billion has gone overseas.
The United States is preferred to Europe or Asia for several reasons, the real estate specialists say, including the favorable tax treatment resulting from a treaty between Australia and the United States, the cultural compatibility of the countries, similar expectations about initial rates of return and the current low interest rates.
The Dutch and British, who once led the roster of investors, are continuing to pour money into United States real estate, said Mr. White of Real Capital Analytics, but they are investing in REIT's or commercial-mortgage-backed securities rather than individual properties or portfolios. In 2002, Rodamco, a real estate company based in the Netherlands, demonstrated the shift in strategy by selling its portfolio of shopping centers in the United States for $5.3 billion.
One buyer was Westfield America Trust, an Australian company that entered the American market in 1977 by acquiring a shopping center in Trumbull, Conn. Westfield owns 66 malls in the United States, generating more than $14 billion in annual sales.
But by forming partnerships, the newer Australian investors are not following the model of Westfield, a global owner and operator, nor that of Lend Lease, another huge Australian company whose American operations were once valued at $1 billion. (Lend Lease has sold many of these businesses in recent months.)
Greg Andrews, a retail REIT analyst for Green Street Advisers, an independent research company, said the Australian investors chose their partners well. ''These are companies that have proved their acumen,'' he said, adding that the joint ventures have been good for the REIT's ''It's a relatively inexpensive source of capital,'' he said, ''and for keeping a relatively little amount of equity, the REIT can retain control and earn fees.''
But reception in Australia to the limited property trusts with American real estate portfolios has been mixed, and no trades are currently in the pipeline, according to Mr. White.
Michael Baliva, the vice president of American operations for Centro Properties, said, ''The Australian market is waiting to digest and understand and insure that the recent deals will perform well.''
One problem has been the weak American dollar, but Terry Fanous, a vice president and senior credit officer at Moody's Investors Service in Sydney, said that the Australian property trusts have taken steps to avoid leaving themselves exposed to currency volatility. ''Our view is that they have been prudent in pursuing these strategies,'' he said.
Mr. Steinert, however, said that if the dollar remained weak, future investment might be curtailed somewhat. ''There will be continued investment but at a slower rate,'' he said. ''But it is an increased appetite, and it is not fly by night.''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
