Vice President Dick Cheney met with Pope John Paul II in Vatican City on Tuesday morning and later visited American soldiers at two military bases in northern Italy as he wrapped up an overseas trip intended to rally support for the campaign against terrorism.
During five days in Europe, the vice president sought to do that in part by trying to temper the widespread image here of the United States as a stubbornly independent and sometimes arrogant superpower.
Mr. Cheney's visit to Vatican City put him in the company of Roman Catholic leaders who had firmly opposed the American-led invasion of Iraq. He is the highest-ranking American official to meet the pope since that invasion.
The pope did not mention Iraq, but it was the obvious backdrop for his remarks to the vice president.
Sitting with Mr. Cheney in the papal library, John Paul talked in English about the importance of peace and respect for human life, then added, ''I encourage you and your fellow citizens to work, at home and abroad, for the growth of international cooperation and solidarity in the service of that peace.''
It came across as more of an instruction than admonition, and Mr. Cheney listened quietly. The vice president made no remarks during the public visit, which followed a 13-minute private meeting.
Before the bombing of Baghdad last year, the pope had made his opposition to a war in Iraq clear, although his remarks were less pointed than those of other senior Vatican officials.
Those officials' statements, both before and after the invasion, occasionally frustrated and angered American diplomats here. Mr. Cheney's visit to the Vatican was a tacit acknowledgment of the Bush administration's desire not to appear to be at odds with Roman Catholic leaders.
His visit followed similar ones by world leaders who clearly wanted to underline the Vatican's opposition to war in Iraq or, alternately, to show that they were not afraid to make their case for war to the pope.
Last February, shortly before the bombing of Baghdad, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain visited the pope.
During Mr. Cheney's visit on Tuesday, the vice president presented the pope with a gift that symbolized peace: a crystal dove. Mr. Cheney, who is a Methodist, then met for more than half an hour with Cardinal Angelo Sodano, the Vatican secretary of state.
R. James Nicholson, the American ambassador to the Holy See, said Cardinal Sodano did not revisit the invasion of Iraq but urged greater efforts to solve the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians as ''a key to bringing peace to the region.''
''It was a forward-looking conversation,'' said the ambassador, who took part in the meeting.
Mr. Cheney's visit to Europe was only his second overseas trip during three years in office. He spent the last three days in Italy, largely as a reward to Silvio Berlusconi, the embattled Italian prime minister, who has been one of Washington's staunchest allies in the campaign against terrorism.
But on Tuesday afternoon, the vice president turned his attention toward the work that American forces had done.
On a stop at Aviano Air Base, the largest American military airport in southern Europe, Mr. Cheney thanked about 400 cheering airmen and their families for their service and sacrifices. He also vowed to provide whatever equipment, training and support was needed to continue the fight against terrorism.
Speaking inside a cavernous aircraft hangar and flanked by an Air Force F-16C fighter and an Army UH-60 Black Hawk helicopter, Mr. Cheney said F-16C's from Aviano were flying patrol over Iraq on the night last month when United States forces captured Saddam Hussein.
''America led a mission to make the world safer,'' said Mr. Cheney, who was secretary of defense in the administration of President Bush's father. The vice president made no mention of new questions over the accuracy of prewar intelligence about Iraq's illegal weapons.
Mr. Cheney later honoroed soldiers here from the Army's 173rd Airborne Brigade who had recently returned from duty in Iraq.
On Tuesday, Mr. Cheney also gave an interview to editors and reporters from 10 European newspapers, as part of his goal to reach out to European allies, including those who opposed the war in Iraq. But Mr. Cheney's aides declined to issue a transcript.
