The ''most striking image yet'' from NASA's Mars rovers reveals fine layers within bedrock, suggesting that the rock was formed by sediment swept down by ancient waters, the lead scientist for the mission said Tuesday.
''Wonderful layer-cake structure here,'' said Dr. Steven W. Squyres, a professor of astronomy at Cornell, the Mars mission's principal science investigator. ''It's going to be fascinating beyond words to get up close and personal with these things.''
Dr. Andrew H. Knoll of Harvard, a member of the mission's science team, said the layers could also have formed out of ash from successive volcanic eruptions.
Scientists cannot tell from the photographs alone which explanation is more likely, but other instruments aboard the rover Opportunity should offer more conclusive evidence.
''We should be able to distinguish between those two hypotheses,'' Dr. Knoll said.
Dr. Squyres and Dr. Knoll described the new photographs at a news conference here at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which is running the mission.
The Opportunity landed early on Sunday, and controllers are now turning on equipment and putting the rover to work. Jim Erickson, a mission controller, said Tuesday that the high-speed antenna had been deployed and tested. With it, the rover's transmissions to Earth will be able to pack in 100 times as much data.
Engineers for NASA said they were investigating why one of the Opportunity's heaters would not turn off completely. They said it did not pose a major problem at the moment.
The rover, which was folded to fit in tight confines for the journey to Mars, will next ''stand up,'' lifting upward on a post so it can extend its six wheels. Controllers expect it will be at least another week before the rover is ready to begin driving around the surface and heading toward the bedrock outcrop.
''We are about to embark on what is arguably going to be the coolest geologic field trip in human history,'' Dr. Squyres said.
At first glance, the outcrop looks huge, like the rock formations of Yosemite National Park.
''It's actually really tiny,'' Dr. Squyres said.
The semicircle of rock, part of the rim of the small, shallow crater where the Opportunity landed, is about 30 yards long, but only a foot and a half high at most. The rover, when it gets there, will tower over the rocks.
''The rover drivers, when they first saw this, they went 'yikes!' '' Dr. Squyres said. ''But when they realized the scale of those things, it was not quite the imposing obstacle it appeared to be.''
The scientists also realized how small the layers are, each perhaps half an inch thick. ''So that really places some constraints on what it could be,'' Dr. Squyres said. ''These aren't lava flows.''
The light-colored bedrock is believed to underlie the whole region where the Opportunity landed, known as Meridiani Planum and spanning tens of thousands of square miles. Dr. Knoll said the vast expanse of rock led him to discount the possibility that the rocks formed out of sediment blown in by wind.
Scientists are also interested in the layer of fine-grained, chocolate-colored soil on top of the bedrock. The soil, they believe, contains an iron oxide that often forms in the presence of water.
An instrument that measures infrared light radiated from the rocks and soils will identify minerals in them. If the rocks sat in water for a long time, chemical reactions would change the minerals.
A camera that records microscopic images will be able to see whether the particles in the rocks have been rounded by the flow of water.
The surrounding topography does not argue for either theory. There are no obvious vestiges of volcanoes, and Meridiani Planum is not a basin that could hold water. The landscape, however, may have been far different when the rocks formed, probably billions of years ago.
