A state judge has ruled that Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger violated state campaign finance law by using a $4.5 million bank loan to cover campaign costs in the closing days of the recall election last fall.
In ruling late Monday on a lawsuit, the judge, Loren E. McMaster of Sacramento Superior Court, said the loan violated provisions of Proposition 34, a ballot initiative passed by voters in 2000, which prohibits personal loans of more than $100,000 by candidates to their own campaigns. Judge McMaster issued a temporary injunction barring Mr. Schwarzenegger from raising any money to repay the loan and ordering him to put any money raised for that purpose in an escrow account.
Judge McMaster noted that Mr. Schwarzenegger had borrowed the money from City National Bank of Beverly Hills on his own signature and then used the money to pay last-minute campaign expenses. He said the maneuver avoided the $100,000 limit and thus constituted legalized ''money laundering.''
The judge said that borrowing money before an election and raising money to repay it afterward left voters in the dark about who financed a candidate's campaign.
''The public would not learn who financially contributed to the campaign until after the election,'' the judge wrote, ''when it would be too late to use such information in making the determination for whom a vote would be cast.''
Mr. Schwarzenegger's campaign lawyer, Colleen C. McAndrews, said the campaign had relied on an interpretation of the loan provisions of the finance law by the California Fair Political Practices Commission in 2002. Judge McMaster explicitly stated that the interpretation was wrong.
''We are gratified that the judge held the campaign acted in good faith and in reliance on the F.P.P.C.'s erroneous regulation,'' said Ms. McAndrews, a former member of the campaign regulatory commission.
Ms. McAndrews said that the Schwarzenegger campaign would not appeal the judge's preliminary injunction and that she expected it would stand.
Aides to the governor, a Republican, said he would probably repay the loan from his own bank account.
Democratic and labor activists filed the lawsuit just before the Oct. 7 vote in the recall campaign, seeking an immediate injunction to prevent Mr. Schwarzenegger from using the loan proceeds in the campaign. That effort failed, but Judge McMaster has now agreed with their complaint that the loan violated the spirit and the letter of state campaign finance law, their lawyer said.
''We thought it was important to continue with the case to establish the principle that the $100,000 limit is a real one and not subject to an exception as Schwarzenegger contended,'' said Lowell Finley, a Berkeley lawyer who represented the plaintiffs.
