China said late on Tuesday that avian influenza had been found in fowl in three regions, making it the latest Asian country to confirm cases of the dangerous virus, which has killed at least nine people so far.
The official New China News Agency said lab tests had confirmed that ducks were infected at a farm in Guangxi Province, in the south near the Vietnamese border.
Preliminary tests also showed bird flu among chickens at a household in Hubei Province and among ducks at a household in Hunan Province, both in central China.
All of the Chinese bird cases involve the deadly H5N1 strain of type A flu virus, which has spread among chickens from Japan to Cambodia and has infected a dozen people in Thailand and Vietnam, with many more cases suspected. But the press agency said no human cases had been found in China.
Other countries that have reported the virus in chickens are South Korea, Indonesia and Laos. South Korea has confirmed the same virus in chickens, Taiwan and Pakistan have reported milder strains, and Indonesia and Laos have reported bird flu strains that they are still trying to identify.
Australia and other countries had urged Beijing to acknowledge persistent reports of bird flu in mainland China. Public health experts suspect that the disease may have originated there, because there have been small outbreaks in Hong Kong almost every year since 1997. Hong Kong authorities have attributed those outbreaks to migratory birds that would have crossed mainland China to reach Hong Kong.
The announcement by China coincided with a call by international agencies for donor nations to help pay for Asia's fight to forestall a lethal epidemic in humans.
The presence of the disease in China, with 1.3 billion people and a huge poultry industry, increases the risk that the virus may spread to people. China's insistence until late Tuesday that it had no cases of the disease was reminiscent of its reluctance last winter to acknowledge the first cases of SARS, which were hidden from the world for four months.
The World Health Organization, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Organization for Animal Health appealed for wealthier countries to help pay the enormous costs of compensating farmers for the slaughter of tens of millions of chickens. Some farmers in Vietnam, Thailand and Indonesia have been selling or smuggling out chickens from infected flocks rather than letting government workers or soldiers slaughter them.
''Although it has not happened yet, the so-called bird flu presents a risk of evolving into an efficient and dangerous human pathogen'' that could pass swiftly from person to person, the three agencies said in a statement.
Dr. Shigeru Omi, the W.H.O.'s regional director for the Western Pacific, said at a news conference in Hanoi on Tuesday that an outbreak of H5N1 flu in people could kill millions. In Atlanta, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said they were very concerned and had activated their emergency operations center.
Thailand announced on Tuesday that it would spend $64 million to compensate farmers at close to pre-outbreak market prices for chickens.
But Indonesia said the same day that it would try to vaccinate birds against a swiftly spreading outbreak there, and would allow the sale of meat from infected flocks to help farmers cover their costs.
Officials of the World Health Organization strongly criticized that approach, saying that vaccinated birds could be carriers of the disease even if they did not become ill, and that the movement of infected birds for sale could spread the disease.
Vietnam has been paying as little as 10 cents on the dollar in compensation, and veterinarians there have estimated that farmers quickly sold close to a million chickens to the public rather than lose them.
''Farmers in affected areas urgently need to kill infected and exposed animals and require support to compensate for such losses,'' said Jacques Diouf, the director of the Food and Agriculture Organization. ''The international community has a stake in the success of these efforts, and poorer nations will need help.''
Japan has donated to Vietnam a small shipment of Tamiflu, a costly antiviral drug that may prevent the disease in humans or limit its severity. But Western countries have done little beyond sending a handful of doctors as advisers.
On Tuesday, Thailand reported its second death from bird flu, a 6-year-old boy, while Vietnam confirmed another human case, its seventh. Dr. Bjorn Melgaard, the World Health Organization's chief representative in Thailand, said that while it was impossible to predict when the disease might evolve to easy transmission among people, each additional human case raised the possibility.
Dick Thompson, a spokesman for the health organization, said scientists should be able in four to eight weeks to produce the seed stock that pharmaceutical companies need to start testing, and then mass producing, a vaccine -- a process that could then take several more months.
