FOR now, Super Bowl XXXVIII is strictly hype, a daily talk show. But on Sunday, under the translucent retractable roof of Reliant Stadium, it will finally be a football game. Offense, defense, special teams.
Especially defense -- the deceptive defense of the New England Patriots, the determined defense of the Carolina Panthers.
Those units have increased the responsibility of the two offensive coordinators -- Dan Henning of the Panthers, Charlie Weis of the Patriots -- trying to penetrate them. In the wandering lives of coaches, Henning and Weis worked together in 1998 and 1999 on the Jets' staff under Bill Parcells. Two other members of that staff were Bill Belichick, now the Patriots' coach, and Romeo Crennel, now the coordinator of the defense that Henning must attack.
''I've known Romeo for 25 years and Bill for 20 years,'' Henning said yesterday at Reliant Stadium, referring to Crennel and Belichick, ''but what happens Sunday is not going to be based on what happened 5 years ago or 10 years ago. Each part of the puzzle brings a different set of solutions.''
Henning knows. Now 61, he has been a head coach with the Falcons and the Chargers, and also at Boston College. He molded Joe Theismann and Doug Williams into winning Super Bowl quarterbacks for the Redskins. He has bounced around with the Oilers, the Dolphins, the Lions, the Bills and twice with the Jets before joining the Panthers when John Fox took over a 1-15 team after the 2001 season. And he has now sculptured the virtually unknown Jake Delhomme into a Super Bowl quarterback.
''Romeo and Bill, they take the same people and do different things with them -- where to be before the snap, where to be after the snap,'' Henning said. ''But the real key is their techniques in the pass rush, in the coverages. It's like Sugar Ray Robinson against Mike Tyson. They know how to get off their blocks, how to tackle. The longest run against them this season was 23 yards. But we're going to see who we have and what we can do and then see how it matches up.''
With these two defenses, Henning doesn't foresee much spectacular offense but warned of possible ''big-time plays'' by the two explosive wide receivers, Troy Brown of the Patriots and Steve Smith of the Panthers.
''We're going to worry about our team and what it can do more than we worry about their team,'' Henning said. ''The collective intellects of the guys on the field, that's going to determine the outcome.''
Using different phrases, Weis said the same thing. For all the X's and O's that a coach puts on a chalkboard or in a playbook, how the players respond, mentally and physically, will decide the game.
''The one thing people don't understand,'' Weis said, sitting in the stands at the stadium, ''is that football is very personnel-oriented. You've got to understand your guys' strengths and weaknesses and the other guys' strengths and weaknesses. It all comes back to strengths and weaknesses. That's what John Fox does best. He knows how to prey on your weaknesses and defend against your strengths.''
In another part of Sunday's plot, Weis will be trying to outwit a coach that he describes as one of his closest friends.
''When John was the Giants' coordinator and I was with the Jets, in the off-season I had a place on the Jersey Shore,'' Weis said. ''John and his wife came down to visit me and my wife, and we'd go out. We talked about if one of us ever got a head job, he'd hire the other.''
When Fox took over the Panthers, he sounded out Weis about going to Carolina, but when Weis's 10-year-old son, Charles, didn't want him to go, Weis said he honored his son's wishes.
Weis was interviewed by the Giants and the Bills for their coaching vacancies, but the jobs were filled by others; his commitment to the Patriots' playoff run prevented him from another interview. The Giants named Tom Coughlin, and the Bills hired Mike Mularkey.
''I think it's something the commissioner should address,'' Weis said. ''Either lock everyone down,'' meaning all the head coach aspirants, ''until after the Super Bowl or you get an opportunity to be offered the job during the playoffs.''
Weis has one Super Bowl ring as the Patriots' offensive coordinator, and now he has a chance at a second. At the relatively young age of 47, he deserves the opportunity to be a head coach, especially after having studied under both Bills -- Parcells (with the Giants, the Patriots and the Jets) and Belichick (with the Patriots).
''Bill Parcells was a button-pusher,'' Weis said, smiling. ''He knew how to play to the psyche of every player, every coach. He'd tell me I wasn't working hard. It's 11:30 and he'd say, 'Are you trying to get out of here?' Bill Belichick is the most cerebral coach I've ever seen. He's always one step ahead of everybody.''
Weis hinted there might not be many touchdowns Sunday.
''If I take seven 3's,'' he said, meaning seven field goals, ''that's 21 points. I think that would have a good chance of winning it.''
Dan Henning would take seven 3's, too.
Sports of The Times
