A former insurance executive who orchestrated a fraud that cost Nassau County taxpayers millions of dollars pleaded guilty in federal court on Tuesday to conspiring to bribe a county official and to launder money.
The executive, Albert E. Isernio, and his company, Benefit Plan Administrators, drained $70 million from the county after taking control of its health insurance contracts in the late 1990's. Mr. Isernio, who made millions and spent large sums at casinos, appeared in court on Tuesday in an orange jail uniform; he faces a prison sentence of seven to nine years.
In a droning baritone, Mr. Isernio read a statement that detailed how he had arranged for his company to take over health insurance for the county's employees, and how his company had bribed a high-ranking county official. But Mr. Isernio's voice strained with emotion as he pleaded with Judge Joanna Seybert of United States District Court to allow him to return home before he is sentenced in April.
''I swear to you, April 23 I'll be here early,'' he said. ''I swear, your honor, I'm not running.''
But Judge Seybert rejected his request and sent Mr. Isernio back to jail, saying that he had better begin serving his sentence soon, and that his family could visit him in the Nassau jail.
By pleading guilty, Mr. Isernio does not have to face a trial on a litany of charges that could have gotten him up to 15 years in prison. He had been tried once before on the charges, but a jury failed to reach a verdict in April. Last week, a federal jury found Mr. Isernio guilty of failing to report more than $1 million on his income tax returns.
''It's over,'' said Assistant United States Attorney Joseph Conway, adding that a full jury trial could have lasted two months. ''We get finality. There's no appeal, and if he gets sentenced within the guideline range, everybody goes home.''
Mr. Isernio's guilty plea on Tuesday effectively brought the story of one of Nassau's most notorious political scandals to a close. One deputy county executive, Robert J. McDonald, pleaded guilty in late 2002 to taking $150,000 in bribes, and the scandal tarnished the administration of the county executive at the time, Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican.
Roslynn R. Mauskopf, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, said on Tuesday in a statement that the scandal was ''the largest corruption scheme that Long Island has seen in more than 20 years.'' She said Mr. Isernio was the scheme's architect. According to federal prosecutors, Mr. Isernio and politically connected accomplices began bribing Mr. McDonald in the late 1990's to ensure that Benefit Plan Administrators would secure the contract to take over Nassau's health insurance contracts.
Mr. Isernio and others had contended that switching Nassau's health insurance plan would save big sums, but it actually ended up costing $70 million more than the county would have paid under its existing health benefits plan. Prosecutors said Mr. Isernio's company reaped $12 million from the deal.
