Following are excerpts from speeches by Senator John Kerry and Howard Dean after they placed first and second in the New Hampshire primary on Tuesday, as recorded by The New York Times.
Mr. Kerry
This victory belongs also in a special way to the veterans who marched with us. And they helped -- they helped to lift us up from the lowest points to the point where we are today.
I know that all of you will join me in saying a special thank you to Max Cleland and Jim Rassmann. In the hardest moments of the past month, I depended on the same band of brothers that I depended on some 30 years ago. We're a little older and a little grayer, but I'll tell you this, we still know how to fight for our country.
And if I am president, I pledge -- when I am president -- I pledge that those who wore the uniform of the United States of America will have a voice and a champion in the Oval Office.
Now this campaign goes on to places all over this country. And I ask Democrats everywhere to join us so that we can defeat George W. Bush and the economy of privilege. And so that we can fulfill the ideal of opportunity not just for some but for all Americans.
Dr. Dean
Stand with us to the very end, which is Jan. 20, 2005. For those of you who think that America needs a president who's willing to stand up for what's right, not just what's popular, we are all together again. Stand together, all of us. To those of you who believe the best way to beat George Bush, in fact the only way to beat George Bush, is to stand up to him all the time, not just when it's convenient, not just some of the time, tonight the people of New Hampshire have asked for change, a real change.
We can change America, and we will. We can have jobs again in America, and we will.
We can join every other industrialized nation on the face of the earth and have health insurance for all Americans, and we will.
We can invest in families with small children and have those kids grow up to go to college instead of prison, and we will.
We can demand for our young people a better future, a solution to global warming, getting us off foreign oil by investing in renewable energy, and we will.
We can regain the moral leadership of this country as it held from the end of World War I until the time of the Iraq invasion, by having a foreign policy based on cooperation, not confrontation, and we will.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
