Tonight, when ''Live From Lincoln Center'' broadcasts a concert by the New York Philharmonic on PBS stations across the country, the announcer will not be saying anything about the personal story of the bass-baritone Thomas Quasthoff, who will sing four concert arias by Mozart. Mr. Quasthoff will be introduced as a distinguished artist, a Grammy Award winner and a popular recitalist who also appears regularly with the major orchestras of the world.
But at his request nothing will be said about his disability. As his many admirers know, Mr. Quasthoff was born in Germany in 1959 with abnormally short legs and vestigial arms, a result of his mother's having taken thalidomide when she was pregnant. At the time some doctors, especially in Germany and Britain, prescribed the drug for morning sickness. When his career took off in the late 1980's, Mr. Quasthoff often spoke of his disability in interviews. Now he considers it irrelevant.
''I don't think people come to my concerts because of my disability,'' he said in a recent telephone interview from Germany. ''They come because of the message I want to get through as a singer.''
By any estimation Mr. Quasthoff, who combines a warmly robust voice with keen musicianship and probing interpretive insights, has become an essential vocal artist on the international scene.
Most people attending his concerts already know his story. Tonight thousands of viewers who know nothing about him could tune in to the broadcast (at 8, Eastern time). If performing live on national television represents a career milestone for Mr. Quasthoff, is it also a breakthrough for people with deformities?
Asked if he sees himself as a role model, Mr. Quasthoff said, ''If it's true, it's a nice side effect.'' But the danger of focusing on this, he added, is that he could start to play a role as a representative for the disabled. The only role he wants to play, he said, is that of ''serious artist.''
Mr. Quasthoff has had to be single-minded about singing because at every stage of his career well-meaning people told him to lower his expectations. At 13 he began studying voice and music theory seriously with private teachers. Convinced that a life in music was impossible, he enrolled in law school. He hated it. So he became a popular radio announcer in Hanover and in his spare time sang with a jazz combo.
In 1988, returning to his classical roots, he entered a voice competition in Munich and won first prize. Soon he was thriving as a recitalist and concert singer, but he was told repeatedly that his physical limitations would make work in opera impossible.
In April he broke that barrier as well, singing the role of Don Fernando in Beethoven's ''Fidelio'' in a production in Salzburg, Austria, with Simon Rattle conducting the Berlin Philharmonic. His reviews were splendid.
It should have been clear to opera professionals earlier on that Mr. Quasthoff, a charismatic artist with a ruggedly handsome face, could have a stage career. The drama in opera does not depend on literal realism. If Luciano Pavarotti can portray a starving bohemian poet, then Thomas Quasthoff, working with a sensitive director, can portray Don Fernando, the stately Spanish official in the final scene of ''Fidelio.'' Or Amfortas in Wagner's ''Parsifal,'' the wounded leader of the Knights of the Grail, a role Mr. Quasthoff is to sing at the Vienna State Opera in April.
Though he has had many other offers to sing opera, he has turned them down. ''It's too much time,'' he explained, ''two months minimum per production.'' In addition to his concert work he is a professor for life in the vocal department of the Music Academy at Detmold, Germany, work he takes very seriously. ''I really want my students to have a feeling that I'm there for them,'' he said.
He declined one concert opportunity because he found it tasteless: the Italian conductor Giuseppe Sinopoli had asked him to take part in an open-air concert with the blind crossover tenor sensation Andrea Bocelli. ''I told him, 'Well, I think one disabled artist onstage is definitely enough,' '' Mr. Quasthoff said. ''I mean, we have the Three Tenors, the Three Basses, and now the Two Disabled Guys.''
As to first-time viewers tonight who might be taken aback by his appearance, Mr. Quasthoff said, ''That's their problem.''
What matters to him is that he will be performing with the conductor Riccardo Muti for the first time. (The program will be repeated by the Philharmonic tomorrow, Friday and Saturday nights.) Mr. Quasthoff said he had long wanted to work with him. Told that this renowned Italian maestro has a well-deserved reputation as an utter perfectionist, Mr. Quasthoff said: ''That's wonderful. I'm ready.''
