French government ministers have raised their voices in support of Sanofi-Synthélabo's hostile takeover bid for Aventis. For most of France's modern history, that would have signified powerful political muscle lined up to assure that the deal would go through. But today, it may add up to little more than verbal posturing.
''The French elite still speaks as if it is in charge of industrial affairs, but it no longer has the tools,'' said Élie Cohen, an economist and the director for research at France's National Scientific Research Center. In the last 20 years, Mr. Cohen said, the country has moved from state-led capitalism to market-led capitalism: ''Now, investors decide.''
Even though Aventis estimates that a takeover by Sanofi-Synthélabo could result in the elimination of 10,000 to 12,000 jobs, many of them in France, the French government is clearly in favor of combining the two companies, both major pharmaceutical manufacturers. In what appeared to be a coordinated campaign to press Aventis's management and shareholders to accept a deal, at least three government ministers have publicly supported Sanofi's bid.
Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin told French entrepreneurs at the Senate on Tuesday that ''it is very important in France, but also in Europe, to have the capacity to maintain a few big champions per sector -- world champions who are able to lift a whole economy of small corporations behind them.''
Even the minister of social affairs, François Fillon, whose department would have to deal with the repercussions of large layoffs, said on the French radio station Europe 1 on Monday that he did not think ''that building a European giant is dangerous for employment in the long term.''
The finance minister, Francis Mer, repeated earlier comments that France and Europe needed the merger to fend off American pharmaceutical giants that might otherwise buy up the best of Europe's drug companies.
''It is clear that in our global economy,'' Mr. Mer said, ''we need strong players at the global level, and this implies the regrouping of forces between a certain number of actors who share the same values, the same culture and who are therefore capable together to get quickly the benefits that stem from their getting closer.''
But Mr. Mer also emphasized that the merger was a private matter and that the government would not get involved. A spokesman in his office added that the government lacked the means to interfere.
For many people, the talk of champions recalled France's ''dirigiste'' days, when the government worked closely with the country's business elite to manage French industry -- a tendency that dated back to the 17th century, when Louis XIV's comptroller general, Jean Baptiste Colbert, created government monopolies and introduced other forms of intervention to stabilize the economy.
''Colbertism,'' as the interventionist policy became known, continued through revolutions and restorations and republics, through the socialist tendencies of the late 19th and early 20th centuries and the wave of nationalizations after World War II. More recently, France has been criticized for perpetuating the government's role through a series of corporate bailouts. Last year, the government agreed to spend 3.2 billion euros ($4 billion) to rescue the heavily indebted railcar maker Alstom.
The high-profile friendship between President Jacques Chirac and the chief executive of Sanofi-Synthélabo, Jean-François Dehecq, has added to the perception that the government is playing a role in the takeover bid. It may well turn out that the bid was discussed at high levels before it was announced. But analysts argue that integration into the European Union and the privatizations of the last 20 years have left France a different place, where Colbertism is more a rhetorical habit than a practical force.
France radically restructured many declining industries in the 1990's, and government subsidies and other aid to ailing businesses peaked in 1997. Since then, analysts say, government aid has fallen sharply, and today is no higher relative to the size of the economy than in many of France's European neighbors. Meanwhile, Paris no longer has the final say on major mergers here: any deal that would create an entity with sales of more than 500 million euros requires approval from the European Union.
Mr. Cohen cited several recent examples in which the French government tried and failed to influence a merger deal to promote the national interest. The French treasury backed a three-way combination of the major French banks BNP, Paribas and Société Générale, but only BNP and Paribas wound up merging. The government opposed the purchase of the aluminum maker Pechiney by a Canadian rival, Alcan, but the deal went through anyway.
Foreigners now hold about 40 percent of the equity in companies listed on France's national stock exchange. In fact, France's relatively liberal policies have made it a magnet for investors: foreign direct investment in 2002, the latest year for which figures are available, totaled $52 billion -- only $1 billion less than China received that year.
Mr. Cohen argued that the French government was now no more protective of its major companies than were other developed nations. For example, Italy blocked a recent bid by Électricité de France to acquire the Italian power company Montedison. And Europeans point to the Bush administration's imposition of protective steel tariffs as evidence that even the United States intervenes in the economy when it thinks jobs are at stake.
That is not to say that Paris will not play a role when it can. Government subsidies have so far kept the French computer maker Groupe Bull out of bankruptcy, though the subsidies have been challenged by the European Union and most people think that the company will eventually disappear.
French pride is also at stake in keeping the country's drug-industry jewels from disappearing into foreign pockets. The government's public support of Sanofi-Synthélabo's bid may yet persuade some major French shareholders of Aventis to accept it. But gone are the days when backroom deals were brokered by France's leading politicians, economists here say.
''You have a desperate effort by senior civil servants to maintain some control, but they no longer have the power,'' said Robert Boyer, a senior French economist. ''Now it is investors, Brussels and the World Trade Organization who decide.''
