Fair Warning, Gentlemen: Ms. Thurman Up for Bid
Thank heavens for the Wright brothers. Just in from El Lay, where she had attended the Golden Globes on Sunday night, UMA THURMAN was the host on Monday night for a charity auction at Christie's at Rockefeller Center.
Ms. Thurman, a reed in a tight black dress, was reluctant to talk about anything other than the charity called Room to Grow, which helps needy mothers with small children.
But her new boyfriend, ANDRE BALAZS, the hotelier, was chattier.
You still have your St. Bart's tan, our Boldface correspondent noted. Mr. Balazs smiled warmly. ''St. Bart's, Miami, L.A.,'' he said. ''I am not sure from where.''
Upstairs from Christie's gallery, the auction beckoned. DANNY MEYER donated a table for 10 at Tabla; GIORGIO ARMANI offered a fashion trip to Milan; CARLY SIMON offered to write a song for the highest bidder; an exclusive Harlem concert was contributed by WYNTON MARSALIS; and KEN BURNS offered to be a personal tour guide to the Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg. The prize of the evening, however, was a date with Ms. Thurman, as her guest at the premiere of ''Kill Bill: Volume 2,'' and the subsequent bacchanalia. As a memento, the winner gets the well-used movie-prop samurai sword (no mention of whether prop blood is included).
The bidding was spirited for Ms. Thurman's company, with Mr. Balazs performing the duties of a gallant boyfriend. He bid $55,000.
But a cool-it signal from Ms. Thurman across the room allowed WILLIAM F. REILLY, a Thurman family friend, to win with a $60,000 bid. Ms. Thurman ceremonially knighted Mr. Reilly with the samurai sword. ''I am knighting you the most generous man of the evening,'' said Ms. Thurman and then gave Mr. Reilly a kiss. He left with all his limbs.
Uncle Junior Thinks Of G-Men and Brylcreem
DOMINIC CHIANESE, who plays Uncle Junior on ''The Sopranos,'' must need witness protection in order to talk about the show's new season. Last week, the white-goateed Mr. Chianese wore a gray pin-striped suit, a gray shirt and no tie at Capitale, a Corinthian-columned bank designed by Stanford White that is now a restaurant in Little Italy.
Mr. Chianese was helping with the Starlight Children's Foundation, a charity that provides entertainment for critically ill youngsters.
What about rumors that -- like JOE PANTOLIANO's Ralph Cifaretto -- Uncle Junior will be joining the big social club in the sky, our Boldface correspondent asked?
Mr. Chianese scowled. ''I don't know anything about the new season,'' he said. ''I can't talk about it.'' But a few minutes later, he said, whomever DAVID CHASE, the writer and creator of the series, wants to kill, he'll kill. ''There's no way to talk him out of it,'' Mr. Chianese acknowledged. ''If he takes you out to dinner,'' he added, ''you're in trouble.''
What about new members of the cast, like ROBERT LOGGIA, who resembles Mr. Chianese, and FRANK VINCENT, also known as FRANK VINCENT GATTUSO, our correspondent pressed?
''All I can say is we get the top guys,'' Mr. Chianese said. Then he became more talkative. One day, Mr. Chianese says, he's at the racetrack when suddenly ''two very tall guys'' come over to him and say, ''We want to take a picture with you, Uncle Junior.''
Now Mr. Chianese takes umbrage at this unnecessary blurring of art and real life, and protests that his name is Dominic.
All right, the tall guys say, we want to take a picture with you, Dominic.
The photograph is snapped and a tall guy brandishes a badge that says Federal Marshal. Mr. Chianese breaks character and exclaims, ''They were the real Feds!''
The marshals assure Mr. Chianese that everything is in order, as long as he says a signature ''Sopranos'' line. So Mr. Chianese says the line, the G-men laugh, and leave.
So what was the line, our correspondent asked?
Mr. Chianese quickly reviewed the terms of the Motion Picture Association of America's system for rating films and said: ''The Feds are on my tail so much that I can taste Brylcreem.''
with Kari Haskell and Joe Brescia
Boldface Names
