Gen. Wesley K. Clark was exuberant on Tuesday night as he took the stage here after battling to a virtual tie for third place in the New Hampshire primary.
It was not exactly the result the campaign had hoped for when it decided to forgo Iowa and concentrate his early efforts on New Hampshire. But staff members said it was enough to carry the campaign into the South.
''Never underestimate what a determined soldier can accomplish when he's fighting for his country,'' General Clark told several hundred supporters.
With a broad grin and eyes red from lack of sleep, he leaned over the platform, nearly to the point of falling off, to swap high-fives with supporters.
''A lot of people told me not to get into this race,'' he said. ''They told me I should leave politics to the politicians. They said I was just a soldier from down South. But if there's one thing I learned from my 34 years in the United States Army, it is this: Real leadership comes from deciding and doing, not talking and debating.''
The general did not quit campaigning until the last minute. Leaving a polling place in Manchester just before 7 p.m. on Tuesday, as the polls there were about to close, he made a last-minute decision to drive to nearby Derry, where the polls remained open an hour later.
After his 24-minute address at the post-election rally, which was interrupted frequently by chants of ''All patriot, no act,'' General Clark made a quick departure for Oklahoma, one of seven states holding primaries next Tuesday.
Since shortly after his campaign began in mid-September, General Clark, who grew up in Arkansas, maintained that the Feb. 3 states would play a bigger role in his campaign's fate than New Hampshire.
But the campaign faced a tougher-than-expected fight from Senator John Edwards, who finished a surprising second in Iowa and was tied for third with General Clark in New Hampshire.
In focusing on New Hampshire, General Clark had the state nearly to himself for almost two months. He emphasized his experience as a military commander and vowed to give Washington a ''higher standard of leadership.''
General Clark greeted voters on Tuesday from when the polls opened in Manchester until they closed in Derry, standing in 10-degree temperatures and operating on only a few hours of sleep after a three-hour, early morning drive from Dixville Notch, N.H., where voters traditionally cast their ballots just after midnight.
And he remained upbeat, even as he stood in the enveloping darkness in a school parking lot, wearing an Army-issue trench coat, as the temperature dipped.
''When you meet people like this and talk to the people of New Hampshire, it is the most exhilarating thing in the world,'' he said. ''I'm looking forward to the next week.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
