Minnesota-Duluth has had a memorable month. Heading into a weekend off before the last 10 games of the regular season, the Bulldogs (17-8-2) are ranked sixth in the U.S. College Hockey Online poll; they share first place in the Western Collegiate Hockey Association with a 13-5-0 record; they went 8-0-0 in January; their eight-game winning streak is the best in Division I; and forward Junior Lessard is among the leading scorers in Division I.
But Lessard has still not shaken the memory of a sunny, windy day in August, when he nearly drowned in Lake Superior off Park Point in downtown Duluth.
''I seriously saw everything going down the drain -- my family, my hockey, my school, my career,'' Lessard said by telephone from Duluth. ''And I was just telling myself not to think about it, I was going to get out of it. But you just panic. We were yelling for help, we were screaming for help, but the waves were so loud we couldn't be heard.''
On Aug. 17, Lessard, his teammate Evan Schwab and their girlfriends were caught in a rip current that pulled them away from the shore.
''At the time, we didn't know you had to swim parallel to the shore to get out of that,'' Lessard said. ''I was pretty exhausted. Evan made it to shore all right, but me and the other two girls were just stuck right in that.''
David Israel, a Lake Superior College physiology instructor who was at the beach with his family, used a boogie board, a wetsuit and swim fins to rescue them.
''The guy came to get the two girls first because he knew I could hold on a little longer,'' said Lessard, who considers himself a ''pretty good'' swimmer.
''When he finally got me, we had been fighting the water for almost 10 minutes, really, really hard,'' he said. ''So I was pretty exhausted. I had to go to the hospital for five, six hours, and while I was there, two or three other people came in because they had gone through the same thing I did.''
Lessard was given fluid intravenously at St. Mary's Medical Center and released. Israel aided in the rescue of three other swimmers. A 21-year-old man drowned in the rough waters, The Duluth News-Tribune of Aug. 19 reported.
Lessard, a senior from St.-Joseph-de-Beauce, Quebec, is tied for third in the nation with 36 points, one fewer than he scored all last season, and he says he looks at life -- and hockey -- differently now.
''I've been really thankful,'' Lessard said. ''Before, when I'd go to practice, you know, maybe you've had a bad day, you're crabby, you don't feel like practicing. Now, you're happy to be there, just happy to be alive.''
HOCKEY EAST  Top-10 Teams Meet
New Hampshire leaves the rough and tumble of the state's primary elections to travel to Alfond Arena in Orono, Me., where fourth-ranked Maine awaits the No. 8 Wildcats.
They trail second-ranked Boston College in Hockey East, Maine by 5 points and New Hampshire by 7.
New Hampshire (15-7-3, 7-3-3) has won four games in a row, outscoring their opponents in that span by 22-4. Also in that stretch, goaltender Mike Ayers had back-to-back shutouts, against Dartmouth and Brown.
Maine (17-6-1, 9-4-1) has stumbled lately, losing two of its last three. The losses were 1-0 shutouts, to Boston University and Massachusetts a week apart.
WOMEN  Shortage of Olympians
Minnesota (17-2-1), ranked third in the U.S. College Hockey Online poll, is running low on Olympians. Of the three Gophers who competed for the United States national team in the 2002 Salt Lake Games, only the sophomore forward Krissy Wendell remains active. Lyndsay Wall, a freshman defender, has been declared academically ineligible for the remainder of the season; earlier the sophomore forward Natalie Darwitz sustained a season-ending elbow injury.
Wendell had a goal and an assist in Minnesota's 3-2 victory over Minnesota State on Saturday. The co-captain Kelsey Bills also scored; it was her first game back after missing 10 games because of an ankle fracture.
The next night, Minnesota State turned the tables with a 3-2 victory in overtime.
Dartmouth (14-1-2), after defeating Cornell by 4-2 and Colgate by 5-0, took over the top ranking in the poll, dropping Minnesota to third, behind Harvard (13-1-1)
Slap Shots
CAPTAINS INJURED -- Second-ranked Boston College will be without its captain, Ben Eaves, for four to six weeks. A senior forward, Eaves fractured a kneecap Jan. 9 in a game against Merrimack.
Minnesota's captain, Grant Potulny, injured a shoulder in Saturday's 2-1 victory over North Dakota and will be out until early March, the team announced Monday.
CORNELL COACH DISCIPLINED -- Cornell Coach Mike Schafer sat out Friday's game because of a one-game suspension for an invective-laden tirade against the officials after a 2-0 loss to Rensselaer. With the assistant coaches Scott Garrow and Brent Brekke behind the bench, Cornell beat Vermont, 2-0. When Schafer returned the next night, Cornell lost to Dartmouth, 2-1. The Big Red will face Colgate this weekend. The Raiders, picked by Eastern College Athletic Conference coaches to finish eighth, are tied for second with Dartmouth in the conference with 16 points (8-4-0).
COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
