By the end of the night, Lawrence Frank looked a few inches taller and a few years older.
Frank, the shortest and youngest coach in the N.B.A. at 5 feet 8 inches and 33 years old, did not take long to grow into his new position. He left the Wachovia Center on Tuesday night with a game ball, a 94-76 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers and perhaps a case of laryngitis.
The Nets gave Frank a thunderous welcome, taking control of his inaugural game as head coach in the opening minutes. Frank refused to lean back and enjoy it. Even in the fourth quarter, he was yelling instructions and applauding every play. He tried taking his designated spot on the bench, but he could not sit still, so he paced away the final seconds.
Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, promised that Monday's coaching change -- Byron Scott for Frank -- would spike the team's energy level. On cue, the Nets forced 10 turnovers in the first 10 minutes, took a 43-16 lead and opened it up from there. By the end, the Nets' numbers were dizzying -- 29 assists, 7 turnovers and 6 alley-oops. The home crowd eventually got tired of booing.
''This is the farthest thing from being about me,'' Frank said. ''This was the first step to playing Nets basketball again. We are going to be relentless, we're going to contest every shot and we're going to rebound.''
Because Scott was in New Jersey watching his daughter play for Livingston High School, he was unable to tune in to the Nets' game until the second half. If he caught a glimpse of their performance, he might have seen all the proof necessary to show that the team had stopped playing for him.
''Change always fires people up,'' Lucious Harris said. ''We wanted to start it off right. We fed off the change and wanted to win this game.''
Frank's debut was perfectly timed. Not only have the 76ers lost seven of nine games, they were also missing Allen Iverson and Derrick Coleman. After one early misplay, a discouraged Glenn Robinson sat down in the paint and did not get up for nearly 10 seconds. Moments later, an errant 76ers pass sailed over Frank's head.
He did not seem to notice. Frank was busy watching Richard Jefferson score 30 points with four 3-pointers and a series of picturesque dunks. Frank also successfully managed an underachieving bench, as Aaron Williams scored 11 points, Rodney Rogers finished with 10 and Zoran Planinic ran the offense for an extended period.
''You can say we came out so happy because Coach Scott was gone, but that's not what happened,'' Jefferson said. ''It was more about this team buckling down.''
Jason Kidd started the game by hitting his first three 3-pointers and finished it relaxing on the bench. Frank thought briefly about reinserting Kidd in the fourth quarter while the Nets had a 20-point lead, but he decided against it after a brief conversation with Kidd at the scorer's table. It might have been his only rookie moment.
Although Kidd is obviously enamored with the new coach and rejuvenated by the change -- he presented Frank with the game ball on behalf of the team -- Kidd acknowledges that growing pains will come later. Kidd still maintains that if the Nets do not find some degree of consistency in the next couple of weeks, more changes could be in store by the trading deadline on Feb. 19.
''This is like the courting process,'' he said. ''You're courting your girlfriend or future wife, and then, when there's a bump in the road, that's when you find out if it's going to work or not. The first couple weeks are going to be fine, and then if there is a point where we struggle, how do we handle that?''
Frank said: ''This is the start of a new season for everybody. You have to start 0-0.''
Or in his case, 1-0, undefeated with authority.
REBOUNDS
ROD THORN, the Nets' president, did not attend the game because of organizational meetings in New Jersey. Thorn will assume the duties of LOU LAMORIELLO, who resigned as the Nets' chief executive but will remain in the same capacity with the Devils. The Nets need to replace the executive vice president CHRIS MODRZYNSKI, who also resigned but will stay on with the Devils.
PRO BASKETBALL
