As a center, he delivers the ball, but Super Bowl media day is a time for role reversals and more.
New England's Dan Koppen knew what to do when a correspondent from ''The Tonight Show,'' Mitch Fatel, squatted to snap the ball to him on Tuesday at Reliant Stadium. ''I'm not putting my hands under there,'' Koppen said. ''Let's do a shotgun.''
Fatel insisted; Koppen politely refused. Finally, Fatel snapped the ball to Koppen, who stood a few yards behind him. Koppen posed like a quarterback.
All around him laughed.
Another reporter later asked Koppen what that was all about. ''I don't know,'' Koppen said, chuckling. ''But it's going to be on 'The Tonight Show,' and that's not bad for a kid from Pennsylvania.''
Not bad for a rookie, either.
For both New England and Carolina, the path to Super Bowl XXXVIII was full of hefty contributions from rookies. Both teams have two rookie starters: Koppen and safety Eugene Wilson for the Patriots, offensive tackle Jordan Gross and cornerback Ricky Manning Jr. for the Panthers. Several other rookies found their way into the limelight this season, including Patriots kick returner Bethel Johnson, who scored game-swinging touchdowns, and Panthers defensive tackle Kindal Moorehead, who was a steady addition to a stout line.
Not long ago, N.F.L. coaches were reluctant to give rookies playing time, particularly in key games. There was little need because most teams were stocked with veterans and plenty of depth.
But the salary cap and free agency have created constant roster turnover in recent years. Rookies are being pushed more to the forefront. And New England and Carolina are here, in part, because they embraced their rookies, found ways to fully use them and watched them flourish.
The majority of rookies on both teams have played like veterans. They created a role for themselves and never looked backward. They maintained perspective. They learned on the run. They made most of their mistakes in practice and did not repeat them in games. They were coachable. They followed strong veteran leadership. They met high expectations.
They exuded confidence.
Manning strolled through media day with his jersey sleeves tucked under, fresh from a startling three-interception performance in the National Football Conference championship game.
''Got to show these guns, baby,'' he said of his muscular arms. ''It's just my personality. I expect to win my battles and be the best. And when things go wrong, I've got a short memory.''
Wilson remembers how he became a starter a day after New England's 31-0 opening loss at Buffalo.
''It was a usual Monday and they called me into the office,'' Wilson said. ''They told me I would be switching from cornerback to safety and that I would be starting. I had played cornerback since Pop Warner league. I simply saw it as an opportunity to get on the field and I've been holding it down ever since.''
The Patriots loved his athleticism, ball skills, that he was effective in zone and man coverage and that he was a physical player. Wilson rewarded them by tying for the league lead in interceptions made by rookies with four and helped his team lead the league in interceptions with 29. Another Patriots rookie, cornerback Asante Samuel, played in every game this season and made one start and two interceptions.
''Early in my coaching career I was one of those coaches who didn't trust rookies,'' Romeo Crennel, New England's defensive coordinator, said. ''Quickly I learned that if you don't play rookies right away, you are basically developing them for someone else because in four years or so, they are free agents and might be with another team that reaps the benefits.''
Dan Klecko, a New England rookie defensive lineman, said he had won more games in New England (16) than he won in four years at Temple. Klecko said that for him and this game's other rookies, success came in part because they did not ''get caught up in N.F.L. off-the-field life'' and ''just kept doing what got them here, only better.''
Gross acknowledged that it was a long way from Fruitland, Idaho, his hometown, to the N.F.L. and to Charlotte, N.C.
''My start was a little different because they told me in May in mini-camp that I was going to be a starter,'' Gross said. ''We had some success, it snowballed and the dream of the Super Bowl and this day became a reality. It's a long, long season, I can't lie. But what you learn is you aren't as bad as you think you are, you aren't as good as you think you are, and you realize you can sink or swim. We're swimming.''
Johnson said he hated returning kicks at Texas A&amp;M because ''most of the guys out there blocking weren't interested in doing that and you could get killed.''
But with the Patriots he found zealous return-team blockers and made the most of them with possibly his signature play of the season: a 92-yard kickoff return for a touchdown in New England's victory at Indianapolis in November. Johnson also made five starts at receiver, led the American Football Conference in kickoff-return average (28.2 yards) and added three special teams tackles.
Colin Branch, Carolina's rookie special teams ace, said: ''Any rookie that says he wasn't a little intimidated the first time he stepped on an N.F.L. field against guys who have been in the league 10 to 14 years isn't telling the truth. And to be a starter right off the bat, that's incredible. You learn to roll with it. Your maturity is on a fast track.''
Moorehead, Carolina's robust rookie, became involved in football in ninth grade only when a schoolmate told him he was scared and dared him to play. He wove a hardened trail to Super Bowl XXXVIII.
''I grew up in Memphis, and times were tough for us back then,'' Moorehead said. ''There were nights I went to bed hungry, times there was nothing for Christmas. I used to rake leaves and pump gas just to get money to buy something to eat. I had to wait until the second day of the draft to get into the N.F.L. But what's an extra day for a rookie like me to get on a ride like this and wind up here where every football player dreams to be?''
PRO FOOTBALL
