The Nassau County executive denied on Tuesday that his administration had covered up a complaint from a county worker that she had been sexually assaulted by her boss, a former high-ranking official at the center of charges of improper spending in the county's economic development agencies.
''Sexual misconduct has not and will never be tolerated in my administration,'' the county executive, Thomas R. Suozzi, said at a news conference here. Speaking angrily, he called charges of a cover-up ''absolutely untrue and absolutely absurd.''
County officials investigated the case carefully and settled it confidentially in keeping with the woman's wishes, said Mr. Suozzi, a Democrat.
He quoted an e-mail message from the woman's mother thanking the county for resolving things.
On Monday the county Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter Schmitt, accused the Democratic county administration of a cover-up. He said that a former Suozzi deputy, Peter Sylver, had been accused of repeated sexual misconduct by a woman who had been his executive assistant.
Mr. Schmitt also charged that when the assistant rejected another advance, Mr. Sylver fired her, but that other officials promoted her to a higher-paying job in another department, with a confidential agreement that she would not pursue her case.
Although Mr. Schmitt said his charges were based on what the woman had told his staff, she declined to talk publicly when called to the witness stand in a legislative hearing on irregularities in the agencies that Mr. Sylver supervised.
Mr. Sylver resigned as deputy county executive last month amid questions over thousands of dollars in charges he made on a county credit card that was obtained by what auditors say was a falsified application.
Mr. Sylver's lawyer, Stephen Worth, said: ''The allegations of sexual assault are absurd and untrue and politically motivated. Ordinarily one would expect a victim to seek aid at a police station or district attorney's office, not at the minority office of the Legislature.''
The Republicans said that they turned over their information on the woman's case to the county district attorney's office for investigation.
The Legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, a Democrat, sent her own request for an investigation.
Some other issues in the operation of Mr. Sylver's former department have already been referred to the prosecutors.
''I take any allegations of sexual misconduct very seriously,'' Mr. Suozzi said. As soon as he heard about the woman's complaint last fall, he said, he told the county's personnel officials to follow the rules, saying: ''Follow the letter of the law. Dot every 'i,' cross every 't','' he said.
Mr. Suozzi accused Mr. Schmitt of defaming his administration and exploiting the woman.
''Mr. Schmitt and the members of his delegation crossed the line,'' Mr. Suozzi said. Their action ''violates all bounds of common decency,'' he said, and ''subjected her to unfair media attention and distress.''
He said: ''Shame on you, Mr. Schmitt. If you want me, bring it on. But leave this young woman alone.''
But Mr. Schmitt held his own news conference and did not back down.
''What we want to know is what did the county executive know, and when did he know it?'' Mr. Schmitt said. He said that county officials should have referred the matter to investigators right away.
But Mr. Suozzi said that the county's review did not find a pattern of complaints that would warrant further action. Such cases can be addressed several ways, including through formal discrimination complaints, lawsuits and criminal complaints.
The county's personnel staff follows a detailed manual that outlines those possibilities to workers with complaints and offers to help them in whatever course they choose, he said. That policy was followed in this case as well, he said.
