Despite uncertainties about how NASA will comply with some requirements for returning the shuttle fleet to space, officials of the agency said Tuesday that they were making enough progress to stick to a tentative launching date of September or October.
Michael C. Kostelnik, the agency's deputy associate administrator for the shuttle and space station programs, said engineers with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration were performing extensive work in redesigning shuttle systems and procedures to comply with recommendations of the board that investigated the Columbia accident.
Work is progressing in areas like redesigning the fuel tank to prevent it from shedding debris at liftoff and techniques to repair damage in space, but those efforts take time, officials said.
''We'd like to be further along, given a target in September,'' Mr. Kostelnik said. ''But we are still progressing.''
Last week, an advisory panel appointed by NASA said in an interim report that the agency was making uneven progress in complying with 15 recommendations that must be met before shuttles fly again. The panel, whose chairmen are two retired astronauts, Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, said that many details for complying with the recommendations had not been worked out and that the progress being made ''should not be mistaken for accomplishment.''
Mr. Kostelnik said that much of the planning for modifications should be completed in a couple of months and that the agency should have some solid answers on what it would do, and when, by March or April.
''A lot of people are impatient to know where we are,'' he said about a fall launching. ''Right now, there is not a showstopper that says we can't get there.''
William F. Readdy, associate administrator for spaceflight, said that the time since the loss of the Columbia and its crew on Feb. 1 had been difficult for the agency, but that it had learned from its mistakes.
''It's been a tough year, it's been a hard year, a year of lessons,'' Mr. Readdy said. ''We're about fixing the problems right now and returning to flying safely again.''
When the next shuttle does take off, he added, ''that will be the safest mission we have ever flown.''
Mr. Readdy said NASA was in the midst of extensive changes in light of President Bush's charge to retire the shuttle by 2010 and develop new vehicles to take humans to the Moon and, later, Mars. The shuttle Service Life Extension Program, which had been developing ways to keep the shuttles flying until 2020, is due for extensive modification that will de-emphasize long-term investments that may not be needed now, officials said.
