With a tableau of his fellow Vietnam veterans mustered on stage, Senator John Kerry strode into an overstuffed hotel ballroom here on Tuesday night, saluted 1,000 of his loyal followers, whooped in triumph and called on ''Democrats everywhere'' to join his march to the White House.
''I love New Hampshire,'' he shouted, his voice breaking, as perhaps it should for a man who was down 20 percentage points in the polls here as recently as three weeks ago, before his upset victory in Iowa nine days ago.
''And I love Iowa, too,'' he said. ''And I hope with your help to have the blessings and the opportunity to love a lot of other states in the days to come.''
Mr. Kerry, the decorated Navy skipper turned antiwar leader turned career politician, reached back into his past for support in his drive to victory in Iowa and New Hampshire, relying on hundreds of fellow veterans -- from World War II and Korea and the Persian Gulf war, not just Vietnam -- to make tens of thousands of phone calls to other war veterans.
Together, this veterans brigade mobilized a constituency that has rarely rallied behind a Democrat or any other single candidate en masse. In the days to come, Kerry advisers say, members of this brigade will be telling their stories, and the candidate's, in speeches and phone calls to the many veterans and their dependents who vote in the seven states with primaries or caucuses on Feb. 3: Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
On Tuesday night, Mr. Kerry thanked those aging warriors ''who marched with us and lifted us up from the lowest points to where we stand tonight.''
''In the hardest moments of the past month, I depended on the same band of brothers that I depended on more than 30 years ago,'' he said, as his graying and wrinkled but jubilant swift-boat crew mates looked on.
''We're a little older, and a little grayer, but I'll tell you this: we still know how to fight for our country,'' Mr. Kerry said.
A few feet away, former Senator Max Cleland, a triple amputee from a grenade attack in Vietnam, raised his hand in exultation.
''And if I am president,'' Mr. Kerry said, teasing his raucous crowd.
''When! When!'' they thundered again and again.
''When I am president,'' he said, ''I pledge that those who wore the uniform of the United States of America will have a voice and a champion in the Oval Office.''
This was a martial-sounding speech from a Democrat whose rationale for his own electability -- that he is best prepared to withstand an expected assault on his patriotism by Republicans in a general election -- has always begun with and come back to his service in Vietnam.
''You stayed the course here in New Hampshire,'' he said to his foot soldiers. ''And because of you, this has been a successful and a happy campaign. And I make this pledge to you tonight: I have spent my whole life fighting for what I think is right and against powerful interests. And I have only just begun to fight.''
''Bring it on!'' they thundered, again and again.
Mr. Kerry called on ''Democrats everywhere'' to ''enlist with us, march with us across this land, and demand a government that's on your side again.''
''Stand with us,'' he boomed, ''and we will give American back its truth as a country where freedom really rings, a country of equal rights and civil liberties where the attorney general is not named John Ashcroft.''
Behind him, a mosaic of supporters clapped, some holding signs saying ''Women for Kerry'' or ''Enviros for Kerry.'' For a moment, the candidate himself hinted at the more diverse battlegrounds to come in the next round of contests on Feb. 3.
''George Bush, who promised to be a uniter, has become the great divider,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''We believe in a country where everyone can hope and strive and move ahead, no matter where you come from, who you are, or what the color of your skin.''
Finally, Mr. Kerry thanked his wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, ''my amazing, graceful, and unbelievable partner in this effort,'' as she stood alongside him in a black suit and a red and orange scarf, looking almost subdued by the adulation from the crowd.
Ms. Heinz Kerry was laughing soon after, though, as she told CNN how she had informed her husband that the networks were declaring him the winner in New Hampshire while he was showering in their hotel near the Manchester airport.
She had told him of his victory in the Iowa caucuses while he was shaving, Ms. Heinz Kerry said, laughing. ''It seems to be a bathroom event.''
While his Democratic rivals pick and choose where to make a stand, or continue to mull their next moves, Mr. Kerry, riding his second straight big victory, is embarking on a national campaign. By the time he wakes up Wednesday at his home in Boston, aides say, his television commercials will be showing in all seven states on Feb. 3.
''It's expensive, but -- while you never have enough money -- our fund-raisers are saying we've had a lot of momentum out of Iowa, we're hoping for very good momentum out of tonight, and his profile is, he can play in any of these states,'' said Steve Elmendorf, Mr. Kerry's deputy campaign manager, who was until last week Representative Richard A. Gephardt's communications director.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
