This was once the portal to the French Empire on the African continent.
From here, Paris administered the vast territory known as Afrique Occidentale Française, stretching east across the arid savannas to what is now Chad and south along the lush coast to the present-day Congo Republic.
Downtown Dakar bears the 19th-century French stamp, from the shuttered windows of its colonial-era buildings to its perennially jammed main commercial street, named after Georges Pompidou. Senegalese men once fought in the French military. The Dakaroise were once French citizens by birth.
Even after independence, in 1960, the French stayed on, pouring aid, installing bureaucrats in virtually every important government ministry, maintaining a military base here with a view of the Atlantic. French companies still run Dakar's telephone company and water service. From the Peugeots on the street to the Pouilly Fumés on the hypermarché shelves, a quarter of all imports to Senegal come from France; 20,000 French citizens live here.
With the advent of the campaign against terrorism, though, things began to change. Africa once again figured in Washington's strategic thinking, and there was something to be gained for an overwhelmingly Muslim country by cozying up to the Americans and, not coincidentally, threatening the French with a loss of influence.
These days, because of a swirl of additional circumstances ranging from a drop in French foreign aid to bitterness over French immigration policy to the power of American hip-hop to a variety of slights and perceived slights, Senegal is marching headlong into the arms of a new empire run out of Washington.
This is by no means a line in the sand, ending French influence here. It's more as if the dunes are shifting, slowly but perceptibly. France remains the biggest donor and trade partner, but Senegal's relations with the United States have already created some Paris-Dakar frisson.
Publicly, both sides say all is well. Africa-watchers are fond of likening it to a difficult moment in the life of an old couple, a love-hate dialectic born of an intimate familiarity.
''It's a period of friction,'' said Mamadou Diouf, a historian at the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor and Senegalese by origin, ''where two partners are trying to adjust to a new moment.''
The ''moment'' that Mr. Diouf refers to has as much to do with the global primacy of American power as the diminution of French power in the shadow of a united Europe. Complicating matters, just as the former colonies on the continent still need France, France still needs its former colonies: French influence in Africa allows it to punch above its weight in the world.
Influence, of course, comes at a price. And the price of supporting a swath of destitute countries in Africa has lately proved to be too much. French aid to its former colonies has plummeted. In Senegal alone, the number of French ''technical experts'' assigned to work in government ministries has fallen to 124 in 2003 from 750 a decade ago.
The signs of shift are small and subtle, based as much on assumptions and perceptions as anything else. Among ordinary Senegalese, the resentment against all things French is based on the one thing they know best: the difficulties of getting a visa to study or work in France. (They have not had as much experience with the American immigration bureaucracy.)
For strivers, New York is now the promised land. For the elite, a degree from Harvard is more fashionable than one from the the Sorbonne. The cabinet of President Abdoulaye Wade is sprinkled with people who have studied or worked in the States. English is now de rigeur. And ardor for all things American is exploited by marketers: ads for American Cola (endorsed by a Senegalese wrestler who calls himself Tyson) and Houston brand cigarettes plaster Dakar.
Mr. Wade's government has unabashedly sought to strengthen ties with Washington in recent years. Senegal has vowed to fight against terrorism. It has signed an agreement, sought by the Bush administration, promising to exempt American citizens from prosecution by the International Criminal Court. It has kept quiet on the war in Iraq.
An African diplomat said he sensed ''an openness to the world outside the Francophone world'' since Mr. Wade's election in 2000, and particularly since the Sept. 11 attacks. ''I think Wade is playing that quite intelligently'' the diplomat said. ''He's very shrewd with the U.S. in particular. He realizes it's the only way to diminish the influence of France.''
A French diplomat, speaking on condition of anonymity, said his country was hardly threatened by Dakar's efforts to make new friends.
''We have long regretted that the United States has done so little for the African continent, and we rejoice, seeing that that great country is trying to turn its words into deeds,'' the diplomat said. Feeling less charitable, the diplomat wondered how long it would take for the United States to reach the level of French aid and trade with Senegal: nearly $60 million in development and military assistance in 2003.
What Senegal will receive in exchange for cozying up to the United States remains to be seen. Military and economic aid has been modest, so far. American companies aren't exactly rushing to do business here. Senegal produces peanuts, not oil.
Senegal stands to gain its biggest reward later this year, when the Bush administration announces the recipients of its new $650 million development aid program called the Millenium Challenge Account. Senegal was the only country to receive a planning grant on how it would use the funds.
Still, Senegal knows it cannot afford to oust the French, said one member of the Wade government, but is seeking a way to escape exclusive French control. ''The only question is, 'Will France accept Senegal's being more independent?' '' he wondered aloud. ''We don't know. But they have no choice. Senegal in 2004 is not the same Senegal as in 1960. The world has changed.''
LETTER FROM AFRICA
