Martha Stewart traded stock on a tip from her broker, and together they created an elaborate web of lies to conceal the truth from investigators, a federal prosecutor told the jury in her criminal trial yesterday.
''She was told a secret'' about a company called ImClone Systems, the prosecutor, Karen Patton Seymour, declared before a packed courtroom during her opening argument. ''A secret tip that no other investors in ImClone had.''
With her reputation and her media company at stake, Ms. Seymour added, Ms. Stewart had everything on the line once an investigation into her sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone began. ''The lies didn't stop there,'' she said. ''The defendants even tried to cover up their cover-up.''
Ms. Stewart is being tried on charges of conspiracy, obstruction of justice, making false statements and securities fraud over that December 2001 sale, which took place after a telephone conversation with her stockbroker and his assistant while Ms. Stewart's jet was stopped for refueling in Texas. The broker, Peter E. Bacanovic, is being tried alongside her on charges of conspiracy, perjury, obstruction of justice, false statements and falsifying documents.
Prosecutors say the broker's assistant, Douglas Faneuil, told Ms. Stewart that members of the family of Dr. Samuel D. Waksal, who founded ImClone and ran it at the time, were selling their own shares. But Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic told investigators that the sale took place for more innocuous reasons, including an agreement the two say they made to sell if ImClone's share price dropped below $60.
Mr. Faneuil, the government's main witness, is expected to testify tomorrow. Court has been canceled for today because of weather.
In his opening statement, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert Morvillo, said that despite working as a stockbroker in the past, Ms. Stewart could not have been expected to know that the information she received would get her into trouble.
''Think that through, ladies and gentlemen,'' he told the jury, who listened in apparent fascination. ''If you were on that plane, and somebody tells you somebody else is selling his stock, would you have thought you couldn't sell the stock because they told you somebody else is selling?''
Boldly appealing to the eight women on the 12-member jury, Mr. Morvillo called Ms. Stewart a specialist in ''flowers, fixtures, food and furniture'' who turned her skill into a company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, ''run predominantly by women with similar goals and ideals.'' Ms. Stewart, Mr. Morvillo continued, ''has devoted most of her life to improving the quality of life for others,'' and yet has been ''ridiculed and parodied'' for her work.
The securities fraud charge against Ms. Stewart is likely to present the biggest challenge for prosecutors, who say that when she issued statements calling her ImClone trade ''entirely lawful'' she did so to prop up the price of shares in her own company.
''Instead of weathering the storm of negative publicity, instead of letting it blow past her,'' Ms. Seymour told the jury, ''Martha Stewart chose to make affirmative statements to investors, all designed to make them believe the same story'' that Ms. Stewart told investigators.
But Ms. Stewart's lawyers say that she was simply defending herself. Mr. Morvillo was ordered by Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum not to dwell on the novel aspects of the charge, but he nevertheless referred to it in court as ''the most bizarre charge in this case.'' He said the statement had been issued by Ms. Stewart's lawyers ''on her behalf'' and added: ''The essence of the allegation was that she was tipped by Sam Waksal. The essence of her denial was that 'I was not tipped by Sam Waksal.'''
Ms. Stewart sat staring straight ahead during the opening arguments, dressed in olive drab and occasionally craning her neck to gaze at the jury with a furrowed brow. Behind her sat a phalanx of fans, including her mother, Martha Kostyra, and her daughter, Alexis Stewart. Alexis Stewart, the jury learned yesterday, introduced Ms. Stewart to both Mr. Bacanovic and Dr. Waksal, the former chief executive of ImClone, who is now serving a seven-year prison sentence for assorted crimes, including securities fraud.
The initial salvos from both sides featured detailed descriptions of Ms. Stewart's financial situation, from her three brokerage accounts to her need to sell some stock at a loss in late 2001 to offset the capital gains from other trades. Besides ImClone, Mr. Bacanovic also put her holdings of Apple Computer and Nokia Systems on the block, selling those in late December that year as well.
There were also mentions of witnesses who will testify, including Mariana Pasternak, who was a passenger on Ms. Stewart's plane and whom Ms. Seymour described as ''her best friend.'' Other witnesses include Ann Armstrong, Ms. Stewart's assistant, and Helene Glotzer, an enforcement official from the Securities and Exchange Commission who interviewed Ms. Stewart in the early days of the investigation.
Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, Richard Strassberg, insisted that his client was innocent, and that he acted only as a responsible stockbroker in his dealings with Ms. Stewart. He called Mr. Bacanovic, who was wearing a red tie, white shirt and blue suit, ''the son of immigrants'' who graduated from Columbia University and from business school and built ''a successful career'' serving clients who were celebrities like Ms. Stewart and ordinary mortals with only a few thousand dollars to invest.
Mr. Strassberg characterized Mr. Faneuil as a novice broker's assistant ''fixated with Ms. Stewart,'' who tried ''to minimize what he had done'' by blaming his boss. Mr. Faneuil's plea agreement with the government, to testify in exchange for a reduced charge, is ''a motivation to lie,'' Mr. Strassberg told the jury. ''He is an admitted liar.''
Both Mr. Strassberg and Mr. Morvillo sought to play down Ms. Stewart's ImClone trade by devoting several minutes of their opening arguments to another ImClone investment she made, around 50,000 shares in a pension account she opened for her employees. When she sold those, in the fall of 2001, Mr. Strassberg said, she did so at a price of ''about $61 a share.''
Mr. Morvillo seized on that as one reason Ms. Stewart and her broker may have chosen the $60-a-share price at which she has said she planned to sell the ImClone shares that are at the heart of her criminal case. In a conversation that Mr. Morvillo said took place just before Christmas 2001, Mr. Bacanovic told Ms. Stewart ''You really should get rid of ImClone, I don't like it.'' Ms. Stewart's response, according to Mr. Morvillo, was: ''Well, if it gets to $60, I'll consider selling it.'' Meanwhile, Ms. Stewart was completing a sale of some three million shares of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia to Value Act, a venture capital fund headed by Jeffrey Ubben, who is now her company's chairman. ''Which of these transactions would you have been focused on?'' Mr. Morvillo asked the jurors.
No defense lawyer offered an explanation for Ms. Stewart's reluctance to part with her ImClone holdings then, or for her desire to sell at $60 rather than $61 or higher. On the day she did trade the stock, it opened at $63 and fell to $58 before her sale went through.
But Ms. Seymour, the prosecutor, maintained that a series of phone calls that day were critical to her decision. ''In the first hour that Doug Faneuil got to work, he was literally inundated with calls from the Waksal family,'' she said. ''They wanted to sell all of their stock,'' estimated to be worth $7.5 million. Then, Ms. Seymour said, Mr. Faneuil called Mr. Bacanovic, who was on vacation in Florida, to tell him what was going on. Mr. Bacanovic told him, ''Get Martha on the phone,'' Ms. Seymour said, and when Ms. Stewart called in several hours later from Texas, she was told ''that the Waksals were trying to sell all of their shares.''
She quoted Ms. Stewart as saying, ''All of their shares?'' and asking for ImClone's trading price. Then, Ms. Seymour said, she told Mr. Faneuil to sell her shares.
A witness from Merrill Lynch, Luciano Moscheta, testified that any sell order had to be formally recorded in Merrill's system.
