Three of the 11 men charged in a fatal fraternity hazing at the State University of New York at Plattsburgh in March were sentenced yesterday to probation or community service, while two others received similar sentences on Monday.
All of the members of the group, each of whom was indicted on a number of serious charges, including criminally negligent homicide, have pleaded guilty to lesser charges.
Only one of the men, William Katz, received jail time. Mr. Katz, 25, is an alumnus of SUNY Plattsburgh and the fraternity, Psi Epsilon Chi. He returned to the campus during the 10-day pledge period when the hazing occurred, and law enforcement officials considered him to be an instigator during the rite, in which an 18-year-old freshman, Walter Dean Jennings, died after being forced to drink large amounts of water.
Mr. Katz was sentenced to one year in jail after pleading guilty to the charges of hazing and coercion, both misdemeanors. Three fraternity members were sentenced to 15 days in jail, but that sentence would be voided upon the defendants' participation in an educational video on hazing or in community service.
The only defendant not yet sentenced is Jeffrey Meyer, who pleaded guilty in October to hazing and disorderly conduct. His hearing is scheduled for Friday before Judge Kevin K. Ryan of Clinton County Court.
The corporation that owned the fraternity house at the time of the death, led by a group of former fraternity members, will be sentenced on Thursday. Last month, the corporation pleaded guilty to one charge of criminal facilitation.
Separate charges against the corporation's chairman of the board of directors, Kevin E. Jones, who is a lawyer with the New York State Department of Labor, were dismissed by Judge Ryan in early December.
Two of the defendants sentenced yesterday -- Jonathan Bernius and Michael West -- each received three years of probation and 250 hours of community service. The third, Patrick Stasiukiewicz, is among the three fraternity members who received a 15-day jail sentence that would be voided, in his case, upon completing community service.
