When Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut released details of his investment in a real estate partnership last month, he described it as an uneventful business venture with three friends who neither sought, nor received, any favors from him.
But if Mr. Rowland's partners received no specific benefits, they did get something just as valuable -- an association with the governor that had the potential to help them as they pursued their own business deals, some involving millions of dollars in state funds. Their state-financed projects included a moderate-income housing development and an industrial park.
Now, as investigators examine the governor's financial dealings, his venture into real estate offers a revealing glimpse of the sometimes murky risks and rewards of mixing business and politics. The question of whether he used his office improperly to help friends, employees or state contractors is central to the impeachment inquiry gearing up in Hartford and the federal criminal investigation of his administration.
Mr. Rowland adamantly denies that he did. But the real estate partnership is a reminder that sometimes just being associated with him could be a benefit in itself.
''There was talk at the time that some of these people were connected to the governor,'' said Stanley Sendzimir, who sold them land for the industrial park. ''We took that as an indication that they were serious about buying it. You would assume, obviously, that their connection could only help.''
It was in 1996, a little more than a year after becoming governor, that Mr. Rowland joined the partnership, called First Development Group. His partners -- Michael H. Cicchetti, Anthony R. Cocchiola and Robert S. Capanna -- had a 20-year history of buying and selling real estate together in the Waterbury area, often using a partnership called AMR Associates.
But although they were friends with Mr. Rowland -- Mr. Cicchetti was also his personal lawyer -- the three had never before included Mr. Rowland in one of their deals.
Making his involvement more unusual was that Mr. Rowland invested about 30 percent less than each of his partners, had no experience in such projects and apparently did little or none of the legwork. According to Mr. Rowland's records, he invested $7,200, while his partners each invested $10,000 to $11,000.
Yet the governor shared equally in the $240,000 profits from the project, which involved buying land in Prospect and Naugatuck, near his hometown, Waterbury, and developing it into residential building lots. The partnership was dissolved in 2001.
While partners with Mr. Rowland in First Development Group, his three friends used other partnerships and companies that did not include the governor to pursue millions of dollars from his administration.
Operating as AMR Associates, Messrs. Cicchetti, Cocchiola and Capanna completed a real estate deal in Waterbury that was financed by an $850,000 loan from the State Department of Economic and Community Development. A local builder was awarded the state loan in 1999 to buy and develop 6.5 acres owned by Mr. Rowland's partners.
A Waterbury developer, who attended at least one public meeting where the project was discussed, said that ''everyone knew who these guys were,'' adding that Mr. Cicchetti was viewed as close to the governor. The developer, who has done business with some of Mr. Cicchetti's clients, asked not to be identified.
''Anyone involved in real estate in the Waterbury area knows that Mike is tight with Governor Rowland,'' he said. ''Everyone's looking for some sign that the governor did something for these guys, but he didn't necessarily have to -- it was their reputation that carried them.''
That reputation was also at work in neighboring Prospect, a tiny town where Mr. Rowland's involvement in the First Development Group subdivision was hardly a secret. Beginning in 1998, his three partners pieced together almost 200 acres that they proposed to sell to the town for use as an industrial park.
Larry B. Alexander, a Florida lawyer who represented Mr. Sendzimir in the sale of the largest tract of land for the park, said a local real estate broker talked up the group's association with Mr. Rowland.
''The broker told me that Mike Cicchetti was close with the governor,'' Mr. Alexander said. ''He said Mike was a friend of the governor, and that couldn't hurt.''
It was Mr. Cicchetti who first met with state officials in early 1999 to discuss financial support for the project, according to files at the Department of Economic and Community Development in Hartford.
A memo written by a department analyst in July of that year shows that state officials were not sure of the proposal's value at first. Noting that there were already industrial parks in Prospect and nearby Naugatuck, the analyst concluded, ''It needs to be determined whether there is a market for this.''
But in less than a year, the department was seeking authorization to begin financing it. According to a May 2000 notation by a state budget official, the industrial park had been ''identified as a priority by D.E.C.D.''
Mr. Rowland, as chairman of the State Bond Commission, had a hand in helping the project along, although his aides say it was largely a formality. He voted, along with the rest of the commission, to approve a list of items that included $175,000 for the Town of Prospect to begin planning the park, which would be partly financed by the state.
''There have been thousands of projects that have come before the commission for approval under Governor Rowland,'' said Ross H. Garber, the governor's legal counsel. ''There's nothing unusual about this.''
If residents give their approval this year, the town will buy the land from Mr. Rowland's partners for about $3 million, or roughly twice what they paid for it.
Mr. Cicchetti and Mr. Cocchiola have not responded to requests for comment. Mr. Capanna died several years ago.
Details of Mr. Rowland's investment in First Development were forced out into the open in December as a result of the controversy over his admission that he lied about accepting free work on his weekend cottage in Litchfield from state contractors and employees. Among those involved in that work were Mr. Cicchetti and Mr. Cocchiola.
Mr. Cicchetti represented Mr. Rowland in the purchase of his cottage and coordinated some improvements and bill-paying related to it, according to documents provided by the governor's office.
As governor, Mr. Rowland recommended Mr. Cicchetti's son and daughter for jobs in his administration. Mr. Cocchiola's daughter also landed a job with the state.
Mr. Cocchiola's company, Cocchiola Paving, performed about $2,000 of work hauling topsoil to the cottage property in 1997, but was not paid until six years later. Mr. Rowland's 1994 campaign committee rented office space from Mr. Cocchiola, whose company has won more than $1 million in paving contracts during Mr. Rowland's tenure.
