Snow and freezing rain fell across a wide swath of the Midwest and East Coast on Tuesday, causing power failures and delays in air traffic, as well as having a role in at least 50 deaths.
In the Carolinas, hundreds of flights have been canceled at Charlotte Douglas International and Raleigh-Durham International Airports since Sunday. Nearly 250,000 residents of South Carolina, where freezing rain left a coat of ice up to an inch thick, lost electricity. Power was out for an additional 45,000 in North Carolina and Georgia.
A spokeswoman for South Carolina Electric and Gas, Christy Farrell, said it would be days before the utility completely restored power.
''The problem has been getting it on and keeping it on,'' Ms. Farrell said. ''You get it up and running, and then there's another problem.''
A low-pressure system stretching from Georgia to Maryland and another bounding across the Midwest converged late Tuesday, threatening heavy snow for Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Massachusetts.
The Associated Press reported that weather was faulted for seven deaths in North Carolina; six in South Carolina; five each in Iowa and Missouri; four in Ohio; three each in Nebraska, Virginia, Minnesota and Maryland; two each in Illinois, Indiana, Pennsylvania and Oklahoma; and one each in Kansas, New Jersey and West Virginia. Most of the deaths were in traffic accidents.
More than 27 inches of snow have fallen in Duluth, Minn., in the last two days, the third-largest snowfall since 1870, according to the National Weather Service. School has been closed since Monday, as plows worked to reach rural roadways. The school superintendent, Julio Almanza, said most of the 11,000 students in the district lived in the country, where many roads remained unplowed. Mr. Almanza, who went to work on Tuesday to carry out administrative duties, used a small plow to clear his 250-foot-long driveway before his 20-mile drive.
''I have my own little tractor,'' he said. ''And I have four-wheel drive, which is what you need up here.''
Akron, Ohio, pelted by freezing rain on Monday and snow on Tuesday, closed many schools as residents hunkered down. Peggy Oliver-DiMauro, who works at a one-screen movie theater there, said her company had doubled showings of ''Elf'' and ''Haunted Mansion,'' to increase revenue and accommodate families wondering how to spend their day off.
''One guy said, 'Thank God, you're open; I wouldn't know what to do,' '' Ms. Oliver-DiMauro said about a father with a handful of children at his side.
Chicagoans, accustomed to January dustings, trudged through messy commuting trips as the snow continued to fall through the rush hour, slowing traffic to a crawl. More than 260 plows and salt spreaders started working early Tuesday morning. Although they quickly cleared most major roads, it took longer to clear the 3,300 miles of side streets, forcing residents to walk through calf-high snow drifts to clear off their cars.
About 300 flights were canceled at O'Hare International Airport, and travelers faced two-hour delays for departures. Midway Airport, which dropped 16 flights, had 40-minute delays.
A spokesman for the state police in Springfield, Ill., Vince Fischer, said his department had helped pull at least 85 people from ditches as a result of the storm.
''Part of the problem,'' Mr. Fischer said, ''is that people are continuing to drive the way they always have. They think, 'If I can go 65 in the summer, then I can go 65 in the winter.' But it doesn't work like that.''
