For the longest time, there has not been much going on at Saratoga Raceway, the track a few blocks down Nelson Avenue from where the thoroughbreds compete to acclaim and fanfare at the place the locals like to call the flat track. A typical evening of harness racing in Saratoga Springs rarely offers anything more than bottom-level trotters and pacers competing for a minuscule purse in front of a few hundred people, a scenario that seems to be the case anywhere standardbreds race in New York State.
But better times appear to be just ahead, not only for Saratoga Raceway but for standardbred and thoroughbred racing throughout the state. At the end of the mythical rainbow will be a pot stuffed with real dollars, millions in revenues from video lottery terminals.
There is sure to be a whir of activity at the newly renamed Saratoga Gaming and Raceway this morning as the doors open to gamblers hungry to test their luck at what some call video lottery terminals and others call video gaming machines. In reality, they are slot machines that have been labeled lottery terminals. The change in wording lets the machines fit into a legal loophole that allows lottery games in the state but not traditional forms of casino gambling -- with the exception of those found at Indian casinos.
By any name, the games will pump much-needed life into the racetracks. That has been the case in six other states and the Canadian province of Ontario, where racing and slot machines have formed marriages that have revitalized the sport through better purses and higher-quality racing while raising revenues from cash-strapped governments.
Now it is New York's turn. Saratoga Gaming and Raceway will open its new $15 million gaming area at 10 a.m., breaking on top of a field of eight New York racetracks, including Aqueduct and Yonkers, which will eventually give their patrons the choice of betting on horses or with machines that have names like Loco Loot, Cash-a-doodle-do and Winning for Dummies.
''I think this place is going to be jamming,'' said Saratoga Gaming and Raceway's general manager, Skip Carlson.
Most patrons will chose the slot machines over betting on horses -- a gambling endeavor many consider complicated and slow paced -- but that will hardly matter to track managers. Most believe that without the promise of slot machines, several harness tracks in the state would have already closed. For those tracks, the last few years have been a case of survival while waiting for the slots' cure-all.
''This was paramount,'' Carlson said, adding that without the arrival of the slot machines, ''harness racing wouldn't have survived.''
''Of the tracks in this state, maybe one would have been left standing,'' he said.
Twenty percent of the profits from the machines will go to track operators and an additional 9 percent will be allocated to purses. Purses for tonight's card at Saratoga, weather permitting, will be double what they were on the previous night of racing, and that may be only a small first step. The purses at Dover Downs, a harness track in Delaware, averaged $900 a race before slots arrived. The current average purse is about $10,000. Delta Downs, a small thoroughbred track in Louisiana with slots, had a race last year with a $1 million purse.
''The only owners who were left around here were people who realized they were never going to make money,'' said Scott Mongeon, Saratoga's leading trainer in 2003. ''They were hoping to break even or just lose a little bit. The ones who were in it for the love of the sport, that's all we had left.
''You can see a difference in people already,'' he said. ''This has changed everybody's attitude.''
Finger Lakes, a small thoroughbred track in Farmington, N.Y., is next, with a scheduled Feb. 11 opening for its gambling parlor. The arrival of the slot machines at Aqueduct was delayed by the New York Racing Association's legal problems, but the gambling area should be open in the final quarter of 2004. Yonkers Raceway is further behind schedule, with a possible opening in early 2005.
Management at the two downstate tracks could not have been pleased by Gov. George E. Pataki's plan to add eight new sites for slot machines around the state, including up to five in New York City. The governor wants the proceeds to be used to finance improvements to schools in the state's poorest districts, including the city. But the track owners' focus remains on the immediate future and the impending benefits from the slot machines.
Unlike the state's harness tracks, Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga offer some of the richest purses in the country and high-class thoroughbred racing. But New York thoroughbred racing's once unquestioned status as the best in the industry has been threatened by tracks in Kentucky and Southern California, where purses have drawn even or surpassed New York's. That should change with the arrival of the slots.
''I had always been against them,'' said Barry Schwartz, the chairman of the N.Y.R.A. ''We were basically forced into a position of having to have slot machines.
''I hate many of these forms of gambling,'' he said. ''I think the lottery preys on people who can least afford it. But, at the end of the day, what other options did we have?
''I grew up in an era when 40,000 people routinely came to Aqueduct on a Saturday,'' he said. ''We lost a lot of ground and that's because there's so much gambling throughout the country.''
Schwartz said the N.Y.R.A. would work hard to convert the slot players into horse players. He estimates the average attendance at Aqueduct after slots are installed will be 15,000 to 20,000 people a day, five or six times the number that now shows up at the track, and he hopes that 1 percent of them will make the transition to betting on horses regularly.
That is a concern for another day. The slots will start humming today in Saratoga, beginning a new era for New York horse racing. The few who actually win at the slots will be smiling, but perhaps not as broadly as those who race horses and run racetracks.
HORSE RACING
