THE big boys in Motor City's sandbox, Hummer and Jeep, are rumbling again.
Jeep, a division of DaimlerChrysler, is running a commercial that shows a group of children tooting around in toy Jeeps while an overweight boy struggles to get his go-cart Hummer out of the mud.
''If it's not trail rated, it's not a Jeep four by four,'' a little girl tells the boy in a cutesy ''I told you so'' tone.
The ad, by GlobalHue of Southfield, Mich., part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, is a takeoff on a recent commercial for Hummer that depicted a naughty boy building a soapbox Hummer and then going off-road to win a race. The Hummer spot, by Modernista of Boston, was directed by Scott Hicks, who directed the movie ''Shine,'' and is set to the tune ''Happy Jack'' by the Who.
Why would Jeep take a swipe at Hummer?
Ever since General Motors began selling a suburbanized, if still steroidal, version of the Hummer in 2002 called the H2, analysts have pondered the effect a brand based on a new military vehicle might have on the brand based on an old military vehicle.
DaimlerChrysler went on the offensive against the H2 by suing G.M. , asserting that the H2's grille too closely resembled a Jeep's grille.
Jeep lost the case, but Hummer still seemed to be on the mind of G.M.'s rivals at the North American International Auto Show this month. Both DaimlerChrysler and Ford showed rugged sport utility vehicle prototypes that seemed to buck the trend toward tamer, carlike sport utilities.
Ford displayed a modern version of its defunct Bronco, while Jeep unveiled a new show car, a massive block of a vehicle called the Rescue, with 37-inch tires and a 6-foot-8-inch-wide chassis.
Whether either vehicle will be produced is not clear, but many at the show said the Rescue's boxy design looked an awful lot like the H2's.
Dieter Zetsche, the chief executive of the Chrysler Group division of DaimlerChrysler, dismissed the idea in an interview at the show. ''If anything, Hummer tried to penetrate in Jeep's area,'' he said. ''This is an absolute, original Jeep, the design of the vehicle, everything. Yes, it has the size of a Hummer, that's true. But I don't know whether there are plans to have certain size brackets restricted to certain brands. That would be new to me.''
Hummer and Jeep are not, in fact, easily compared when one looks at the numbers. Jeep, whose sales declined 4 percent last year, according to Autodata, is a far older brand that sold more than 440,000 vehicles last year, compared with about 35,000 Hummers.
Hummer is also a pricey brand, with the H2 starting around $50,000 and the H1, which closely resembles the Humvee military transport, around $100,000. That is why the parking lot at the Hummer Driving Academy in South Bend, Ind., where rich suburbanites come to learn how to drive off road, is filled with Jeep Wranglers -- the camp's instructors cannot afford Hummers.
Hummer is planning lower-priced, smaller models to fill out its lineup, which will present a broader challenge to Jeep down the road. But that could take years. Jeep plans to redesign its flagship S.U.V., the Grand Cherokee, this year, and to offer a bigger version of the Wrangler.
For now, the Hummer's principal threat, many analysts say, is capturing the mystique that Jeep once had.
''Hummer has stolen Jeep's thunder in terms of image,'' said Peter M. DeLorenzo, a former Detroit advertising executive who now edits autoextremist.com, a Web site that critiques the industry.
''Jeep is no longer considered the top of the mountain in terms of off-road vehicles,'' said Mr. DeLorenzo, who does some consulting work for Chrysler. ''The H2's image has blown past Jeep overnight.''
Mr. DeLorenzo said the Hummer ad ''might be considered one of the best car ads of its type of all time.'' He called the new Jeep ad ''a very childish, amateurish spot that pretends to make fun of Hummer'' but ends up making Jeep look bad.
Speaking generally, Clive Chajet, founder of the Chajet Consultancy, a corporate identity specialist, said, ''I think it's always risky to be negative about a competitor.''
''It is a form of flattery by the knocker to the knockee, because you don't talk about the competition and you don't bring attention to them,'' he said.
Strong identities are increasingly important with the market overrun with sport utilities. Jeep appears to be choosing to play up the machismo, with the latest commercial being one in a series promoting the brand's ''trail rated'' off-road capabilities.
The Hummer driver? In the Jeep commercial, the overweight kid, labeled an ''imitator,'' is left pounding futilely on his roof.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
