THE formal process for firing bad teachers who have union protection has long been criticized as slow and cumbersome. It is also true, however, that a determined principal has many ways to force out teachers -- even if they have stellar records.
Dr. Lee D. McCaskill, principal of Brooklyn Technical, one of the city's elite high schools, has been at war with many of his teachers. As reported in this column a year ago, the school was plagued by management problems that repeatedly resulted in the canceling of popular student activities, including one of the city's finer Shakespeare programs and trips to state and national competitions for the debating, chess and robotics teams. To recall briefly two examples: Teachers and students complained that the principal heavily censored the student paper; it had six advisers in six years, came out only twice a year, and in June 2002, so upset Dr. McCaskill that he ordered all 4,000 copies destroyed. And then there was the robotics club, which spent months building a robot, raised money to compete at a national meet in Florida and an hour before boarding the plane, had the trip canceled by Dr. McCaskill.
In the case of the student paper, Dr. McCaskill had said the newspapers were destroyed because the adviser sent a ''preliminary'' draft full of grammatical errors to the printer; others said he was upset by a story about ''disrespectful students'' who ''spit on the floors'' and ''urinate in the fountains.'' In the case of the robotics meet, Dr. McCaskill had said ''it was revealed'' to him that an assistant principal ''without the knowledge of the principal'' had arranged the trip; the assistant was ''appropriately disciplined'' as a result. Others said that the principal's autocratic and disorganized management style was the real problem.
What is not in dispute is the animosity. At most city schools, it is rare for faculty members to request one union conciliation hearing a year with the principal to resolve education issues like book selection; Brooklyn Tech had four in 18 months. In the last few years, about a quarter of the 30-member English department has left, and seven reached for interviews faulted Dr. McCaskill.
Louise Maher-Johnson received years of positive or excellent classroom observations, served on several school committees and was the environmental club adviser. In 33 years, she never had an unsatisfactory rating. Then, after criticizing Dr. McCaskill in the press, Ms. Johnson received six unsatisfactory observations and five letters of misconduct in six months. She loved supplementing lessons with her collection of educational videos, using a documentary on post-Civil War Reconstruction when she taught August Wilson's play ''Fences.'' Suddenly, she was barred by the principal from using a VCR. She always had her own classroom; suddenly she had to share two classrooms on two floors. ''At 60 years old, I became a floating teacher,'' she said. ''He wore me down; it affected my health.'' Last summer, she gave up and retired.
City officials, as well as Dr. McCaskill, and his regional superintendent, Reyes Irizarry, declined to comment. ''We will not respond publicly to questions about personnel matters,'' Eileen Murphy, a spokeswoman, said. ''We do not respond to teacher ratings.''
Todd Friedman, a 15-year veteran, received many good ratings, served as a mentor for new teachers and wrote curriculum for the Academy of American Poets. But as a critic of the principal he was vulnerable, and in June 2002, a parent who was friends with Dr. McCaskill complained that Mr. Friedman had assigned a ''pornographic'' book, ''Continental Drift'' by Russell Banks.
It didn't seem to matter to Dr. McCaskill that ''Continental Drift'' was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize, written by one of America's most respected novelists. Or that the school's summer reading list, which went out under Dr. McCaskill's signature that very week, included ''Secrets'' by Nuruddin Farah, a novel that in the first 17 pages describes group masturbation and a man having intercourse with a cow.
Dr. McCaskill put a warning letter in Mr. Friedman's file, calling ''Continental Drift'' ''inappropriate'' and ''sexually explicit'' and threatening possible dismissal.
Mr. Friedman appealed. Under the city grievance procedure, the first hearing is conducted by the principal, who, not surprisingly, ruled that his reprimand of Mr. Friedman was entirely correct.
The second-level grievance was heard on March 19, 2003, by the office of the regional superintendent, Mr. Irizarry, a close ally of Dr. McCaskill. Mr. Irizarry didn't seem too familiar with the book; he kept referring to it as ''Continental Draft.'' Nor did his hearing officer, who called the author ''Russell Brooks.'' But others knew it and several groups, including the American Library Association and the National Council of Teachers of English, wrote angry letters testifying to how highly regarded the novel is. Stuyvesant High teachers wrote that the book is in their school library and that Mr. Banks's works are proudly taught there.
By then, Dr. McCaskill and Mr. Irizarry were contradicting each other. Dr. McCaskill called the novel ''inappropriate.'' Mr. Irizarry wrote, the ''issue is not related to the appropriateness of the novel,'' but to ''Mr. Friedman's failure to follow established procedures.''
To make the case go away, they offered Mr. Friedman a deal. They'd remove the reprimand if he cleared his reading choices with one of Dr. McCaskill's assistants. Mr. Friedman refused. His file was several inches thick by now, but his most basic question was still unanswered. Could he teach ''Continental Drift''?
In May, school officials surrendered. They removed the reprimand without any concessions by Mr. Friedman. He'd won, but he lost. He had embarrassed the principal publicly. ''If I stayed at Brooklyn Tech, my life would be miserable,'' he said. He joined the exodus, transferring to Midwood High. To this day, no one has said whether it's O.K. to teach ''Continental Drift.''
Alice Alcala is one of the most respected Shakespeare teachers in the city. At Brooklyn Tech, she won a $10,000 grant, bringing the Royal National Theater of Britain to do student workshops and spending Saturdays preparing her classes to do their own performances. But she spoke out against the principal. When he tried killing her Shakespeare program, she went over his head to the central administration and got it reinstated.
The day after she was quoted in news articles criticizing Dr. McCaskill, she received an unsatisfactory classroom observation rating for the first time in 28 years of teaching. She was repeatedly denied access to the auditorium and in June, got an unsatisfactory for the year. ''At 53, I almost lost my livelihood,'' she says.
But she got a break. The principal at Murry Bergtraum High in Manhattan knew what a gifted teacher she was and gave her a position.
''I'd been so beaten down,'' Ms. Alcala said. ''When I requested the auditorium, I couldn't believe the next day I got permission. I kept thanking them. They said, 'Relax, this is not like Brooklyn Tech.' I felt like I'd come out of a nightmare.''
Wayne Gagnon, the Bergtraum assistant principal who supervises Ms. Alcala, says they are ''absolutely thrilled'' with her work.
Ms. Alcala has won $1,800 in grants, had a local Shakespeare company come to work with her students, and in December put on several student performances of ''Macbeth,'' featuring the witches in a step dance that brought down the house.
Great teachers inspire, and after seeing Ms. Alcala's witches dance, another teacher, Wil Hallgren, plans to do Aristophanes' ''Frogs'' with his class, featuring a rap-style debate between Euripides and Aeschylus.
As for Brooklyn Tech, there's no course solely devoted to Shakespeare anymore.
ON EDUCATION E-mail: edmike@nytimes.com
