Secretary of State Colin L. Powell sought to assure Russians on Tuesday that despite American plans to redeploy some troops to former Soviet bloc nations in Eastern Europe, the United States had no intention of encircling or threatening their country.
Interviewed on a Moscow radio station, Mr. Powell said that while the level of American forces in Europe was falling to fewer than 100,000 from more than 300,000, the Bush administration has been looking at the possibility of putting ''temporary facilities'' in Eastern Europe for training or use as air bases. Forces based in these areas might be sent in emergencies to the Persian Gulf, the Middle East and Central Asia, he said.
''It is not essentially moving our army closer to the Russian federation, and people should not see it in that light,'' Mr. Powell said on the popular independent radio station Ekho Moskvy. ''The number of troops over all will be going down. Therefore we are not trying to surround anyone.''
But Mr. Powell's comments appeared to reflect a sense that many Russians, though perhaps not many Russian leaders, did indeed see American moves ''in that light.'' For three days, first in the nation of Georgia and then in the Russian capital, Mr. Powell has been trying to allay such suspicions.
Since the end of the cold war, Russians have objected generally to the eastward march of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization but have yielded with each expansion after tough discussions with the United States and its European allies. American officials say they do not expect significant opposition from the Kremlin to the establishment of American bases in former Soviet satellites like Poland, Romania or Bulgaria.
More problematic, however, is the American military presence on the southern border of Russia, particularly in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, where the United States has access to Soviet-era bases it refurbished to support the war in Afghanistan. There is also a small American military contingent in Georgia to conduct counterterrorism training, but Mr. Powell promised this week that this limited force would soon depart.
The secretary flew back to Washington on Tuesday afternoon after an arduous two days of private and public diplomacy. He mixed in with the ritual expressions of friendship a surprising critique on a variety of matters, from concerns about the health of Russia's democracy to its campaign against rebels in Chechnya.
In his radio interview and later at a meeting with civic leaders at the American Embassy, Mr. Powell said he had received assurances from the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, that the charges against Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, a prominent businessman arrested last year, would be fully explained and that his trial would be open.
The treatment of Mr. Khodorkovsky, including the seizure of his company's assets, has roiled the investment community in Russia and raised widespread doubts about whether Mr. Putin's government will tolerate dissent or independent sources of wealth. Mr. Khodorkovsky has been a critic of the Putin government.
Meanwhile, Mr. Powell said the United States had no intention of expelling Russia from the Group of 8 industrial nations, known as the G-8, which confers annually and coordinates economic plans.
Some American lawmakers and Democratic presidential candidates have called for Mr. Putin to be disinvited from the next G-8 summit in Sea Island, Ga., in the late spring, because of the Khodorkovsky arrest and the suppression of criticism in the Russian news media during recent parliamentary elections.
The secretary also repeated his concern over the war with separatist rebels in Chechnya, saying that although the matter was an internal affair, Russia had an international obligation to exercise restraint in conformance with human rights norms.
For all these criticisms, Mr. Powell dismissed the idea that Russian-American relations were headed toward a new freeze or that Russian democracy was in danger. ''The cold war is over,'' he said. ''The Iron Curtain is down. Russia and the United States are now friends. We should not see such things in cold war terms.''
