TWO strong men emerged one chilly morning recently from the walk-in cooler in the back room of Oliveto, a small but celebrated Italian restaurant here, carrying half a pig, split lengthwise from snout to tail. It had arrived the night before, straight from the farm of Paul Willis of Thornton, Iowa, the leader of a group of farmers who sell free-range porkers under the Niman Ranch label.
Thump! They dumped the carcass onto a butcher's block, and Paul Bertolli, the restaurant's intense, bearded chef, went to work at once to start turning it into sausages and other cured pork products. (English lacks a collective noun for these delicacies, which the Italians call salumi; the words ''sausage,'' ''salami'' and ''salumi'' all stem from the Latin ''sal,'' meaning salt.)
Using only an ordinary boning knife, wielded either forehand, for precision, or backhand, for power, he removed the leg, including the foot, or trotter; the thigh; and part of the rump. The trotter, boned, stuffed and boiled, would become zampone. The thigh, salted and aged for 12 to 18 months, would become prosciutto. The rump meat, combined with other cuts and ham fat, might go into mortadella, the plump, pink, fine-textured, delicately flavored cooked sausage that is one of Bologna's great culinary achievements.
Other bits would wind up as pickled pork ears, testa (head cheese), pork chops, pancetta (unsmoked bacon), blood puddings, pork meatballs and a broad array of other handmade items. The pigout reaches a climax in Oliveto's annual Whole Hog Dinner, served Feb. 24 through 27 this year, when more than 30 porky treats are on the menu, from jowl to tripe to kidney to belly.
You can use everything except the squeal, they used to say. It's a wonder that the remarkably resourceful Mr. Bertolli doesn't use that, too. His cooking style is all Italian all the time, with only one solecism -- a mountainous Alsatian choucroute garni, adorned with ham and sausages.
''You can't buy a lot of these things,'' Mr. Bertolli told me as I watched him making his salami, ''and when you can, they don't taste as good. When I started doing this sort of work, it was hard to get people to eat the stuff, but now the Whole Hog Dinner is the most popular thing we do.''
Other chefs around the country have gone into the artisanal salumi-producing business in recent years. Handcrafted soppressata is always on Judy Rodgers's menu at Zuni Cafe in San Francisco; years ago, when she was working at the Union Hotel in Benicia, Calif., she used to age her sausages in the hallway of her apartment. Frank Bonanno makes his own capocollo from neck and shoulder meat to serve at Luca d'Italia in Denver. At Avec, a hypercasual offspring of the much-lauded Blackbird in Chicago, with backless stools and communal tables, a variety of Koren Grieveson's salumi is served on sharing plates.
And of course several of Mario Batali's Manhattan restaurants, including Babbo and Lupa, serve an array of skillfully house-cured meats. (Mr. Batali's father, Armandino, runs a salumeria and lunch counter in Seattle.)
But no one goes at it with any more verve than Mr. Bertolli, and few turn out salumi with the same suppleness, richness and supercharged flavor, showing all the complexity only long aging in a moldy cellar can achieve.
The chef's grandfather emigrated in the 1920's from the Veneto to the South Side of Chicago, where he made cured meats to sell in his delicatessen. A few of them went west by mail to San Rafael, in Marin County north of San Francisco, where Mr. Bertolli's parents had settled. The smell and taste of his nonno's salumi, especially the soppressata, captivated the young man, and at age 14 he was a journeyman butcher at Petrini's Market in San Francisco.
A degree in music at Berkeley, cooking stints in California and Italy, a time as Alice Waters's chef at Chez Panisse and a year off to study ancient history at the University of Toronto led to Oliveto -- a typically meandering route for a contemporary American chef.
Now 49, he is fascinated (some might say obsessed) by food tradition. After considerable effort, he discovered someone to stone-grind whole-grist polenta from field-dried Midwestern dent corn. In ''Cooking by Hand'' (Clarkson Potter, 2003), he argues, ''It is often the case that the more primitive version of a dish cannot be improved upon, and a cook can do no better than attempt to preserve the memory of taste and process associated with it.''
Mr. Bertolli makes fettuccine from farro, an ancient Italian grain also known as spelt, milled in his own kitchen. With the backing of a group of well-off epicures, he makes balsamic vinegar in Sonoma County for them and for the restaurant, using the most labor-intensive and time-consuming traditional methods. From the four-inch layers of fatback on 600-pound sows raised on a local farm, he makes ethereal sheets of snow-white lardo: just unctuous, unapologetic, unadulterated, 100 percent fat, cured with coarse sea salt and flavored with bay leaves, garlic and rosemary. Don't knock it until you try it.
An intelligent and articulate man with a shyness rare among today's star chefs, he showed me a model of a pig's skeleton, citing the Latin name of each bone, and learnedly discussed the action of enzymes and the changes in pH that take place during curing and aging. It was way over my head, but he mastered the chemistry in courses he took in meat sciences at Iowa State.
For the moment, Mr. Bertolli makes sausage once a week, Tuesdays and Wednesdays, in batches of 70 to 75 pounds, but he has been laying plans for a 10,000-square-foot factory in the Bay Area to manufacture pork products on a larger scale. When it opens late this summer, it will turn out a dozen kinds of fresh and dry-cured sausages, for sale to the public and to wholesalers in the area.
Everything, he vows, will still be tied by hand, using linen twine, just the way it is done now, and only pure natural casings will be used.
AS soon as he had dealt with the hindquarter of the pig on the day of my visit, Mr. Bertolli set to making coppa. He cut into the pig, six ribs or so back from the head, lifted out a loin, trimmed away much of the fat and shaped the meat into a compact, beautifully marbled cylinder. Each pig yields only two of these very choice pieces.
Salted and massaged with garlic and white wine, the coppa-to-be rests for two weeks in a flat pan, where it is turned again and again to ensure that the flavorings penetrate deeply and evenly into the flesh. Then it is sewn into a natural casing and hung in the cellar for four or five months, emerging furry, splotchy with mold and irregular in shape, unlike mass-produced salumi.
Next came the house specialty: soppressata Veneto style, as much like his grandfather's as Mr. Bertolli can manage. (His other sausage recipes come from all over Italy -- Tuscany, Piemonte, Emilia-Romagna, and Basilicata and Calabria in the deep south.) For this he or his assistants laboriously remove the sinews from front-shoulder meat, chop it into rough one- or two-inch cubes and chill it to 30 degrees. (Meat freezes at about 29.)
Why so cold? Otherwise, Mr. Bertolli explained, the fat would tend to begin melting as the pork is processed, making the meat too mushy.
In Italy, the meat would next be hand cut, but Mr. Bertolli uses a German contraption consisting of a spinning bowl with a rotary knife whirling vertically inside it. On my visit, he put 25 pounds of shoulder and fatback into the machine, in a four-to-one ratio, and three-quarters of a pound of salt. What came out was a dry, crumbly mixture of irregularly sized pieces, rather like butter cut into flour in making a pie crust. Then he added pepper, cayenne and aniseed, along with sodium nitrate and sodium nitrite as curing agents.
Next, in a big stone mortar, Mr. Bertolli made a paste of garlic, red wine and a small amount of corn sugar, or dextrose. (Here comes the chemistry.) The dextrose interacts with minuscule quantities of bacteria -- lactobacillus and two staphylococcus cultures added in the form of a slurry -- to produce acids that give the sausage texture and tang and pull moisture from the meat.
At this stage, one of the kitchen helpers hauled a bulky hand-cranked sausage stuffer from the refrigerator and set it, with a grunt, on the table.
Mr. Bertolli contemplated it with a sly smile and commented, ''These are all medieval tools that we use.''
Medieval, maybe, but they did the job, forcing the soppressata mixture into a sterilized casing, made of cow's intestine and known in the trade as a beef bung cap. ''Not too full now, or it may burst when you tie it off,'' the chef warned. When he judged the moment right, with the sausage perhaps three inches in diameter and two feet long, he fixed a forcepslike clamp at the open end to hold the stuffing in.
Finally, with all the care of a seamstress in a couture house, he made a network of half hitches down the length of the sausage, tied off the open end and finished with a loop from which it would hang in the aging cellar. To eliminate air pockets, he pricked it all over with a multipin gizmo.
The finished product, all pink and white, looked good enough to eat. But of course it wasn't ready yet; it still had to go through its ''dripping phase,'' hanging for 72 hours at 80 degrees while shedding water, and then spend the next 120 days or so in the cellar.
Mr. Bertolli stroked the sausage like a man petting a beloved dog.
But as much as he loves pig, he harbors no prejudice against other animals. He makes boar sausage, rabbit liver pâté and duck ham. When I ate lunch with him after watching him making sausage, I tasted not only his chewy, delectable, thoroughly cured soppressata, sliced paper thin, but also one of his more recent experiments -- a Moroccan-style dry-cured lamb sausage called merguez, jampacked with cumin and cayenne. ''Too spicy?'' he asked.
Not for me, not at all.
