Lillian Roberts, the incumbent, this morning won the hotly contested race to lead District Council 37, New York City's and the nation's largest union of municipal workers.
Ms. Roberts narrowly defeated Charles Ensley, the president of the local representing 15,000 of the city's social workers, one of the 56 locals within the district council.
The two campaigns reported, with weighted voting at a delegates' assembly, that Ms. Roberts received 66,295 votes, while Mr. Ensley received 58,479 votes.
The race was tight, with several of the largest unions, most notably the one representing crossing guards and cafeteria aides, solidly backing Ms. Roberts.
But Mr. Ensley had the support of more than 20 small unions, and just hours before last night's vote by the 327-member delegate assembly, both sides were confidently predicting victory. Each delegate represented hundreds of union members.
The council represents more than 120,000 municipal workers, from accountants and architects to pothole fixers and zookeepers
Ms. Roberts, who was the district council's No. 2 official in the 1960's and 1970's before leaving to become state labor commissioner, was first elected as executive director 23 months ago.
At that time, she came out of retirement to help reinvigorate and unify the council after its parent union had placed it in trusteeship because of a corruption scandal. In the late 1990's, more than 20 council officials were convicted of embezzlement or vote rigging.
With his sharp tongue and willingness to criticize others, Mr. Ensley alienated many other council leaders over the years. But over the past year, he worked hard to become a unifying figure, insisting that Ms. Roberts was a lackluster leader without vision who needed to be replaced. He promised to reinvigorate the union's organizing and political activities in the hope of restoring the union to the position it once had as the nation's most respected municipal union.
Polite and with a gentle voice, Ms. Roberts comes across as charming and mild-mannered, but many council officials said she was a tough, steely campaigner. At times, her campaign turned harsh, especially in several mailings that attacked Mr. Ensley's running mate, Mark Rosenthal, the district council's treasurer. Those mailings criticized his salary of more than $200,000 - hers is $250,000 -- and suggested that he wanted to be re-elected to remain on the ''gravy train.''
Mr. Rosenthal, who also serves as president of a local representing city drivers and park employees, played a pivotal role in unmasking the corruption scandals that rocked the council in the 1990's. Last night, he narrowly his treasurer's post to Maf Misbah Uddin, who is president of the council's accountants local.
In the 2002 election, Mr. Rosenthal was the candidate for treasurer on Ms. Roberts's slate. But they had a falling out over negotiating tactics with the Bloomberg administration, and over Mr. Rosenthal's call to cancel a $180,000 legal services contract that the council awarded to a law firm that employed Ms. Roberts's nephew.
In her two years at the council's helm, Ms. Roberts did not play as forceful a role as some of her predecessors, most notably Victor Gotbaum.
