OF all the mezedes you can snack on at the bar at Molyvos, the Greek restaurant in Midtown, the mini meatballs called keftedes may appear to be the most mundane. They arrive four to an order with garlicky tzatziki and a basketful of pita. But there's something unexpected in their bite: a refreshingly sour and chewy curveball tossed inside the minty mix of meat and cheese. You can't quite put your finger on it, but it's the reason you order more.
''It's the trahana,'' said the chef, Jim Botsacos, pronouncing the word for this tiny Greek pasta in three sharp, staccato syllables: TRAH-hah-nah. Made with bulgur wheat and thick goat's milk yogurt, this racy relative of couscous gives his keftedes their distinctive texture and tang.
The chef disappeared into his kitchen, returned with a hockey-puck-sized disk and banged it against a tabletop. Hard as a rock, tan and grainy, his homemade dried trahana looks nothing like pasta. But when crumbled into simmering milk or stock, it rehydrates into creamy, irregular-shaped pellets.
Trahana is the humblest of pastas, a descendant of an ancient recipe for preserving dairy and grains during lean winter months. Back then, cooks made a porridge out of hard cracked wheat and soured dairy, molded them into various shapes and dried them on rooftops. Mr. Botsacos replicates that rustic tradition in his oven.
Trahana is akin to tractae, the fortifying thickener Apicius wrote about in the first century. Indeed, a few spoonfuls of store-bought trahana (either regular or sour), lazily stirred into simmering stock, creates a quick and comforting pasta soup, which you can dress up with saffron, chunks of feta, or anything else you have on hand. The longer the soup cooks, the thicker and creamier it becomes.
''It's a home-style ingredient,'' Mr. Botsacos explained, and it's rarely found on restaurant menus. At Molyvos, its addition to keftedes and the occasional stuffing or soup evokes instant nostalgia among Greek customers. ''We put it in anything, and it sells like crazy,'' he said.
A plate of keftedes with trahana is $4.50 at Molyvos, 871 Seventh Avenue (55th Street); (212) 582-7500.
Titan Foods in Queens sells packages of trahana for $2.29 to $5.99: 25-56 31st Street, Astoria; (718) 626-7771 or www.titanfood.com. International Grocery, 543 Ninth Avenue (40th Street), has it for $2.50; (212) 279-1000.
KEFTEDES WITH TRAHANA  Adapted from Molyvos  Time: 30 minutes
1/4 cup milk
1/4 cup sour trahana, crumbled  Salt and pepper to taste  5 tablespoons olive oil  1 medium onion, peeled and finely diced  2 cloves garlic, peeled and chopped
1/4 pound zucchini, washed and grated
1/2 pound ground beef
1/4 pound ground lamb  2 tablespoons fresh mint leaves, chopped  2 tablespoons fresh parsley, chopped  1 cup freshly grated Parmesan or Kefalotyri cheese  1 egg
1/2 cup bread crumbs.
1. In a small saucepan, warm milk over medium heat. Stir in trahana, season with salt and pepper, and bring to a simmer. Remove from heat and let stand until all liquid is absorbed and trahana is soft, 2 to 3 minutes. Allow to cool.  2. Place a sauté pan over medium heat. Add 2 tablespoons olive oil and the onions, and cook until translucent, about 5 minutes. Add garlic and cook for one minute. Add zucchini, cook until soft, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat and cool.  3. In a large mixing bowl, combine ground beef, lamb, and vegetable mixture. Add softened trahana and remaining ingredients except bread crumbs. Add the bread crumbs a little at a time. Mixture should be moist but not wet. Form into small meatballs.  4. In a large heavy-bottomed sauté pan over medium heat, heat remaining oil (more, if needed); do not let it smoke. Gently drop meatballs into hot oil. Turn occasionally, until browned on all sides, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a baking sheet lined with paper towels. Serve with tzatziki and a salad.
Yield: About 35 meatballs.
