NTT DoCoMo, Japan's biggest mobile phone operator, took a step on Tuesday to join the bidding war for AT&amp;T Wireless, intensifying the intrigue and global gamesmanship gripping the cellular industry.
DoCoMo presently owns 16 percent of AT&amp;T Wireless and controls two seats on the company's board. But in a filing on Tuesday, DoCoMo recused itself from evaluating bids for AT&amp;T Wireless, a move widely understood to put DoCoMo itself in a position to join the auction.
DoCoMo, however, has not yet said whether it actually intends to make a serious bid for AT&amp;T Wireless, and that suggests to some bankers that the move is aimed at raising the auction price, or to muddle the potential efforts of a rival, Vodafone, to buy AT&amp;T Wireless.
The developments come as the auction for AT&amp;T Wireless, the third-largest wireless company in the United States, appears to be gathering steam. The company has sent a letter to prospective bidders instructing them on the process and indicating that bids are due on Feb. 13.
The company considered to have the most interest is Cingular -- the No. 2 wireless company, which is jointly owned by SBC Communications and BellSouth. But others receiving letters from AT&amp;T Wireless and its bankers include Vodafone of Britain -- the global leader in wireless -- Nextel, and Deutsche Telekom, as well as DoCoMo, according to people close to the companies.
The companies appear to want to make sure the sale of AT&amp;T Wireless does not give a competitor a leg up, or that AT&amp;T Wireless does not sell for a below-market price.
''NTT will battle Vodafone to the death for this asset,'' said Patrick Comack, an analyst with Guzman &amp; Company, expressing one of several theories about DoCoMo's interest in the AT&amp;T Wireless bid. ''They are vicious competitors in Japan.''
Shares of AT&amp;T Wireless rose 2.2 percent on Tuesday, to $11.17. The stock has been climbing since early December, when it stood around $7.
The competitive landscape is also shifting. One rival, T-Mobile USA, which is owned by Deutsche Telekom, announced on Tuesday that it had gained one million new subscribers in the fourth quarter. That far exceeds AT&amp;T Wireless's fourth-quarter gains of 128,000 subscribers, and the gains of Cingular, which reported adding 642,000 subscribers.
The performance of T-Mobile could have a tangential impact on the sale of AT&amp;T Wireless. T-Mobile has been on the auction block for some time, though bankers said that the asking price has been too rich to interest investors seriously.
The price for AT&amp;T Wireless is expected to exceed $30 billion. That is the amount that Cingular said it would be willing to pay for the company, according to executives close to the negotiations. Cingular has a particular interest in such a pairing because AT&amp;T Wireless brings Cingular much-needed spectrum and the two companies use similar underlying technology.
For its part, Vodafone is thought to have an interest because it and AT&amp;T Wireless use similar technology to run their networks. At present, Vodafone has a 45 percent stake in Verizon Wireless (which is 55 percent owned by Verizon), but its network uses technology that is fundamentally different from the Vodafone infrastructure in Europe.
What kept Wall Street bankers and analysts buzzing on Tuesday was the question of the sincerity and rationale behind DoCoMo's interest in bidding for AT&amp;T Wireless. Kevin Calabrese, an analyst with Argus Research, said DoCoMo at the least wants to bid to help drive up the price for AT&amp;T Wireless.
In 2001, DoCoMo paid around $24 a share for its stake in AT&amp;T Wireless. By driving up the price, it might hope to recover some of its losses. But Mr. Calabrese said that DoCoMo might have trouble persuading its shareholders of the wisdom of a serious bid for AT&amp;T Wireless.
''Can they make the case to shareholders that another international investment makes sense,'' asked Mr. Calabrese, who noted that in 2002, DoCoMo had about $4 billion in failed overseas investments.
That said, Mr. Calabrese and other analysts said that DoCoMo could have a legitimate concern that if it loses a bid for AT&amp;T Wireless, it could be locked out of an equity stake in the United States, and have no relationship with a network here. Such a relationship can, at the least, help a provider more easily route its own international calls.
Raul Katz, director of the telecommunications practice at Booz Allen Hamilton, said the financial advantage to Vodafone or DoCoMo of creating a global mobile network might be overblown. Mr. Katz estimated that only 800,000 people a year travel with such frequency as to want to join a network with global span. ''That's not a big deal,'' Mr. Katz said.
TECHNOLOGY
