While newer art-world areas like West Chelsea continue to draw galleries, a growing number of high-end dealers, spurred by strengthening business conditions, expiring leases and relatively attractive rents, are looking for space in traditional neighborhoods for the trade in Midtown and the Upper East Side, according to gallery owners.
Maxwell Davidson is one gallery owner who recently took advantage of strong business over the last six months to move into larger and more efficient quarters.
Until December, Mr. Davidson's gallery, which specializes in 20th-century artists like Léger and Calder, was on the third floor of the gallery-laden Fuller Building, at Madison Avenue and East 57th Street. His 11-year lease for 1,900 square feet of space there was due to expire at the end of May 2004.
At his old home, Mr. Davidson was sharing a floor with three other galleries, and because space was tight, he was also sharing an office with a son, Maxwell Davidson IV, who joined his business four years ago. In September, with sales doing better than they had earlier in the year, the elder Mr. Davidson began looking elsewhere, and his search eventually led him to lease the 5,200-square-foot fourth floor of the 12-story building at 724 Fifth Avenue, between 56th and 57th Streets. Although he is now paying ''moderately more'' rent than before, he feels he is getting more for his money, both as a single-floor tenant, and also because he is paying for less common space.
The gallery space that Mr. Davidson recently took on at 724 Fifth Avenue had been on the market for about six months. E. William Judson of Judson Realty, the broker who represents the building, said that real estate demand from uptown gallery owners began to increase three to four months ago.
Since then, however, Mr. Judson says he has noticed a strong demand for gallery space not just in Midtown, where larger galleries tend to go, but also at the 15 smaller buildings that his company manages or leases on Madison and Lexington Avenues on the Upper East Side. While space there is generally tight, some of the new tenants , he said, have come either from Chelsea or from London. But others, like Cook Fine Art, are dealers who used to mostly work privately, but who are now taking on more public exhibition space.
Cook Fine Art has spent three years at 1063 Madison Avenue, between 80th and 81st Streets, but last week closed a deal for an additional 2,000 square feet of space on the building's second floor, said Scott Cook, who is a co-owner of the business with his wife, Soussan.
Uptown Manhattan has always been a magnet for high-end dealers specializing in Old Master, Impressionist and contemporary works, who like to be near customers both living on the Upper East Side and visiting Midtown hotels and who also tend to prefer smaller, more intimate gallery space than might be found in an area like West Chelsea.
''Our works are smaller, so they get lost in big spaces -- we're not interested in West Chelsea,'' said Rachel Adler, a private art dealer who works by appointment only, and who is about to move from her home to 1,000 square feet of space at Madison Avenue and 71st Street.
Galleries in Midtown, for the most part, can still afford to rent only upper-floor space, Mr. Judson said. Still, he said, with rents for upper-floor gallery space in Midtown now in the low $40-a-square-foot range annually, the area is becoming attractive even to those galleries that have not traditionally gravitated to the area. ''The prime part of Chelsea is now $30 to $35 a square foot,'' he said. ''For another $5, you can be at 57th Street and Fifth Avenue.''
''The gap has closed considerably,'' said Pierre Sernet, a Manhattan investor who buys and rents town houses, and whose tenants include high-end art galleries. ''I have clients who are looking to come back uptown.''
One gallery owner who is committed to staying in Midtown is Allan S. Chait, whose Ralph M. Chait Galleries, established by his father in 1910, is a leading dealer in Chinese art and antiques. For the last 42 years, the gallery has been at 12 East 56th Street, where Mr. Chait rents about 2,500 square feet of space, both on the ground floor and on a mezzanine. In May, however, the gallery will also be moving to 724 Fifth Avenue, where it will occupy the entire 10th floor of the 12-floor, 65,000-square-foot building. That space had been on the market for about a year.
Mr. Chait is not fazed about leaving his ground-floor location. ''I find that street traffic is not what it used to be,'' he said.
Regional Market / Manhattan
