SOMETIMES, as his bus or bicycle draws nearer to Gotham, he imagines himself to be a superhero in disguise. Not Superman, no. Not Batman or Aquaman or Spider-Man. No.
Flyer Man.
''I take off my suit, and here I am,'' says mild-mannered Martin Forro. ''Flyer Man.''
Superman has his cape, Batman his cowl. Flyer Man has his enormous backpack, from which he can retrieve boxes of staples, jars of thumb tacks, rolls of tape -- and multicolored reams of fliers, each one promising another way to invigorate this dreary existence of ours.
Enjoy Yoga at Home. Awaken Your Dormant Creativity Through Counseling. Learn How to Make Yourself Happy through Buddhist Meditation. Join an Acting Workshop. And, if all else fails: Learn to Play the Five-String Banjo.
''Fliers do work,'' says Flyer Man, who prefers the spelling that suggests superheroic ability. ''Definitely.''
Fliers are the wallpaper of New York. They shout from the metal-frame doorways of bodegas, beckon from bulletin boards in laundry rooms, insinuate themselves into the idle thoughts of customers at coffee houses. But where do these fliers come from? Does the banjo guy pause from composing his Appalachian opus to adorn Chelsea with fliers? Does the meditation master interrupt his ''om'' to hustle down to Kinko's?
Om-m-m, no. They call on Flyer Man.
Martin Forro, 40, was once a mere mortal. He was laid off nearly two years ago from a job selling pagers, which he had taken years earlier after being laid off from a job selling copiers, which he had taken when his planned career in real estate went nowhere. One day the answer just revealed itself: fliers.
''I almost feel like God was on my side when I got laid off,'' he says.
He vowed to devote himself full time to papering Manhattan with commercial come-ons. Sitting in their home in Cliffside Park, N.J., he and his wife, Betty, developed a flier, what else, to announce his new purpose in life. ''How do you get the word out?'' the advertisements asked. ''Let Martin, the Flyer Man, distribute your flyers.''
Mr. Forro felt empowered by experience. He used to post fliers part time in the early 1980's, back when he was living on the Upper West Side, back when fliers were the spam of urban existence. Those wild days are long gone, though. If Batman heeds that bat signal in the sky, then Flyer Man is duty-bound to honor that message on bare walls: Post No Bills.
Flyer Man agreed to meet with a civilian the other day at Murray's Bagels, on Eighth Avenue in Chelsea. He waddled into the store, Hulklike, as if weighed down by sheer muscle, though the weight turned out to be his unwieldy parka, other layers of clothing, and that huge black backpack. He ordered only a Diet Coke -- Flyer Man is on a diet -- and began to talk about his peculiar niche in this city.
A CUSTOMER will benefit from all that Flyer Man has gleaned from being out there, armed with little more than a stapler. For example, he has identified about 150 high-visibility locations where fliers are permitted -- and that is just between 57th and 123rd Streets. He knows which supermarkets allow fliers and which do not. He knows the preferences of stores: staples, tape or tacks. He knows that simple messages work the best.
And he knows that he has a nemesis, a competitor who has only recently emerged on the scene. ''There's another guy out there,'' he says. ''I think he called me once and posed as a customer. He asked me how I do my job.''
Mr. Forro swings his backpack onto his shoulders and sets out to begin his rounds. No gloves over his chapped hands, because he needs his fingers to be free. No radio headset, because he needs to concentrate. When he is posting, he says, ''I'm thinking about what my next location will be.''
He staples some fliers to the bagel shop's bulletin board, click, click, click, then shuffles across Eighth Avenue to a doorway festooned with fliers. He points to one of his old fliers, for a photographer, which is missing a few tear-off phone numbers.
''See?'' he says. ''Look how effective. That's amazing. One tag left.''
With each stop, at this coffee shop and that laundry, Mr. Forro prunes the bulletin boards like an attentive gardener, weeding the old, planting the new and --
Holy Swingline! What's this? The flier of that competitor! Stapled over a flier for Flyer Man!
Our hero tears the offending piece of paper from the wall, and crumples it with his bare hand.
About New York
