Fourteen members of a Harlem drug gang have been indicted in what the authorities described yesterday as an extensive crackdown on drug sales and weapons violations around the corner from one of New York City's most revered religious institutions, the Abyssinian Baptist Church.
The charges, announced yesterday by Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, culminated a nine-month investigation into a thriving trade in crack cocaine along Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard between 138th Street and 139th Street. The block is just northwest of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, which is at 132 138th Street.
Drug dealing and violence ''plagued residents and visitors in this Harlem neighborhood, who were confronted with narcotics dealing even as they made their way to church,'' Mr. Morgenthau said.
The authorities said the charges announced yesterday focused on members of a group known as the Stone Crew. In October, the authorities said, they brought narcotics charges against five members of another gang, known as the McRae Family, which was operating on or near the same Harlem block. Mr. Morgenthau described the block as ''a persistent hub of drug-related violence and crime.''
The arrests also came in the aftermath of an undercover investigation that broke up a gunrunning organization transporting weapons from Georgia and selling them from a produce stand at 137th Street and Seventh Avenue, a block south of where the Stone Crew and the McRae Family sold their drugs, the authorities said.
In an interview, Mr. Morgenthau said the Rev. Calvin O. Butts III, pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, had been among those who complained to the police. Mr. Butts did not return a telephone request for comment yesterday.
Investigators said the Stone Crew was named after its leader, Ronald Stone, and has been active in narcotics sales for years, operating out of an apartment building at 2363 Seventh Avenue. The group has regularly sold crack in quantities ranging from small $5 bags to much larger amounts in bulk, the authorities said.
The indictments announced yesterday followed a police search on Monday of the gang's apartment, and by late yesterday, Mr. Stone and most of the gang were in custody, facing charges of narcotics sales and possession. Four of the gang members were still being sought last night, said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for Mr. Morgenthau.
Mr. Morgenthau said the Stone Crew members, if convicted, could receive sentences of at least 162/3 years. ldquoThese people are well known in the community, and it is important to see them facing significant sentences,rdquo he said.
Mr. Kelly said the Stone Crew gang had taken in profits of as much as $750,000 a year from drug sales. ldquoThis illegal organization has dominated a two-block stretch of Seventh Avenue with an around-the-clock drug market,rdquo he said.
Officials said the case against the McRae Family organization was aided by surveillance work on the gunrunning operation. Officers at the time witnessed frequent drug sales on the street, they said.
The group was headed by a 49-year-old Harlem woman, Mary McRae, officials said, and its members included two of her sons. All members of the group have pleaded guilty to illegal drug possession, and four have pleaded guilty to illegal drug sales. They await sentencing.
