Just six months after his recall from retirement to be the Army's top officer, Gen. Peter J. Schoomaker has moved rapidly to refashion the nation's oldest and largest armed service at its moment of greatest challenge since at least the Vietnam War.
He inherited leadership of the Army when its relations with the Pentagon's civilian leadership were at a low. And with Army forces stretched, some say to the breaking point, the new chief of staff has opened several initiatives to reconfigure the service to handle old combat missions and new duties, like the long-term stability missions in Iraq and Afghanistan.
There is no argument that the Army is operating under stress. Eight of its 10 active-duty divisions are moving in or out of Iraq and Afghanistan, and almost 165,000 members of the Army National Guard and Reserve are now called up for missions there or in the broader campaign against terror -- assignments that have turned out to be far longer than many citizen-soldiers thought they had signed up for.
But General Schoomaker said in an interview that his goal remained reorganizing his service to be faster to the fight and more lethal, without taking the expensive step of asking for a larger Army.
Instead, he ordered the Third Infantry Division, victorious in the swift capture of Baghdad, to create itself anew. The goal is fielding four or five redesigned brigades, each as capable as any of the current three and easier to deploy as individual units or with other services in a larger team.
He is considering plans to trim artillery units and reassign soldiers to military police, civil affairs and engineering units. Those tasks are critical to the kind of security and stability missions the Army is conducting today.
General Schoomaker (pronounced SKOO-maker) wants soldiers and officers to stop moving from base to base every 24 months. If assignments were extended to three or more years, he says, combat units would have stronger cohesion, thousands of additional troops would be available at any time, the Army could save money -- and families would achieve their dream of more predictability.
''These are bars I've set,'' General Schoomaker said during a two-day inspection of a huge desert war game here. ''This is the challenge.''
A great challenge faces General Schoomaker, too, answering questions from members of Congress and, quietly, from some in the ranks who say the Army is too small for its current missions. The service is deeply committed to Iraq and Afghanistan, and in recent days began the largest troop rotation since World War II, moving almost a quarter-million soldiers in and out of those two countries.
As part of his new duties, General Schoomaker is repairing ties with the Pentagon's civilian leaders. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and his inner circle clashed over canceled artillery systems and troop strength for Iraq with Thomas E. White, who was pushed from his post as Army secretary, and the previous Army chief of staff, Gen. Eric K. Shinseki, now retired.
General Schoomaker is gracious in discussing General Shinseki, the officer he succeeded. ''When history is written, he will come forward as having made great contributions to the Army,'' General Schoomaker said. But a clear sign of a new, more cordial relationship arrived in person here on Thursday.
A Black Hawk helicopter landed just beyond a mock village where mock insurgents battled real mechanized infantry and Special Forces, and out of the sandstorm spiraling from beneath the rotors stepped Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, making his own inspection of the war game.
Although Mr. Wolfowitz and General Schoomaker had separate schedules already packed to the minute, the two huddled atop a wind-sliced ridge at the National Training Center for nearly an hour. They spent their time in animated discussion about the future of the Army, and the importance of these exercises that pit the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines in joint war games against human and computerized foes maneuvering in new and unexpected ways.
In recent days, General Schoomaker has begun publicly describing his plans for the Army. It is an unusual step into the spotlight for an officer who spent most of his career in the secret world of Special Operations, a member of elite counterterrorism squads and rising to chief of the military's all-service Special Operations Command. (The general said he had to reschedule his own wedding day because his unit was ordered into isolation in advance of the April 1980 mission to rescue American hostages in Iran, which ended in failure.)
Today, with 31 years of military service under his belt, his mottos come as metaphors, and they have to do with applying creative, even unconventional thinking to problems facing the Army and the nation.
He recalled playing football at the University of Wyoming, and described how the huddle had been devised to make sure everybody knew the play as they headed toward the line of scrimmage.
''But what makes a great team is what happens after the ball is snapped,'' he said. ''Can you find the opportunity within the chaos? Because you can't organize the chaos of the battlefield.''
Pressed on whether the Army must grow, General Schoomaker said he was not yet convinced that he needed to take the expensive step of requesting more troops, unless his analysis concluded that the current tempo was not a temporary spike, but a butte or even a plateau.
In the meantime, he already freed up soldiers for fighting by moving 5,000 jobs performed by troops over to civilians, a trend he hopes to expand this year. And he is looking at ways to rewrite Army rules on changing assignments.
About 63,000 Army personnel are in motion between posts at any one time, at a cost of about $1 billion. While 40 percent of those are soldiers and officers entering service or retiring, thousands of others would be available more often if asked to remain longer at each assignment.
The idea has caused some grumbling, especially among midlevel officers who fear that the slower turnover among commanders -- a natural expectation if extending time in each position -- means fewer opportunities to move up.
''Not if we increase the number of brigades and battalions,'' General Schoomaker responded. He has challenged the Army to add perhaps 15 active-duty brigades to the current 33, organized into 10 divisions.
Since returning to duty, General Schoomaker signed up for a steady schedule of troop visits, one bringing him here to the Southern California desert and a huge training exercise.
Just after dawn, long before the sun made good on its promise to warm these Mojave badlands that look like Afghanistan or Iraq, General Schoomaker was crossing through wadis and cresting ridges, his Humvee spinning small tornadoes from the cold desert floor.
Or maybe it was the general himself kicking up all the dust.
In talks with generals and G.I.s, his questions were the same: Are you comfortable with the plan? Are you reaching far enough? Does the exercise challenge you beyond your expectations?
''You're not learning unless you're operating in the zone of discomfort,'' General Schoomaker said, and he handed out specialized dog tags he had stamped out for the troops, each bearing the imprint, WARRIOR ETHOS.
The warrior ethos, General Schoomaker concluded, ''is a mind-set of commitment.''
