For her big day in court, Martha Stewart had lots of support -- including her mother, Martha Kostyra, and daughter, Alexis Stewart. She had some friends (Barbara Walters turned up at the courthouse).
And though she probably didn't know it, she had Barbara Todres.
Ms. Todres describes herself as a die-hard Martha Stewart fan, so devoted that she watches her television show at 2 a.m. The only things she reads, she says, are Ms. Stewart's magazine, Women's Wear Daily and The New York Times (on weekends).
And so she used her last day of vacation to visit the courthouse, watch the trial and write Ms. Stewart a four-page letter on leopard-print paper.
Her sentiments in a nutshell? ''Go for it, Martha! Go! Go!'' Ms. Todres recalled.
A longtime resident of Greenwich Village, Ms. Todres is not a courthouse regular; aside from a visit on Friday to watch jury selection, she said, her only experience in a courtroom has been as a juror.
Wearing a fur coat over a flowered dress, shiny yellow scarf and white sweater with crocheted flowers, Ms. Todres seemed like a butterfly among a crowd of black-clad reporters. And she pronounced the performance of Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert Morvillo, ''marvelous.''
Ms. Todres said that one thing surprised her when she saw Ms. Stewart in the flesh: ''She is shorter than I thought. She seems so big on television, bigger than life.''
Ms. Todres was one of the few civilians in ''the overflow room,'' where kibitzing lawyers and reporters without coveted courtroom passes could watch the proceedings on a big screen.
It was not a total success. Technicians had arranged the fixed camera so that there was a great view of the judge and none of Ms. Stewart, except for her olive-clad shoulder and an occasional flash of blonde hair.
The opening statement by the prosecutor was audible. Karen Patton Seymour, elegant in a dark suit and pumps, stood at the lectern and addressed the jury as if she were the most glamorous high school teacher ever.
But the limits of the system became apparent when Richard M. Strassberg started to speak. Mr. Strassberg, who is representing Peter E. Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart's co-defendant and former stockbroker, began crisply: ''This case is really about one thing.''
What that thing was, no one in the overflow room could tell; Mr. Strassberg had moved too far from the microphone. Indeed, he remained almost inaudible for most of his opening statement and was occasionally invisible, too -- hidden behind a huge chart on an easel. At least he seemed dapper in his dark suit.
Mr. Morvillo does not look dapper; indeed, he gives the impression of being disheveled, even with his tie knotted and cuffs buttoned.
Those in the overflow room had a lot of time to notice this, because he, too, sometimes stepped too far from the microphone, or moved past it to lean on the jury box, or just dropped his voice so low that it could not be heard.
Mr. Morvillo did manage to make the crowd laugh, took a few cracks at Congress and noted that ''this case is brought to you by the Department of Justice, headed by John Ashcroft.'' The jury, what little of it was visible, seemed rapt.
But in the overflow room, the statements that came through most clearly were declarations like, ''I predict that after you have analyzed all the evidence, you will agree with what I just said.''
Whatever it was.
Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  An article in Business Day on Wednesday about the scene at the courthouse where Martha Stewart is on trial referred incorrectly to the presence of Barbara Walters. She was there as a reporter for ABC, not as a supporter of Ms. Stewart.
