The streets here were crawling on Tuesday with dueling bands of screaming campaign workers, toting huge signs, swathed in thermals, stamping their feet against the bitter cold.
At the intersection of Elm and Merrimack Streets, a particularly nasty shouting match between the Kerry and Dean contingents broke out. ''Ker-ry, Ker-ry, Ker-ry'' came the chants from about a dozen sign-pumping middle-aged men on the northeast corner, most of whom identified themselves as ''firefighters for Kerry.''
Across the street, a small group of students and women, mostly hidden behind a huge Howard Dean poster, shouted ''Let's Go Howard! Let's Go Howard!'' Many had taken the day off from school.
Both sides seemed to believe that victory depended on the decibels they could generate.
But as the numbers in the Kerry crowd swelled, panic set in on the Dean corner. T. J. Knobloch, a teenager with spiked multicolor hair from Arlington, Mass., quickly got on her cellphone to headquarters. ''There are 25 of them now and they are loud,'' Ms. Knobloch yelled into the phone, ''so we could really use some backup and reinforcements.''
She said with satisfaction, ''Earlier there were Clark and Edwards supporters on the other corner, but we managed to chase them away.''
Young Youth Vote
The Dean campaign has made a great effort to get out the young, but the ''youth vote'' is younger than normal here. Many polling places in New Hampshire offered ''Kids Vote'' booths, where the under-18 crowd could cast make-believe ballots featuring candidate pictures as well as names. Like their parents, they flocked to vote, some families divided by deep political rifts and many undecided until they picked up their ballots.
Twin brothers, Matt and Tom Hutter, 10, split along party lines. Matt voted for Senator John Kerry, saying that he ''likes the fact that he was in the Army and also had a lot of government experience.'' But Tom said he would vote for President Bush, who had virtually no opposition in the Republican primary. Tom said Mr. Bush ''had done a good job in office.'' Never mind that the administration started when Tom was 6.
In Manchester, 6-year-old Anna Conley announced that she had cast her secret ballot for Senator John Edwards.
''She's just voting for Edwards because she knows Mom likes him,'' taunted her older brother, Brian, a fourth grader who voted for Mr. Bush.
''No, it's because I liked the way he said those words on TV,'' Anna retorted, but then added, raising her arms in the air, ''I'm with Mommy!''
Vegetable Candidates
New Hampshire has the reputation of being open-minded and giving all comers a chance, so it was no surprise that the downtown sidewalk in front of the Merrimack Diner on Tuesday was crowded with an odd assortment of presidential pretenders: There was Robert Haines, who helped tackle a man who had opened fire at the White House with an automatic weapon in 1994. There was Vermin Supreme, who promised passing children a pony if they would give him their vote, and whose campaign staff of five chanted their slogan, ''Neuter Baby Bush.''
And then, there were the two huge walking vegetables: Chris P. Carrot and Colonel Corn, the presidential slate put forth by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, or PETA. Escorted by three handlers (since it was presumably hard to see through their vegetable suits) the candidates waved presidentially.
''We're trying to make people think more about compassion towards animals and what happens in slaughterhouses, as well as to change eating habits so that people eat more fruits and vegetables and whole grains,'' said Joe Haptas, their campaign manager.
Mr. Haptas and the vegetable handlers said that, despite the cold, they had gotten a much warmer reception in New Hampshire than in Iowa. They said they especially liked running into the campaign workers for Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, who is a vegan. ''They take our buttons and put them on,'' Mr. Haptas said ''It's great.''
Common Ground
On the sidewalk leading to Baxter Elementary School, a polling place for Ward 1, a row of frozen volunteers from all six campaigns carried signs and stoically greeted voters. They sipped coffee from Dunkin' Donuts and stood on floor mats from their cars, to put a little distance between cold feet and the snow.
Then along came a quartet from Veterans for Kerry, who unfurled their banner across the street, faced the line and -- boot camp style -- began to chant:
''Hay dee hay dee hay dee ho, George W. Bush has got to go! Sound off, three-four, let's get George Bush out the door!''
At first they sang solo, but soon each line roared by the veterans was echoed back by the line of campaign workers. ''Here is something we can all agree on,'' said Judith Russell of Manchester, smiling, an Edwards volunteer.
Voting for November
And then there were the supporters of President Bush, who ended up voting in the Democratic primary, under a law that allows this state's huge number of independent voters to re-register as Democrats or Republicans at the polling place.
Ed Preczewski of Bedford said he would vote for Mr. Bush in the general election, but would probably vote for Senator John Edwards in the primary. ''I'm here today selecting a Democrat to run against my candidate, because I think Edwards is electable and could bring harmony to this country,'' Mr. Preczewski said. ''I think he will make it a very good race.''
Other Bush supporters were less altruistic, casting Machiavellian votes. ''I cast my ballot for Howard Dean because I think he would certainly lose against George W. Bush,'' said a man in a long camel-colored coat, who refused to give his name. ''You could call it a strategic vote: I think George Bush has done a terrific job, so I'll help him any way I can. This is it.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK
