With the televisions in the ballroom flashing results showing him in a dead heat with Gen. Wesley K. Clark for third place, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina took the podium, pumping his fists and grinning broadly.
He did not have the clear third-place finish that his advisers said would be his best showing, given the financial and regional advantages of Senator John Kerry and Howard Dean. But it had been a remarkable two weeks for Mr. Edwards, who had a surprise second-place showing in the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19. And if there was any disappointment, Mr. Edwards kept it to himself.
''Now we're going to take this energy and momentum that we saw in Iowa, this extraordinary energy and momentum that we experienced in New Hampshire, and we're going to take it right through Feb. 3,'' Mr. Edwards said, referring to the coming primaries and caucuses in the South and West where his campaign believes his candidacy lives or dies.
A couple of hours earlier, sitting in his hotel suite with his wife, Elizabeth, and older daughter, Cate, 21, and watching election results on CNN, Mr. Edwards seemed to be itching to head for more politically advantageous parts, especially South Carolina, where he was born and where he believes his Southern roots will keep Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry in particular at bay.
''Now we go to other places, don't we?'' he said. ''Remember in Iowa, which was more neutral territory, John Kerry and I were very close to each other.''
General Clark's showing, he said, could be explained easy enough.
''General Clark has been living here,'' Mr. Edwards said, referring to the general's decision not to compete in Iowa.
As he heads south and west, Mr. Edwards said, he plans to continue with his appeal for raising the living standard of the working and middle classes, though ''it's possible we'll alter the speech somehow.'' His New Hampshire finish, he predicted, would be taken as a sign of a continuing surge and accelerate the flow of desperately needed cash to his campaign treasury.
But he also found himself fighting off perceptions that perhaps he would make a better vice-presidential nominee than leader of the ticket.
''I'm not interested in being vice president,'' Mr. Edwards told former Senator Bob Dole on ''Larry King Live'' on CNN, moments before addressing the ballroom.
Mr. Edwards's day began with a five-minute visit to a polling place in the Manchester district of his New Hampshire chairman, State Senator Lou D'Allesandro.
He shook hands with shivering campaign workers who held large placards outside the elementary school gym serving as the polling station, and then rushed back toward his campaign bus.
Did he have butterflies, a reporter asked?
''A little bit, a little bit,'' Mr. Edwards replied, still walking briskly. ''But I feel very good. I feel very positive, very good about the way things are going right now.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
