''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' the final installment of the ambitious cinematic trilogy set in Middle Earth, dominated the Academy Awards race with 11 nominations on Tuesday. ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World,'' had 10, and ''Cold Mountain'' and ''Seabiscuit'' had 7 each.
There were many surprises as major productions went ignored and several small films won attention.
The 5,800-member Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which bestows the Oscars, snubbed Miramax Film's big offering this year, ''Cold Mountain,'' failing to give it best-picture or best-director nominations. That New York-based company traditionally dominates the Oscars, and even this year scored the most nominations of any studio, 15, and a best-director nomination for a small Brazilian film, ''City of God,'' a favorite of the Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein.
Among the small films recognized was ''Lost in Translation,'' about a young woman contemplating her future as she waits in a Tokyo hotel.
That movie, written and directed by Sofia Coppola, received nominations for best picture, director, original screenplay and best actor (Bill Murray).
Ms. Coppola, the daughter of Francis Ford Coppola, is only the third woman, and the first American one, to receive an Oscar nomination for directing. Others were Lina Wertmüller of Italy (for ''Seven Beauties'' in 1976) and Jane Campion of New Zealand (for ''The Piano'' in 1993), but neither won.
Ms. Coppola said that the recognition came as a shock. ''It's really hard to digest,'' she said. ''When you're starting with something personal, when you're not thinking about the audience, it's exciting when people connect to what you're thinking about. There's nothing better than that.''
For New Line Cinema, which made ''The Lord of the Rings'' trilogy, the nominations were welcome recognition of its $330 million gamble, which has long ago paid off.
''This film couldn't have been made in any other way,'' said Robert Shaye, co-chief executive of New Line, referring to the decision to make all three films at once and release only one a year.
The academy, which made its announcement in Beverly Hills, ignored a long list of Hollywood stars in high-profile roles: Russell Crowe in ''Master and Commander,'' Tom Cruise in ''The Last Samurai,'' Nicole Kidman in ''Cold Mountain.''
Surprisingly three films nominated for best picture garnered no acting nominations. ''The Return of the King,'' ''Master and Commander'' and ''Seabiscuit'' all took multiple nominations, but none for acting.
Instead the academy singled out performances that had not mounted ubiquitous ''for your consideration'' advertisements in the movie trade papers, or been featured on ''Access Hollywood'' or the Jay Leno and David Letterman late-night television circuit.
Among the most unexpected nominees were Djimon Hounsou, as best supporting actor for playing Mateo, a neighbor to a young immigrant family in ''In America,'' and the 13-year-old Keisha Castle-Hughes for best actress in the independent hit ''Whale Rider,'' about New Zealand Aborigines and their creation myth. She was the youngest actress ever nominated in that category.
Other surprising choices were two comic performances, usually not considered worthy of the Oscars: Johnny Depp for best actor as an off-kilter pirate in ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl'' and Diane Keaton for best actress as an over-50 writer who falls in love with Jack Nicholson in ''Something's Gotta Give.''
That movie has ''an important message, and a hopeful message, a message that fights ageism,'' Ms. Keaton said. ''Things can work if you have a good script and a good director. You can work, people will go. Why take us out to a field and shoot us? We're vibrant, we're alive, and we want to be involved in life. We don't want to be taken out to pasture.''
The foreshortened Oscar season, with the awards ceremony being held a month earlier than usual, on Feb. 29 in Hollywood, appeared to have a strong influence on the nominations. Studios did not have nearly as much time to campaign as in recent years and did not send videotapes of their movies to academy voters until late December because of a dispute over bootlegged copies.
Those changes seemed to to hurt Miramax's ''Cold Mountain'' and to help a movie like ''Seabiscuit,'' which conducted an extensive advertising campaign for its DVD, which was released in December, thus keeping the movie before Oscar voters while not directly campaigning for the awards.
Mr. Weinstein of Miramax said his $80 million ''Cold Mountain'' suffered from being released so late in the year. ''If I had to do 'Cold Mountain' over again, I'd open it in November or October and have the time for it,'' he said.
Instead it opened when ''The Return of the King'' was dominating the box office. ''When you see that,'' Mr. Weinstein said, ''you think, 'God that was the wrong strategy.' Whereas 'City of God' was the total right strategy,'' he said, with that film in theaters for much of last year.
Two independent studios that, unlike the major ones, were able to send out early videotapes called screeners, appear to have benefited from doing so. Newmarket Films garnered best-actress nominations for Charlize Theron in ''Monster'' and Ms. Castle-Hughes in ''Whale Rider,'' while Lion's Gate could claim nominations for Alec Baldwin in ''The Cooler'' for best supporting actor, and three nominations for ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.''
Other best-actress nominees were Samantha Morton for ''In America'' and Naomi Watts in ''21 Grams.'' Other best-actor nominees were Ben Kingsley, playing an Iranian immigrant in ''House of Sand and Fog,'' and Sean Penn, who played a working-class father in Boston shattered by the death of his daughter in ''Mystic River.'' That movie also took nominations for best picture and best director for Clint Eastwood. Jude Law in ''Cold Mountain'' was also nominated.
Even among the nominees, the talk turned to the unusual nature of this year's nominations pool.
''A lot of movies that spent a lot of money didn't get recognized,'' said Gary Ross, who wrote and directed ''Seabiscuit,'' set during the Depression, about a long-shot racehorse. ''It's about what people like and their tastes, and people's own individual opinions.''
He added that the broad array of choices was good. ''There's two ways to look at this, competitively, or inclusively,'' he said. ''I choose to look at it inclusively. It's wonderful when 'Whale Rider' or 'City of God' gets recognized. You want to celebrate as much diversity as you can.''
Among the nominees for best documentary were Errol Morris's ''Fog of War,'' about the former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and his decisions during the Vietnam War, and Andrew Jarecki's ''Capturing the Friedmans,'' about a Long Island family coping with allegations of child molestation. Mr. Jarecki's film has fueled an attempt to reopen the case of one of the convicted family members, Jesse Friedman.
Mr. Morris said that he thought his film resonated because of its relevance to America's current war. ''It's an interesting story of a world out of control, of confusion, self-deception, error, false ideology, wishful thinking,'' he said. ''A laundry list. There is that central question: Is McNamara providing an excuse for his behavior or is he giving us some insight into the way the world works? Or both?''
Oscar nomination have often meant the discovery of obscure but talented actors by broad audiences, or the revival of a dormant career of an old-time star.
The Iranian-born actress Shohreh Aghdashloo, nominated for best supporting actress for ''House of Sand and Fog,'' said she valued the chance to tell an immigrant's story to a mass audience.
Mr. Baldwin said that he considered his nomination a chance to resurrect his career.
''What's amazing to me with these nominations is how things can change with one movie,'' he said. ''One day you're framing your death certificate. The next day your future looks infinitely brighter.'' Of his certificate he said: ''I'm going to take it down now. I'll keep it framed. But I'm taking it off the wall.''
