NATO's top commander in Europe voiced frustration on Tuesday that members were not providing enough troops for the reconstruction effort in Afghanistan, which he said was a ''defining moment'' for the alliance as it adopted a broader agenda in the world.
In testimony intended to bring members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee up to date on Afghanistan, the commander, Gen. James L. Jones of the United States Marine Corps, said NATO's plans to expand beyond the capital, Kabul, and the northern area of Kunduz would require more troops than the current 5,500.
He said he expected the number of United States troops in Afghanistan -- 11,000, most of them involved in counterterrorism -- to remain the same.
''The political will has been stated,'' he said. ''The alliance has agreed, the donor countries have been identified, and yet we find ourselves mired in the administrative details of who's going to pay for it, who's going to transport it, how's it going to be maintained.''
In August, NATO took command of the force, which provides security in Kabul and its environs. NATO then won United Nations authorization to expand into other areas. Its political arm is considering the request for more troops.
NATO forces took on security duties in Kunduz this month in the first part of a project to support up to five provincial reconstruction teams.
The rebuilding of Afghanistan after the ouster of the Taliban in 2001 involves NATO's first mission beyond the European Atlantic area. Unlike the war on Iraq, this effort has been embraced by NATO's European members. The alliance's new secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, has called Afghanistan its ''No. 1 priority.''
During the testimony, senators from both parties expressed concern that the Bush administration might become distracted with Iraq and fail to solidify the gains made in Afghanistan in health care, education, women's rights and road building.
''Are we winning or losing?'' asked Senator Richard G. Lugar, an Indiana Republican and the committee chairman. ''Why should we have confidence this is going to work out?''
Security has not been established in huge swaths of the country, and the Taliban are resurgent along the Pakistan border. President Hamid Karzai is still trying to wrest control from provincial governors.
''If security is not achieved, international aid workers and others critical to the reconstruction of Afghanistan will not be able to function,'' Senator Lugar said.
Congress approved a total of $1.6 billion in aid for Afghanistan in 2004. President Bush is expected to ask for $1 billion more in his 2005 budget request next week.
An urgent concern is establishing conditions for presidential and parliamentary elections in June.
William B. Taylor Jr., the State Department's coordinator for Afghanistan, told the committee that voter registration was lagging, with only about 600,000 voters out of 10.5 million on the rolls.
''The Afghan government, the U.N., the international community and the U.S. government are now straining to pick up the pace of registration,'' he said, adding that the election date might slip.
Mr. Taylor acknowledged that the United States and its allies had so far failed to suppress the drug crops. The police are understaffed and unmotivated and drug growers are increasingly brazen, he said, in some regions raising opium poppies in village squares.
--------------------
Bombing Kills Canadian Soldier
(By The New York Times), KANDAHAR, Afghanistan, Jan. 27 -- In one of the worst attacks in Kabul in months, a suicide bomber leaped at a Canadian peacekeepers' vehicle on Tuesday, blowing himself up and killing one soldier and wounding three more, said Maj. Gen. Andrew Leslie, the commander of Canadian forces there. An Afghan civilian was also killed; eight other bystanders were wounded, the police and hospital officials said.
The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack in a telephone call to The Associated Press later in the day, the news service reported.
In October two Canadian soldiers were killed in the area when their vehicle hit a mine.
