Turkey is changing in surprising and encouraging ways, setting a constructive example for the entire Muslim Middle East. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, an Islamic politician who favors democratic pluralism, it has enacted far-reaching reforms that are intended to meet the exacting admissions criteria of the European Union.
Mr. Erdogan, who visits the White House today, is a strongly pro-Western leader who worked hard to repair the breach that opened between Washington and Ankara over the Iraq war, which Turkish public opinion strongly opposed. The Bush administration clearly appreciates those efforts, as the high-level reception awaiting Mr. Erdogan in Washington shows. But the administration can do more, especially on the tangled issue of Cyprus, divided between Greek and Turkish Cypriot sectors. Winning E.U. approval for Turkey's candidacy later this year probably depends on a resolution of this issue.
Mr. Erdogan is now promoting a compromise plan that could reunify the island after 30 years of enforced division. Washington's influence can help clinch a deal by this spring. Failure to make that deadline will solidify Cyprus's division, with just the Greek Cypriot portion of the island joining the E.U. on May 1. That, in turn, could delay Turkey's pending admission to the E.U. for years.
Last spring, the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, came close to brokering a Cyprus settlement. Many ordinary Greek and Turkish Cypriots supported Mr. Annan's efforts. So did Mr. Erdogan. But the plan collapsed when political leaders on both sides of the island refused to submit the plan to popular referendums. The stronger objections came from Rauf Denktash, the long-serving Turkish Cypriot political leader. After elections in the Turkish part of the island last month weakened the grip of Mr. Denktash's party, Mr. Erdogan sought to revive the Annan peace plan.
That will require agreement by Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot leaders to let Mr. Annan fill in the remaining details and submit the plan to popular referendums before May 1. Mr. Erdogan favors this approach and must press Mr. Denktash not to stand in the way. Washington can help by urging Greek Cypriot leaders to accept this accelerated procedure and reminding Turkish generals, who have provided the military muscle for Mr. Denktash's obstructionism, that Turkey's broader interest in joining the E.U. requires a Cyprus compromise.
Turkey's generals claim to be strong defenders of Turkey's pro-Western orientation. By standing behind Mr. Erdogan's Cyprus diplomacy, they can advance Turkey's E.U. candidacy. They should also give strong backing to Mr. Erdogan's efforts to move closer to Western-style democracy. America has a strong interest in Mr. Erdogan's success.
