Look, but don't touch.
Because starting tomorrow, and for only six weeks, the restored and reconfigured Egyptian tombs at the Metropolitan Museum of Art will be unveiled without the protective glass that has obscured their 4,000-year-old limestone carvings for the last nine decades. Scary icons to generations of city schoolchildren, the two tombs -- or ''toons,'' as they were lovingly misdescribed in ''The Catcher in the Rye'' by J.D. Salinger -- have been sheathed in thick glass panels since shortly after they were first opened to the public in 1910 and 1916.
The huge old glass sheets -- too heavy to be cleaned, covered with scratches, tinged green and prone to annoying reflections -- ''distorted the colors in the reliefs,'' said Dorothea Arnold, the museum's curator of Egyptian art, describing the carved, painted limestone images in the offering chamber of the tomb of Perneb.
''It came to such a point that I was ashamed to come in here,'' she said, standing in the tomb on a recent afternoon.
New 11-foot-tall glass panels from Wernberg, Germany, cannot be installed until mid-March. Thirteen of the panels will protect the tomb of Perneb and 10 the newly repositioned tomb of Raemkai.
Hinged for cleaning access, the nonreflective new glass panels, which are engineered to be ''water white,'' reducing the greenish hue, are three-fourths of an inch thick and made of three laminated layers for strength.
And so, this construction-schedule hiccup offers a once-in-a-lifetime viewing opportunity. Quite literally, since few people could be alive who saw the tomb reliefs before the protective glass was first hoisted into place. The Perneb ''is the most complete tomb outside of Egypt,'' said Dr. Arnold, who organized the multimillion-dollar reinstallation of the tombs and five galleries around them. The painted carvings are very rare, she said, gloriously depicting the rituals of libation and sustenance in the afterlife. Describing the glassless limestone reliefs as unencumbered, Philippe de Montebello, the museum's director, said that ''we honestly believe that people approach great things with a deferential attitude.''
Of potential vandalism, he said, ''We are frankly not concerned.''
But the museum will not only trust but also verify. Visitors will be ushered into the once-sacred offering rooms in groups of five, under the supervision of a guard. And atmospheric monitors will signal alarms to empty the tomb chambers if an increase in humidity from visitors threatens the condition of the fragile limestone reliefs.
In the reconstruction, which has been under way for more than two years, five of the 32 galleries and seven study rooms that constitute the Lila Acheson Wallace Galleries of Egyptian Art, some 6,000 square feet of displays housing 800 artifacts, have been reconfigured and reinstalled.
In addition, three of the 18-foot-tall original windows facing Fifth Avenue, as well as ceiling beams of the 1902 building designed by the architect Richard Morris Hunt, have been exposed, along with their street views, for the first time in decades.
The newly redesigned galleries include two devoted to Predynastic and Early Dynastic art up to 2,650 B.C., including four flint hand axes that have been dated to 100,000 to 300,000 years ago, the oldest in the collection.
Two other renovated galleries house the collection's most recent Egyptian works, dating to Roman times, ended around A.D. 400.
But the most striking new feature of the galleries is the reconfiguration of the two tombs. That of Perneb, a sacred royal official, is dated from 2380 to 2350 B.C.; that of Raemkai, a royal prince, is dated to about 2450 B.C. These relics will now serve as the Metropolitan's gateway to the Egyptian wing in ''a dramatic evocation of what it was like to enter the mystery of the tombs,'' Mr. de Montebello said.
Dr. Arnold said that the new setting for the Perneb tomb, which originally took 10 to 15 years to build, more closely represented its natural setting in Egypt. A new rusticated wall of Egyptian limestone from a quarry in Helwan, Egypt, has been built outside the tomb to restore the sense of intimacy conveyed by the original closed courtyard, with its relief carvings of Perneb.
As for the Raemkai tomb, its limestone reliefs have been reassembled in their original enclosed configuration, instead of being ''displayed on the walls looking like easel paintings,'' as Mr. de Montebello put it.
The old presentation of the Raemkai tomb, and even the glass panels, were described by Mr. Salinger in ''The Catcher in the Rye'': ''You had to go down this very narrow sort of hall with stones on the side that they'd taken right out of this Pharaoh's tomb and all,'' he wrote in the voice of his 16-year-old protagonist, Holden Caulfield, adding, ''It was pretty spooky.''
In the novel, a boy asks Holden for directions to the mummies ''in them toons and all,'' and Holden says: ''Toons. That killed me. He meant tombs.'' Holden finds himself alone in the tomb of Perneb. ''It was so nice and peaceful,'' he says, but then he notices an obscenity written ''right under the glass part of the wall, under the stones.''
The new limestone wall at the tomb of Perneb was carved with chisels, and it matches the original walls in every respect, except for the light color of the new stone.
''Give the wall another 4,000 years,'' said Dr. Arnold with a laugh, ''and we'll have a good match.''
