With the annual campaign to raise money for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund drawing to a close, donors continue to send money.
But they are also sending mixed signals.
In recent weeks, the 2003-04 fund-raising effort, which concludes on Saturday, received an influx of donations, closing the gap between the amount raised during this campaign and the tally from one year ago. Fund officials saw the trend as an optimistic sign -- until the momentum diminished over the last few days.
By Monday, contributions totaled $7,548,200.03, 6 percent less than at the same point in the 2002-03 campaign.The number of donors is down as well, by about 11 percent.
Still, the sharp rise in donations earlier this month was gratifying, said Jack Rosenthal, the president of The New York Times Company Foundation, which administers the fund.
The increase came, he said, at a time when the bitter weather was offering a poignant reminder of the daily travails of the poor.
The New York City Department of Homeless Services reported that 38,310 men, women and children in 2003 were homeless, an increase from the 34,576 that were reported in similar straits in 2002.
''The cold magnifies need in this time of sharply higher homelessness,'' Mr. Rosenthal said.
For more than nine decades, the Neediest Cases Fund has come to the aid of New Yorkers facing precisely these types of hardships: the lack of shelter and food, the struggle with illness and family turmoil. Drawing on the support of individuals and corporations, the fund has been able to provide emergency assistance and relief programs to help people in distress stabilize and even rebuild their lives.
With this in mind, the decline in donors is unsettling, said Mr. Rosenthal. ''We have some sense of persistent donor fatigue in the long wake of 9/11,'' he said.
In the future, Mr. Rosenthal said, the hope is to make a stronger connection with younger professionals, without whom the tradition of giving falters.
One such initiative involves a relationship more than a decade old with representatives of New York's young investment banking community.
Jesse Serventi, Oliver Bell, Silpa Pericherla and Rachael Kort are all junior analysts at Citigroup. On Monday, their group presented the foundation with $130,000 worth of checks for the Neediest Cases Fund. The donation was the product of a five-month drive in three financial institutions -- Goldman Saks, CIBC and Citigroup. (Two other banks, Bank of America and First Boston, that also participated have yet to submit their collections.)
With the Neediest Cases Fund, all donations go toward helping struggling individuals and families; while any administrative costs are covered by the foundation. Without such monetary gifts, social workers do not have the flexibility, or as many of the tools, they need to meet the frustrations of New York City's poor.
At the Community Service Society, one of the seven charities supported by the Neediest Cases Fund, money from the fund provides most of the clients' direct assistance, said Sanford Lewis, director of the charity's department of social services.
This assistance can include forestalling foreclosures, providing emergency food or medication, or helping people relocate after an eviction, he said.
''We are the place of last resort for these clients,'' he said. ''We resolve situations that seem unresolvable.''
To the Community Service Society and the six other charities aided by the fund, the decline in donors is worrisome, another cause for concern on top of a sluggish economy.
''The demand far exceeds our ability to help,'' said. Mr. Lewis. It is also cause for concern for the people directly helped by the Neediest Cases Fund, some of whom have shared their stories in The New York Times during the current fund-raising campaign.
One of these is Joseph Suber, whose account appeared on Dec. 10. The fund, and the generosity of donors, gave his family help and hope through a time of personal crisis.
Mr. Suber, 31, is a single father of two boys, Malik, 10, and Jalin, 5. After losing all they owned in a devastating fire at their apartment building in 2002, they had to move to a shelter.
But Mr. Suber was helped by Strive/East Harlem Employment Service, an affiliate of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, another of the charities supported by the Neediest Cases Fund. At Strive he received job training, which helped him find employment and secure a new apartment for his family.
When Corinne Lau, a community relations manager at Ikea Paramus in New Jersey, read the story, she was touched by Mr. Suber's determination to keep his children from living in a shelter.
Ikea furnished his new home with living room and dining room sets and bunk beds for his children -- $2,500 worth of merchandise for a fresh start.
''We wanted to make it a surprise,'' said Ms. Lau.
After some planning and a few white lies, Ms. Lau and her team concocted a scheme to keep Mr. Suber out of his apartment until they were finished decorating. ''He was five minutes away, we were still working,'' said Ms. Lau. When Mr. Suber finally arrived with his son Malik, the last fixture was just being placed.
Mr. Suber was so overwhelmed; he walked in and walked back out. He thought he had entered the wrong apartment.
''I felt like it was on 'Oprah,''' he said. ''I can finally eat dinner at the table with my family.''
Mr. Suber, and recipients like him, are why Estella Otis of Philadelphia wrote a note with her recent $100 donation.
''All your profiles are heart-wrenching,'' she wrote. ''We are thankful for our blessings, and wish to share.''
Donations can still be sent to the campaign. Contributions must be postmarked or made throughCharityWave.com by Jan. 31. to count toward this year's campaign.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,516,794.03  Recorded Monday: 31,406.00  Total: $7,548,200.03  Last year to date: $8,033,998.43
