A decision to cut up a 1954 Elvis Presley master tape and sell the pieces on the Internet infuriated rock 'n' roll aficionados yesterday.
What is purported to be the original recording of the song ''That's All Right'' and nine others from recording sessions Presley and his band did in 1954 and 1955 -- known as the Sun Sessions -- was snipped yesterday at a news conference at Nola Recording Studios in Manhattan.
Rather than preserve the whole reel, a company called Master Tape Collection announced plans to cut the tape into two-inch pieces, each of which will be mounted under Lucite as a plaque. These can be purchased online, at www.elvismastertape.com, for $495 each.
A sample of the recording session played yesterday featured the song ''That's All Right,'' including conversations between Presley; his producer, Sam Phillips, owner of Sun Records, who died last year; and the guitarist Scotty Moore.
Michael Esposito, president of Master Tape Collection, based in Bloomfield, N.J., said that the reel was discovered in 1992 and that it came to him through a broker and a collector. Mr. Esposito said he had played the recording once, preserving it digitally, but that the tape had suffered water damage and was too fragile to be played again.
''What we decided to do is share the tape,'' he said. ''This will never be played again because it will never hold up. It's in such bad shape. It's very brittle.''
There are some questions about the authenticity of the tape. RCA, Presley's recording label, said through a spokeswoman: ''We possess the original tape of the recording. Beyond that, we cannot comment.'' It's not clear whether more than one tape was made of the sessions.
Mr. Esposito claimed that his recording was verified by Tony Bongiovi, an engineer and record producer, and Jim Czak, a sound engineer and record producer, who together helped produce an extensive ''forensic report.'' Both men spoke at the press conference in New York.
Dave Marsh, the veteran rock critic who wrote the book ''Elvis,'' questioned the expertise of these engineers as well as Mr. Esposito. There is no listing for Master Tape with the New Jersey telephone directory and the only Web site is the one for the Presley sale. ''Is this a company that anybody's ever heard of before?'' Mr. Marsh said. ''Or was it something created to exploit this maneuver?'' Mr. Esposito did not return follow-up calls seeking comment.
Before deciding to make pieces available on line, Mr. Esposito tried unsuccessfully to sell the tape in its entirety to RCA. ''Yes, the recordings were offered to us, but they weren't offering anything we didn't already possess,'' the RCA spokeswoman said yesterday.
Mr. Marsh called the decision to destroy the tape outrageous. ''If they were cutting up something that was purported to be the original copy of the Declaration of Independence or an original copy of 'Moby-Dick,' we wouldn't even be asking, 'What's the big deal?' '' Mr. Marsh said yesterday. ''They're destroying something forever that in the future could have real value.''
Whether the tape could be played again is immaterial, Mr. Marsh said. ''You'll find books that if you tried to read them, would turn to dust,'' he said, mentioning, for example, the Gutenberg Bible.
Jim Henke, chief curator at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, was also appalled. ''If indeed it is the original master tape to 'That's All Right,' I think it's a disaster,'' he said. ''To destroy something that's such an important historic artifact is destroying a key part of American culture.''
Elvis Presley Enterprises, the singer's estate, granted a license and agreed to allow Master Tape to certify the plaques. On its Web site, www.elvis.com, the estate explains why. ''The music embodied in the tape is completely and perfectly preserved forever in the vaults of BMG/RCA. Whether it's O.K. to cut up a deteriorated original tape that found its way into a private collection could be debated endlessly.
''We do not own the tape,'' the Web site continues. ''It was not our decision to make. The project would have happened with or without us. Our licensing department's decision was whether to grant the requested licensing cooperation. Master Tape Collection presented convincing evidence of the tape's authenticity, and our licensing department thus felt comfortable working with them.''
At yesterday's news conference no mention was made of the plaques' price. But Mr. Marsh said that what underlied the entire enterprise was greed. ''This is about one thing,'' Mr. Marsh said. ''This is about money.''
''Either they're destroying history or this is a fraud,'' Mr. Marsh said. ''They can't have it both ways. If it isn't valuable, why are they selling it? And if it is valuable, why are they destroying it?''
