Rod Paige arrived in Washington as a champion of urban schooling, a Republican honored by a billionaire Democrat, Eli Broad, at a lavish inaugural gala. Over Champagne and lobster, the most influential figures in education toasted the new education secretary, an architect of the Texas miracle they had heard so much about.
Dr. Paige, a Texan wearing cuff links and cowboy boots as he mingled under the crystal chandeliers, was the Bush administration's star symbol of compassionate conservatism.
But these days his critics say Dr. Paige, who had been superintendent of schools in Houston, has become a symbol of its failed promise, as opposition to the administration's overhaul of public schools grows, and lapses in Houston's record of success -- including falsified dropout rates -- come to light.
At first, Dr. Paige declined to address questions about Houston, saying he was no longer responsible for Houston schools and could not answer for them.
But in a lengthy interview recently, Dr. Paige defended his record in Houston and as secretary of education, saying he was part of ''a very effective team that has good things to get done.''
In a speech to business leaders in Houston last month, he sharply criticized critics of his former school district, accusing them of little more than a pre-election effort to undermine the Bush administration.
''Some people think they can damage the process of national reform and defeat the No Child Left Behind law by striking out at Texas and the Houston Independent School District,'' Dr. Paige said. ''They believe they can win by fighting a proxy war here. So they try to devalue the good work of the people of Houston.''
In his three years in education secretary, Dr. Paige, a child of segregation in Mississippi who just passed his 70th birthday, has traveled the country selling the law, which imposes strict testing and accountability measures on the nation's schools.
He embraces the law's goals as akin to ''life itself'' and often uses the president's own language to describe them. He rejects appeals for a midcourse correction, saying any problems with the law can be fixed through the regulatory process.
''My role is to bring the president's vision into reality,'' the secretary wrote recently in a note of afterthoughts following an interview.
As secretary, Dr. Paige presides over a department with a $53 billion budget covering everything from preschool to college loans, and once unimaginable powers over what goes on in American classrooms.
A crisp and careful dresser, with a striking collection of cowboy boots, Dr. Paige appears much younger than his years. Drawing from his time as a football coach, he occasionally falls back on sports metaphors.
Dr. Paige said he had not thought ahead to whether he would stay on for a second Bush term; Margaret Spelling, chief of the White House Domestic Policy Council, said President Bush had not yet considered the question of second-term appointments ''with him or anyone else.''
The secretary counts among his major victories getting all states to submit their formal plans for how they would comply with No Child Left Behind by last year's deadline. He noted that when he took office, seven years after Congress passed the 1994 precursor to No Child Left Behind, only 11 states had submitted such plans.
Under the Bush law, schools must test students every year in grades three to eight and show that each subgroup -- blacks, Latinos and children with limited English, for example -- is making adequate progress. Failure to show such progress results in a range of progressively more serious sanctions to schools.
Dr. Paige added that on his watch, the Education Department had managed to pass two audits -- which it had done only once before in two decades.
''That took an awful lot of tenacity on the secretary's part,'' said Bill Hanson, who served as Dr. Paige's deputy for the first two years of his term as education secretary.
To some, clean audits might not seem the stuff of greatness, but Dr. Paige maintained that they were crucial to the department's credibility.
''How could we ask for accountability when we ourselves are not accountable?'' Dr. Paige asked. ''How could I stand in front of Congress and hold my head up when we couldn't pass an audit?''
Given Dr. Paige's credentials as a former dean of a school of education and the first education secretary to have headed a major urban school district, supporters and critics alike have expressed surprise that he did not play a more conspicuous role in shaping the No Child Left Behind law. Dr. Paige contends that behind the scenes he collaborated with the White House on drafting it.
''I think the White House has held Secretary Paige's reins too tight,'' said William J. Bennett, the outspoken conservative who served as education secretary under President Ronald Reagan. ''He is very outspoken, he's got clear and strong views, and he hasn't been as loud as I'd like him to be.''
William Taylor, an architect of the original Title I law that compensates schools in poverty, said Dr. Paige had ''started off with a lot of credit in his bank on the Hill'' and was ''deferred to in the Senate and House.'' But Mr. Taylor added, ''Somehow or another, I think that dissipated.''
Mr. Taylor, who largely supports No Child Left Behind, said the secretary ''has had some useful things to say,'' but added, ''He hasn't really been proactive, and he's not thought to be the guy who's calling the shots on legislation.''
Others, however, note that the Bush White House does not encourage cabinet members, particularly on a high-profile issue like education, to stand out.
And Dr. Paige himself said, ''I would not have joined the Bush team if there was space between the president's ideas and mine.''
He first met the Bushes when he worked on President Bush's father's failed presidential bid against Mr. Reagan in 1980. He traces his political rise to a powerful business and civic group, the Greater Houston Partnership, that took the lead in revitalizing the city in the early 1990's and chose Dr. Paige to be its point man on education. There, Dr. Paige test-drove many of the accountability measures now facing the rest of the country. He set goals and held principals accountable, giving bonuses for success and getting rid of those who failed.
But lately questions have emerged about just how successful those methods were. Reports in The New York Times and elsewhere have suggested that the spectacular gains there were illusory -- criticisms that Dr. Paige, who was superintendent from 1994 to 2001, vigorously disputes.
At the same time, resistance to the education law has been growing. With some 26,000 public schools falling short of the law's accountability measures, a handful of school districts are turning down the federal money, and legislatures in a half-dozen states are considering following suit.
Mr. Broad, the billionaire executive, said he was pleased with Dr. Paige's record as education secretary so far. The two have become close allies. In 2002, the Broad Foundation created an award for the best urban school district, and gave Houston first prize. The foundation also contributed heavily toward a $54 million Education Department project that will give parents access to data on the Internet about the academic performance of schools, districts and states.
For his part, Dr. Paige has drawn attention to the Broad Foundation, a relative newcomer in education circles, by joining its seminars for school board members and superintendents and by attending its award ceremonies.
Mr. Broad said he did not have second thoughts about the award his foundation gave Houston, despite reports that the schools there had vastly underreported dropouts and that the Texas state exam appeared to inflate academic gains.
''I still believe that the two best states in education in the last five years are clearly North Carolina and Texas,'' Mr. Broad said.
In Houston recently, Dr. Paige also cast the importance of the law in terms of civil rights. Those remarks dismayed civil rights advocates like Ted Shaw of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, who said the secretary was unfairly polarizing the education debate.
But Dr. Paige described No Child Left Behind as the ''logical next step'' to Brown vs. The Board of Education and said he could not understand how those who support civil rights would essentially attack the law by casting doubt on Houston's record.
''I find it staggering that the very critics and organizations that fought so hard for civil rights could leave our African-American, Hispanic-American and special-needs children behind,'' he said. ''Some critics are just on the wrong side of history.''
Correction:  November 19, 2004, Friday  An article on Jan. 28 about Education Secretary Rod Paige's defense of his policies in the Bush administration misstated the surname of the chief of the White House Domestic Policy Council, who said the president had not decided on changes for the cabinet in the event that he won a second term. She is Margaret Spellings, not Spelling. (The error came to light on Wednesday after Ms. Spellings was nominated to succeed Mr. Paige.)
