IT is not by accident that great barbecue has achieved the status of myth among passionate devotees unlucky enough to live far from the barbecue belt. No other genre of food has spawned as powerful a set of tale-tellers, regaling their audiences with pungent accounts of slow-cooked meat imbued with the scent of wood smoke. Indeed, all the best barbecue literature takes the form of a quest. You can practically hear the lyres a-strumming as the seekers triumph over challenges and obstacles in pursuit of the tender objects of their desire.
As much as anybody, Robert Pearson should understand the mythic nature of great barbecue. Back in 1992, when he opened his first New York restaurant, Stick to Your Ribs in Long Island City, Queens, he said, ''All the best barbecue places that I've been to south of the Mason-Dixon line were on the wrong side of the tracks.''
But now he has taken barbecue to the right side of the tracks, or at least the wealthier side. Last fall, he and his partners opened Pearson's Texas Barbecue in the heart of the Upper East Side, about as unlikely a place as any for finger-lickin', two-steppin', consonant droppin' eatin'.
Nonetheless, there it is, and if New York City has a scarcity of barbecue pits, it is certainly crawling with barbecue fanatics. Not surprisingly, they were drooling in anticipation of Pearson's arrival. Mr. Pearson, a former hairdresser whose own odyssey took him from Britain to New York City to Texas in the 1960's, had earned his barbecue spurs with exceptional brisket in Queens.
As the opening of Pearson's approached, desire and expectation heightened. Alas, the food was a letdown. How could it not be? As Danny Meyer learned at Blue Smoke, you cannot achieve immediate barbecue greatness through technology and money, no matter how careful the planning and earnest the effort. Barbecue works best simply and elementally, and any urban machinery that comes between fire, smoke and meat complicates matters immeasurably. And then there is the unavoidable sense of displacement that occurs when you remove barbecue from its natural environment of pickup trucks and parking lots.
The good news is that Pearson's is slowly but perceptibly improving. As specialists in Texas barbecue, Pearson's centerpiece is rightfully the beef brisket, Texas's great contribution to fine dining. Pearson's brisket ($14.95) will never be mistaken for, say, a good Texas version, or even for the brisket at Pearson's Queens outpost, now housed in a sports bar in Jackson Heights. It is certainly smoky enough. But it is bedeviled by inconsistency. One night, we ordered two plates of brisket at my table. One was excellent, with gradations of smokiness that were simultaneously intense and subtle. The other was dry, overwhelmed by smoke and served in stringy chunks.
Pork shoulder ($14.95), too, is inconsistent. One night it is smoky, tender and moist, the kind of meat you can't resist. Another night it is unpleasantly dry. No such inconsistency mars Pearson's superb hot links ($14.95), cut lengthwise into thin slices, smoky, savory and just spicy enough. The North Carolina-style pork ($14.95), unfortunately, is consistently awful. Served in a supposedly sweet-and-sour sauce, it is devoid of any vinegar flavor and simply renders the lackluster meat wet. Modestly smoky pork ribs ($12 small, $23.50 large), cooked until the exterior is barely crisp, are very good, as was a special one night of beef back ribs.
Except for the sweet, milky cracked corn ($4), full of pleasantly crisp bits, the sides need plenty of work, whether gloppy, too-sweet beans or peppery, acidic collard greens ($3 each). So do the desserts ($5). The pecan pie is so over-caramelized that it is difficult to chew it without sealing your mouth shut.
Unlike Blue Smoke, a stylized New York temple of barbecue, Pearson's sticks close to the rustic tradition. Worn wood floors, plastic chairs and Formica tables are the real thing. Food comes on compartmentalized platters, and sometimes in plastic takeout containers. Nothing is cooked to order. Whether in Texas, Tennessee or New York City, in a barbecue place that would be thoroughly wrong.
Pearson's Texas Barbecue  170 East 81st Street, Upper East Side; (212) 288-2700.
BEST DISHES -- Beef brisket; pork shoulder; hot links; pork ribs; beef back ribs; cracked corn.  PRICE RANGE -- Sandwiches, $9.95; main courses, $12 to $23.50.  CREDIT CARDS -- MasterCard, Visa.  HOURS -- Monday through Wednesday, 5 to 10 p.m. Thursday and Friday, 5 to 11 p.m. Saturday, noon to 3:30 p.m., 5 to 11 p.m. Sunday, noon to 3:30 p.m., 5 to 10 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Step at entrance; more steps to restrooms.
$25 AND UNDER
