Almost 20 years ago, Bruce Frank was the starting point guard for the Teaneck High School team, playing alongside the future N.B.A. player Tony Campbell. Frank was good enough to dream of playing in the N.B.A. himself someday and to earn a place in Howie Garfinkel's Five-Star Basketball Camp.
The camp also held interest for Bruce Frank's younger brother, Lawrence, a 16-year-old who had been cut from the same Teaneck High team.
Their mother, Marilyn, said: ''Lawrence decided to call and say, 'I don't play basketball, but I'd like to go as a coach-trainee.' Garfinkel said: 'I don't know what you're talking about. This is a camp for players. Write me a letter.' ''
So Lawrence Frank wrote Garfinkel a letter, and Garfinkel let him come. ''He gave him a job at night working the canteen, and he walked around with a clipboard, taking notes,'' she said. ''He met the coaches. That was the start of his networking. He met Jeff Van Gundy, all these coaches, and he was just 16 years old.''
Some of the players made it from the camp to the N.B.A. Now Garfinkel has placed his first coach-trainee. Lawrence Frank made his debut as the coach of the Nets on Tuesday in a 94-76 victory at Philadelphia. Less than 48 hours and two sleepless nights after learning that Byron Scott had been let go and he had been promoted, Frank, 33, was in the unlikely position of leading the two-time defending Eastern Conference champion.
His mother and his wife, Susan, took the train together from their homes in Bergen County, N.J., to witness the moment that has been on his mind since childhood. ''When he was a kid, he used to sit there watching and call all the plays,'' his mother said. ''I have two older sons that played basketball. The oldest played in college. It used to drive them crazy. He would never shut up. He'd be calling the plays and they would say, 'What do you know about it?' ''
He began answering that question Tuesday night when the game tipped off.
Asked if he had received any autograph requests Tuesday, Frank said: ''No one wants my autograph. They still think I'm the ball boy.
After learning of his new position just before midnight on Sunday, he went through a sleepless night, watching tape, planning a meeting with players and preparing for practice. Under Scott, Frank had been the visible and vocal face of most practice sessions, so that did not change. But when the team arrived in Philadelphia on Monday night, he began to fulfill a different role.
''Once we got into the hotel, I met with each individual player, brought them up to my room and just talked,'' Frank said. ''We talked about their role, talked about improvements. I wanted to get their input and wanted them to have my feedback. That obviously took a while when you go through every player. Then after that, I started watching some more tape on Philly.''
Frank would not confess to how much he slept, but he did say he was awake by 4:45 a.m. ''I slept some,'' he said. ''You know you don't get this good-looking without sleeping.''
He arrived at the arena before the team bus, writing his game plan and instructions on the boards in the locker room. He then dressed for the role, but with the same suits he had worn as an assistant. ''I'm going to steal a line from the guy you guys keep on referring to, Coach Van Gundy,'' Frank said. ''I remember him saying, the Armanis and the Hugo Bosses, those guys paid him not to wear their stuff. I'll probably be in the same boat. Who wants to give me a suit? Maybe a clown suit.''
