Spray from fire hoses freezes on the uniform, turning firefighters into stiff-armed ice figures. Spray hits the face and causes frostbite, or runs beneath the collar and breeds hypothermia.
Hydrants freeze. Water freezes in hoses. Hoses freeze to the ground. Staircases turn into frozen waterfalls, and firefighters wearing 60 pounds of equipment slip and fall and blow out their knees.
Fighting fires is never easy, but in winter, when fires multiply, so do the dangers. Now firefighters do not battle just thick smoke and oxygen-hungry flames; they must deal with the opposite extreme, ice and the freezing night.
Twelve fires broke out within 12 hours in New York City late Monday and early yesterday -- about double the normal number -- while the temperature hovered in the teens. Rarely have the challenges faced by firefighters in the depths of winter been so starkly underscored.
A 47-year-old grandmother died in a house fire in Brooklyn; her body froze so solidly to the guts of the house that firefighters were afraid to pry her out for fear of collapsing what was left of the building. At least nine firefighters were hurt in slips, trips and falls.
''It was a tough night last night,'' said Capt. Michael Lee of Engine 236 in Brooklyn.
In the cold, even the most basic maneuvers become logistical headaches. ''You want to avoid creating puddles as much as possible,'' said Fire Chief Stanley P. Dawe -- a difficult task to accomplish while pouring thousands of gallons of water onto a building.
Dennis Smith, a former city firefighter who has written a dozen books, said: ''If you have a burst hose and you have to change the hose, you will find the couplings are probably frozen. If you are trying to pull someone to safety, you're doing it on a frozen fire escape where one wrong step will send you down six stories.''
And the technical difficulties are compounded by the physical discomfort.
''One time, at a lumber yard fire in the South Bronx,'' Mr. Smith recalled, ''I literally had icicles hanging from my nose and my eyebrows. When I took my coat off finally, after being out there six hours in subfreezing weather, my coat stood up like a tent.''
Each of the three biggest fires overnight yesterday presented winter complications, said Chief Dawe, who visited all three.
There were numerous frozen hydrants at a four-alarm fire in East New York, Brooklyn. In the fatal fire, in Flatlands, Brooklyn, ice built up on the already-weakened walls of the gutted building as the fire was put out, increasing the danger of collapse. Piled snow in the hills of Washington Heights in Manhattan made footing especially treacherous at an apartment house fire that critically injured three residents.
Everywhere, he said, there was ice. ''Lots of ice. People were slipping and sliding.''
The first major fire of the night was the four-alarm blaze in a three-story building on Liberty Avenue in East New York that began at 11:30 p.m. Two civilians received minor injuries, officials said, and seven firefighters were hurt -- knee strains and sprains, neck and shoulder strains.
''You're wearing 60 pounds of gear and carrying another 20,'' Chief Dawe said. ''If you fall, you're probably going to hurt yourself.''
The second big fire, at 1820 Brooklyn Avenue in Flatlands, was called in at 1:15 a.m., but it had probably been burning for quite some time, the chief said. In the winter, windows are closed tight so neighbors are less likely to smell smoke. Passers-by are fewer, and they are bundled up and looking down, focusing more on their discomfort than their surroundings.
''It was like a big ball of flame blowing everywhere,'' said Mary Brown, 23, a student who lives next door. Ms. Brown said she saw a woman who lives in the house, a Queen Anne inhabited by four generations of a family, drop her baby out a window into the arms of a passer-by, then jump to safety herself.
The baby's great-grandmother escaped in time, but her grandmother, identified by relatives as Beverly Walkes, 47, a lab supervisor at Bellevue Hospital Center, was trapped inside.
Shortly after the firefighters arrived, the back half of the house collapsed. Sixteen hours later, Ms. Walkes's body was still in the remnants of the second floor, coated in ice and half-buried in debris. It took firefighters and a demolition crew the rest of the day to safely reach the body and bring it out.
The third major fire was touched off by a defective space heater in a first-floor apartment of a six-story building on Pinehurst Avenue in Washington Heights, Chief Dawe said. When the woman who lived in the apartment ran out to warn her neighbors and escape, she left her door open, allowing the fire to spread.
The street was too narrow for fire trucks, so firefighters had to park their rigs on West 183rd Street and carry ladders to the building, Firefighter Charlie Markey of Ladder Company 34 in Washington Heights said. The side of the building was covered in ice. The ground was uneven. The building was built into a hill.
''Normally, in the best weather you're going to have a problem with a building like this with portable ladders, with all the bushes,'' Firefighter Markey said.
An icy wind blew off the Hudson, threatening to blow the fire in a new direction and shaking unsteady the ladders. Still, two people were carried to safety down the ladders the firefighters had erected. Three others were led out through a stairwell.
Chief Dawe said firefighters took about 15 people out of the building who might otherwise have died. Three people who were critically injured were taken to Columbia-Presbyterian Center of New York Presbyterian Hospital. Fire and hospital officials did not identify them yesterday.
Around 6 a.m., the firefighters packed up their gear. Katharine Stevens, 42, a doctoral student who had been helped down a ladder from her third-floor apartment by the firefighters, was allowed back in, and she watched them from her window.
''I felt very sad to see them go,'' she said.
