HIGHLIGHTS
SYDNEY: GERMAINE GREER VS. THE PRIME MINISTER -- The feminist author Germaine Greer, left, has drawn fire from Australia's prime minister, John Howard, after writing an article that characterized Australians as a people drifting into mediocrity and ''too relaxed to give a damn.'' In her criticism, the Australian-born Ms. Greer, author of ''The Female Eunuch,'' who now lives in England, likened her former countrymen to the residents of the fictional Ramsay Street in the Australian soap opera ''The Neighbors,'' The Associated Press reported. Writing last week in The Australian, she said, ''If your ambition is to live on Ramsay Street, where nobody has ever been heard to discuss a book or a movie, let alone an international event, then Australia may be the place for you.'' In comments broadcast on television Mr. Howard said, ''What she basically says is that the average Australian is too stupid to think about anything that's the least bit philosophical or important.'' He called Ms. Greer elitist and condescending and declared her ''hopelessly out of touch.''
LONDON: ART AND COMMERCE -- Britney Spears, Beyoncé and Pink dressed up, strode along a blue carpet, listened to the cheers of screaming fans and paid a visit to the National Gallery in London on Monday, The Associated Press reported. But art was secondary to commerce on this occasion, which was actually the first screening of a Pepsi commercial, filmed in Rome, in which they play gladiators and Enrique Iglesias portrays an evil Roman emperor. ''Filming the ad was awesome,'' said Ms. Spears, who wore a black coat over her short strapless black evening dress. ''It made me feel empowered, and I got to work with these two fantastic gladiator women.'' The commercial reworks the old Queen hit ''We Will Rock You.'' Brian May and Roger Taylor of Queen also attended. ''I will die happy,'' Mr. May said.
HONORS: THE DAVE MATTHEWS BAND -- The Dave Matthews Band is to receive the special Chairman's Award at the N.A.A.C.P. Image Awards on March 6 in Los Angeles, The Associated Press reported. The racially mixed band -- the drummer, Carter Beauford; the bassist, Stefan Lessard, and the saxophonist, Leroi Moore, are black, and the violinist, Boyd Tinsley, and Mr. Matthews, the vocalist and guitarist, are white -- was cited for its devotion to social and environmental causes and its ''dignified representation of people of color.'' Julian Bond, chairman of the N.A.A.C.P. board, said, ''To see and hear them is to recognize great talent; to learn of their good deeds is to recognize they are good souls.''
BERLIN: HELMUT NEWTON'S BURIAL: German officials said yesterday that the photographer Helmut Newton, who died last week at 83 in a car crash in Hollywood, is to be buried in Berlin, where he was born. Klaus-Dieter Lehmann, who heads the Prussian Cultural Heritage Foundation, said Mr. Newton's widow, June, had accepted with ''great joy and emotion'' the city's offer of an honorary grave. The site has yet to be chosen, a spokesman for the mayor's office told Agence France-Presse. Last year Mr. Newton signed a contract to turn his archive over to Berlin for display.
JERRY LEWIS: THE RETURN -- Jerry Lewis, 77, is planning to return to performing on March 3 in Las Vegas, now that he has shed 50 pounds and has undergone three months of treatment there in a hospital rehabilitation center to enable him to withdraw from a steroid he was taking for pulmonary fibrosis, a chronic lung ailment, Reuters reported. His publicist, Candy Cazau, said, ''He is feeling great,'' since weaning himself from the steroid prednisone and undertaking a diet and exercise regimen. She said he planned to lose about 20 more pounds, bringing him to 180. She said he hoped to appear in March at the Orleans Hotel and Casino, where he was a regular before his health declined nearly three years ago.
LOS ANGELES: RETURN OF ''THE YARD'' -- Coming in for Burt Reynolds: Adam Sandler. That's the story out of Los Angeles, where The Associated Press reports that Mr. Sandler will star in a remake of ''The Longest Yard,'' the 1974 comedy in which Mr. Reynolds played an imprisoned former football player in a challenge match against the prison's guards. Sherry Lansing, the chairwoman and chief executive of Paramount Pictures, said on Monday that production, with Columbia Pictures, is to begin in June, The Associated Press reported. Discussions are in progress to add the comedian Chris Rock and the rapper Snoop Dogg to the cast.
RENAISSANCE ART -- Assembled from the collections of Queen Elizabeth II, the British Museum, the Victoria and Albert Museum and the Louvre, among many others, the new exhibition at the Frick Collection, first seen last fall at the National Gallery of Canada, commemorates the 500th anniversary of the birth of Girolamo Francesco Maria Mazzola (1503-1540). Far better known as Parmigianino, a name reflecting his native city, Parma, this Renaissance artist left nearly a thousand extraordinary drawings in a career that spanned 20 of his 37 years. Through April 18, 51 of his drawings and 5 of his paintings, including ''Saturn and Philyra,'' above, are to be seen at the Frick in ''A Beautiful and Gracious Manner: The Art of Parmigianino.''
FOOTNOTES
The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts has announced a 10-year, $10 million grant to Creative Capital, a foundation that provides grants and support to individual artists. The gift will provide $1 million a year for nine years and $1 million in cash reserves.
Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  Because of an editing error, a report yesterday in the Arts Briefing column reversed the racial identifications of two members of the Dave Matthews Band, which is to receive a special N.A.A.C.P. award in March. The bassist, Stefan Lessard, is white; the violinist, Boyd Tinsley, is black.
