During his freshman year at U.C.L.A., Ricky Manning Jr. discovered a fact that almost threw his athletic career for a loop.
He was not almost 6 feet tall, as he had long believed. On the contrary, the university's athletic trainers told him, he would live the rest of his days as a decidedly shorter man.
''I really thought I was 5-11 the whole time I was in high school,'' Manning, the Carolina Panthers' rookie cornerback, said at Reliant Stadium on Tuesday, sporting a crooked visor and a sparkling bracelet on his wrist. ''But I was only 5-9.''
The news sent Manning off on a trek to be noticed in any way possible. His jewelry got brighter and his play became bolder in the defensive backfield, a trend that has continued in his first season in the National Football League.
''I used to tease him and say, 'You're like a pit bull with no teeth,' '' Bob Toledo, the former U.C.L.A. coach, said in a telephone interview from Thousand Oaks, Calif. ''But it's not the size of the dog in the fight, it's the size of the fight in the dog. Ricky is a competitor -- a survivor -- and he just has that air of confidence.''
That air has breathed youth and crackling energy into a Carolina team that is considered an underdog in Sunday's matchup here against the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XXXVIII.
Manning brings a West Coast braggadocio that belies his 180-pound frame, a confidence born of playing college football in the nation's second-largest media market and playing it well.
With DeShaun Foster, the Panthers' second-year running back, also a former U.C.L.A. player, Carolina has benefited from a pipeline of talent from the Pac-10 university. (The Panthers also drafted tight end Mike Seidman from U.C.L.A. last April, but he has been injured most of the season and will not play in the Super Bowl.)
Foster has given Carolina Coach John Fox a speedier complement to the pounding Stephen Davis, while Manning has added moxie and a big-play mentality to a sturdy defense.
Their presence in Charlotte is not by chance. Kelly Skipper, a former U.C.L.A. assistant coach under Toledo, is the son of the Panthers' running backs coach, Jim Skipper.
''Kelly coached DeShaun directly and recruited Ricky Manning,'' Jim Skipper said. ''When you know someone at the school, their word has a little bit more roar to it. We personally knew the coaches and we knew that they were both tremendous football players.''
Both Manning and Foster had to overcome incidents off the field that hurt their draft status.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association suspended Foster for the final three games of his senior year, in 2001, for accepting the use of a Ford Expedition from a Hollywood producer and actor named Eric Laneuville.
Foster, who had been a top Heisman Trophy candidate, fell into the second round of the N.F.L. draft.
In April 2002, Manning got into a fight with two men at a bar near the U.C.L.A. campus and was arrested on a charge of felony assault. The charge was eventually dropped, but the incident (along with questions about his size) dropped Manning into the third round of the draft.
Skipper and the Panthers were undeterred in their enthusiasm for Foster and Manning.
''They are good, high-character guys,'' Skipper said. ''In this profession that we're in, everything is magnified and nothing is routine when you get out of line. Therefore, it's a bigger issue than it is.''
Toledo said of Manning's bar fight: ''That wasn't him starting the fight, that was him finishing it. He had to defend himself. If he was being picked on, he wasn't going to back down.''
Manning and Foster said the glare of Los Angeles prepared them for the cold realities of the N.F.L. Foster, recalling his suspension, said: '' I was young. I've grown and matured from it.''
Manning almost seems to play in a perpetual state of focused fury, manhandling receivers much taller and snatching the ball from their hands. Against St. Louis in a National Football Conference divisional playoff, Manning intercepted a Marc Bulger pass intended for Torry Holt by stealing the ball from him.
Against Philadelphia in the N.F.C. championship game, Manning picked off three passes.
His teammates, understandably, are impressed.
''The thing is, Ricky's good,'' Carolina safety Mike Minter said. ''From Day 1 he told you guys that, after the draft, he was going to make all of those teams that passed him up look foolish. Then you put that talent and confidence with some veterans, and what you've got is a football player.''
Skipper said: ''Once that preseason is over, you're not a rookie. That doesn't mean you limit your ability. If you're a baller, you're a baller. If this car is 10 years old or brand new, it doesn't matter. Just start those keys and get going.''
Other than fulfilling his rookie duties by buying breakfast sandwiches for the veterans on Saturday and chicken on Sunday during the season, Manning has filled his role like an old pro. He replaced Terry Cousin, who injured his calf on Nov. 30, and has not relinquished the starting job.
For each of his seven interceptions this season, including the postseason, Manning has brought each of the seven pairs of football gloves he used back to his tiny Charlotte apartment.
One day, he plans to mount them on his wall in the style of Willie Mays Hayes, the character played by Wesley Snipes in ''Major League.''
That news does not surprise Toledo, who was once startled in his office at U.C.L.A. by Manning directing a remote-control car through Toledo's front door.
''I had to put the muzzle on him every once in a while, but he was one of my fondest memories,'' said Toledo, who was asked just how tall Manning really is.
''We had him at 5-9. But we were hedging.''
PRO FOOTBALL
