Olga Neuwirth's ''locus . . . doublure . . . solus'' for piano and orchestra is more an accusation than an offer of consolation. Raw, shrill, scratching away at the conventional comforts of musical beauty, this seven-part piece composed by this Austrian in her mid-30's is a kind of frontline journalism: written skillfully, with imagination and in high-drama mode.
Its place on the Cleveland Orchestra's program at Severance Hall on a cold Saturday night -- after the Overture to Mozart's ''Don Giovanni'' and before Strauss's ''Alpine'' Symphony -- showed just how different the very function of music has become for many who now compose it.
If Mozart's opera broods on the wages of sin, it places listeners at a comfortable distance from the brink of damnation; it invites orderly contemplation. Strauss's somewhat overweight exercise in musical mountaineering is one of his several glosses on people's lives, with happy endings included. Stuffed full of virtuoso detail, but emitting gasps of great beauty from time to time, the ''Alpine'' Symphony wakes us up, sends us up the mountain, provides a few frissons of danger, douses us with a thunderstorm and then sends us safely down to bed.
Ms. Neuwirth's piece offers no such reassurance. Her title refers back to the historical curios and legends imagined by the writer Raymond Roussel, an early-20th-century fabulist. Yet it is hard not to hear in this music a declaration of unhappiness with the world right now. Ms. Neuwirth's fits of depression are ingenious. Mistuned strings create foggy eeriness. Chord combinations grate forcefully on the ear. Shrill peeps and percussive explosions offer theatrical punctuation.
Marino Formenti at the piano is all palms, fingers, fists and forearms. The results sting, and Mr. Formenti's balletic mugging of the instrument make the pricks sharper. If beauty in music is a standard that secures our attention and conveys a message, however unpleasant, directly to the listener's heart, then ''locus . . . doublure . . . solus'' is beautiful. We should store its impressions in our minds, but perhaps not hear it too often.
Franz Welser-Möst, who was thought a curious choice to take over this great orchestra a few years ago, seems to have secured a place with his players. A recent trip to Vienna won admiration for the orchestra and a hometown-hero reception for the conductor. Mr. Welser-Möst also seems confident in the sophistication of a Cleveland audience that has come to expect elegance and passion in older music as well anything the present can throw at it.
CLEVELAND ORCHESTRA REVIEW  Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  A picture caption with a music review yesterday misstated the name of the performing group. As shown in the review and the headline, it is the Cleveland Orchestra, not the Cleveland Symphony.
