Tenet Healthcare, the hospital chain that grew through aggressive acquisitions before becoming mired in federal investigations, is planning to sell more than a quarter of its hospitals in an effort to reverse its declining fortunes.
Tenet will announce on Wednesday that it intends to sell 27 hospitals, leaving it with 69 in 13 states, its chief executive, Trevor Fetter, said Tuesday night. Among those to be sold are 19 in California, accounting for more than half of the hospitals it owns in its home state.
And in what will probably surprise Wall Street, Mr. Fetter said that Tenet would announce that its earnings for the fourth quarter of 2003 would be ''significantly below'' the 11 cents a share analysts had been expecting. It will also say that it expects to break even in 2004 -- and that is before revamping charges -- a result far below the profit of 50 cents a share that analysts had been expecting.
The news could put pressure on the company's share price, which closed down 85 cents Tuesday, at $16.15. The stock hit a 52-week high last Wednesday of $18.73 on hopes that the worst was behind the company. Tenet's problems started in October 2002 when its shares traded at about $50.
Mr. Fetter, who took over as chief executive in September, said in an interview late Tuesday that executives performed an extensive review of operations and decided that the company had to focus on a core group of better-performing hospitals if it was to improve its financial performance.
''By getting smaller,'' he said, ''we will be able to accelerate the time it takes for a turnaround.''
Among other things, he said, the sale would reduce the amount the company would need to spend to meet California seismic regulations to $300 million from $1.9 billion.
Mr. Fetter denied that the sales were needed to raise cash to pay for what some analysts have estimated could be hundreds of millions or even billions of dollars in liabilities stemming from the federal investigations and malpractice lawsuits.
He also said the company was not entering a downward spiral in which the sale of hospitals would lower earnings in the long run, perhaps necessitating further sales. ''Far from a downward spiral,'' he said, ''this is an act that will reveal a strong core of hospitals.''
But Darren Lehrich, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey, said the divestitures indicated that Tenet's turnaround was far from imminent. ''With the magnitude of this asset sale, we're still at least two years away from having that,'' said Mr. Lehrich, who issued a report on Monday predicting the divestitures and lowering his rating on the stock.
Tenet, based in Santa Barbara, Calif., is the focus of numerous federal investigations of its charges to Medicare, its relationships with doctors and other practices. The company's earnings, which grew rapidly for several years as it took advantage of an oddity of the Medicare system, have deflated since it stopped doing that.
It also faces numerous malpractice suits connected with its hospital in Redding, Calif., where two doctors were suspected of performing unnecessary heart procedures. The company paid $54 million to the government in connection with those accusations.
The divestitures are a reversal of course for Tenet, which became the nation's second-largest hospital chain behind HCA through acquisitions. Before its problems started a little more than a year ago, Tenet had 113 hospitals, but it has been selling or closing some even before the latest announcement.
With 69 hospitals, it would lose its second-place ranking, at least in number of hospitals, to Community Health Systems of Brentwood, Tenn., which has 72 hospitals in 22 states. Based on revenue, however, it might remain second.
Tenet said the hospitals that it would shed had net operating revenue of $2.7 billion in fiscal 2003 and collectively had a slight operating loss. Besides those in California, the other hospitals to be sold are in Louisiana, Massachusetts, Missouri and Texas.
Tenet said it hoped to complete the sales by the end of this year and to realize net proceeds of about $600 million. Much of those proceeds will come from tax benefits stemming from the losses Tenet expects to incur on the sales.
Tenet said its earnings were continuing to deteriorate, not only because its Medicare reimbursements had fallen but also because managed care companies were driving harder bargains, and expenses from patients not paying their bills were rising. It said that it expected those conditions to continue through 2004 and that it did not anticipate returning to typical industry profit margins even in 2005.
The company is also expected to say that it will take a charge of about $1.4 billion in the fourth quarter of 2003, in part to write down the value of hospitals.
Tenet said it anticipated that its deteriorating financial results would place it in violation of covenants for a $1.2 billion line of credit by the second or third quarter of this year. But the company, which has $600 million in cash and no significant debt repayments due before 2006, said it was hopeful it could work something out with lenders.
