Just weeks after paying a big fine for its financial dealings with the Enron Corporation, the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce faces imminent regulatory action for providing more than $1 billion in financing to investors who made illegal mutual fund trades, according to people briefed on the inquiry.
The New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, and the Securities and Exchange Commission are considering filing suits within a couple of weeks against Canadian Imperial for arranging these financings, people briefed on the investigation said. The regulators could also file suit against senior executives who were aware of the activity, they said.
Through the financing, the bank helped hedge funds make far bigger bets in mutual fund shares, primarily though the use of derivatives. In some cases, the bank financed trades made after stock trading had closed but at an earlier price, according to those briefed on the investigation. The practice, known as late-day trading, is illegal.
A spokesman for Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce declined to comment on the regulators' inquiry, other than to confirm that the bank was cooperating with the investigation.
Just last month, Canadian Imperial reached an $80 million settlement with the S.E.C. over financings that it arranged for Enron. Those deals allowed Enron to hide debt and inflate its profit by more than $1 billion and its operating cash flow by almost $2 billion, according to the settlement.
In the mutual fund investigation, the activities in question probably produced relatively small profits. The financings being examined by regulators would have yielded a few million dollars in fees, estimated Frank Partnoy, a law professor at the University of San Diego and a former Wall Street trader. ''They couldn't possibly have made enough money to have made it worth it,'' he said.
Other companies under investigation for their role in improper fund trading have also said that their gains from such activities were small. Janus, for example, has said that it will return $32 million to investors in its funds to compensate them for improper trading.
In the case of Canadian Imperial, the bank may have been eager to bolster its investment bank in the United States, said one person briefed on the investigation. For years a bit player, it made some headway in the 1990's in junk bonds and other specialized financings.
The bank became involved in the fund financing at the request of a broker at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, which it owned for about five years before selling a majority stake in the firm a year ago, this person said.
The bank has said little since the regulators' interest was disclosed about two and a half weeks ago. But it has quietly stopped financing short-term mutual fund trades by hedge funds, according to a person briefed on the bank's activities. It has also forced out several executives in New York, according to people who know them.
Two traders, Paul Flynn and Jeff Haas, were quietly asked to leave in December, after the bank learned that they had been contacted by regulators, these people said. Their departures were previously reported by TheStreet.com.
Keith Wellner, a lawyer who sat near the two men on the trading desk and reviewed the financings, has also left, they said. Robert Deutsch, a managing director who supervised the two traders, has since left. ''Deutsch sat right next to them,'' said Michael Lubin, a former trader at the bank, referring to Mr. Flynn and Mr. Haas.
Mr. Deutsch reported to Brian G. Shaw, deputy chairman of CIBC World Markets, the investment banking subsidiary of the bank.
A lawyer representing Mr. Flynn and Mr. Haas, James Walden of O'Melveny &amp; Myers, declined to comment. Mr. Shaw also declined to comment.
Mr. Wellner did not return calls. Mr. Deutsch could not be reached.
Individuals close to the investigation said that lending officers were aware of the trading.
Representatives of the S.E.C. and Mr. Spitzer's office declined to comment.
Canadian Imperial set up accounts that were one-third backed by hedge funds and two-thirds backed by the bank, according to people briefed on the investigation. In return for the capital, the hedge funds agreed to pay a specific interest rate on the bank's capital. This trading, known as a total return swap, allowed the hedge funds to make bigger bets and potentially to generate greater profits on smaller investments.
Once the bank agreed to finance a hedge fund's trades, the hedge fund routed the illegal fund trades through brokerage firms or other third parties, the people said. A number of the trades were processed through Security Trust, an intermediary in the processing of mutual fund trades by pension plans.
The inquiry comes after federal regulators shut down Security Trust, which was accused of facilitating hundreds of illegal late trades made by Edward J. Stern, who ran Canary Capital Partners, a hedge fund.
Canadian Imperial would have been aware that its money was being used to make illegal trades, people briefed on the regulators' investigation said, because its senior loan officers monitored the trading. ''The credit department of the bank did due diligence,'' one person said.
The bank financed trades on behalf of Mr. Stern, as well as hedge funds referred by the Oppenheimer broker, Michael A. Sassano, according to people briefed on the investigation. He was one of Oppenheimer's top brokers, known for generating several million dollars a year in commissions, senior brokers at the firm said.
While Mr. Sassano knew his clients were rapidly trading in and out of funds, it is unclear whether he knew about any after-hours trading, a person close to the investigation said.
Mr. Sassano has been ''laying low,'' a former colleague said. A secretary said that he was out of the country when first contacted. A lawyer for Mr. Sassano, Ira Lee Sorkin, said that ''at all times Mr. Sassano acted appropriately.'' Although Mr. Sassano did refer clients to CIBC, ''he had no involvement in determining whether the bank would lend money,'' Mr. Sorkin said.
An Oppenheimer spokeswoman said the firm and Mr. Sassano were cooperating with the investigation.
The investigation is a setback for the bank's United States ambitions.
''There is no question they have struggled in the U.S.,'' said Robert Wessel, a stock analyst with National Bank Financial. Canadian Imperial made more than $1.5 billion as an early equity investor in Global Crossing, the telecommunications company that later filed for bankruptcy protection. But excluding that gain, the bank has sustained meaningful losses in the United States, Mr. Wessel said.
The company has written down hundreds of millions of dollars on loans to American companies including Enron and even Global Crossing, which it profited from in other ways. In September, a jury in Los Angeles County found in favor of a group of investors and reached a $52 million verdict against the bank for failing to provide complete financial information in a junk bond offering backed by CIBC.
The bank has scaled back its activities in the United States, partly because of adverse market conditions. It has agreed to drop some types of specialized corporate finance for three years as part of its settlement with regulators over Enron, and it is holding fewer corporate loans. The bank sold most of its stake in Oppenheimer a year ago, although it retains a one-third interest.
A spokesman for the bank said its United States investment bank was a critical part of its banking activities, adding that it still has a thousand employees in this country.
