SOME chefs cook by instinct, unable to say why they do what they do except that it just seems right. Others cook while steadily thinking about what they are doing and the reasons why, about the relationship of flavors and textures, the history of a recipe, about a method or an ingredient.
The first group may create great dishes, but the thinkers are much more interesting to talk to.
Sam Hayward, the chef and an owner of Fore Street restaurant in Portland, Me., is a thinker. In his home here on a recent frigid day he was pondering the penetrating aromas and flavors of sauerkraut, that acidic combination of sweet and sour that people either love or hate.
It is easy to understand why old-time Mainers found sauerkraut irresistible. On this particular day, when the trees here cracked with the force of the ice in their limbs, Mr. Hayward baked sauerkraut in a crock with juniper berries and rosemary and a robust portion of braised smoked bacon. The fat sweetness of the pork mingled with the crisp flavors and soft textures of the kraut to make a dish that soothed the palate and calmed the soul.
Before refrigeration, of course, cabbage needed to be preserved through the winter: sauerkraut was the result. It is a utilitarian product, but a delectable one, too.
''I'm fascinated with how sheer necessity came up with things that are absolutely delicious and that stay in our foodways for generations, long after the need has passed,'' Mr. Hayward said.
The kraut in Mr. Hayward's kitchen came from Morse's Sauerkraut, a family-owned company in Waldoboro, Me., that has produced naturally fermented sauerkraut from locally grown cabbages since 1918. ''Naturally fermented'' means that the cabbage was pickled in its own brine, which is created when sliced cabbage mingles with a hefty dose of salt. Salt draws out the sweet vegetable juices, eventually producing lactic acid to further preserve the cabbage and in the process turn it into something better. Much better.
Naturally fermented vegetables have a high amount of ascorbic acid, Mr. Hayward explained. ''People in this climate did not have access to vitamin C all the time,'' he said. ''They had to take it where they could get it. They got so they craved these things in the depths of winter.''
While he talked, he broke apart a thick slab of meaty bacon that he had braised that morning, chilling and weighting it to make it more compact. ''I rubbed the meat with aromatics -- black pepper, rosemary, thyme,'' he said. ''I like to roast black peppercorns over the fire for a couple of minutes before cracking them. You get this great, nutty aroma that way.''
He threw a handful of peppercorns into a frying pan and set them over the gas ring. As soon as the peppers began to crackle, he stuck the pan under my nose. A little waft of smoke carried the penetrating aroma, almost cuminlike in its intensity.
Mr. Hayward's kitchen is a comfortable, colorful space with cabinets painted pale green and deep teal, slate countertops and a big, wide floor-to-ceiling brick chimney that embraces a wood-fired oven tall enough to use for baking as well as grilling.
He arranged meaty pieces over the kraut that he had mounded in an oven dish. ''It's nitrate-free bacon,'' he said. ''It comes from a butcher in North Anson who calls it uncured smoked bacon. It's definitely salted, but it lacks the sharp, almost sour flavor we associate with nitrate-cured pork products.''
The liquid and fat from the braised bacon were used to flavor the kraut. Some recipes call for sauerkraut to be thoroughly rinsed before using but Mr. Hayward does not do that. ''You rinse away the flavor,'' he said. After he mixed in some of the braising liquid and the chilled fat, he set the kraut in the oven, then turned his attention to a little pile of small yellow-fleshed potatoes. He sautéed them in the rest of the pork fat, then finished their cooking later in the dish of kraut and bacon.
''Sometimes I do this with beans instead,'' he said. ''Jacob's cattle beans are great with caramelized onions and reconstituted dried mushrooms. Add some chicken stock and put them to bake right beside the kraut.''
And if you do not have chicken stock? He looked bemused, as if he were thinking, Would anyone not have chicken stock?
''You know, there are byproducts of normal cooking that really make a huge difference. If you're roasting a chicken, for instance, and you have juices left in the pan, take that extra step and deglaze the pan. Then put the juice away, in the freezer if necessary. It can substitute for stocks in many dishes that might otherwise be diminished in intensity.''
He contemplated the finished kraut with its crisp-edged potatoes and succulent pork. ''Brine-fermented foods are very friendly to wine,'' he said, ''but the best accompaniment is good hard cider right out of the barrel. There was a time when every household around here would have had a barrel of cider bubbling away.''
He looked up, pondering another connection with past necessities. But I tucked into the sauerkraut before he could get started.
ROASTED SAUERKRAUT AND BACON  Adapted from Sam Hayward  Time: About 4 hours plus 2 hours' chilling
1 tablespoon black peppercorns  6 juniper berries  2 sprigs fresh rosemary, leaves only  1 teaspoon fresh winter savory leaves, chopped  1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves  6 fennel seeds  1 12-ounce slab smoked meaty bacon, preferably nitrate-free, rind removed
1/4 cup sweet apple cider  2 pounds naturally fermented sauerkraut (see note)  1 1/2 pounds small Yukon Gold or other yellow-fleshed potatoes  Sea salt and ground black pepper.
1. Heat oven to 275 degrees. Place peppercorns in a small skillet over medium-high heat. Toast until they are crisp and give off a nutty aroma. Transfer to a mortar and grind to a coarse powder, gradually adding and pounding in juniper berries, rosemary, savory, thyme and fennel seeds.  2. Rub bacon well with mixture, shaking off excess. Place bacon in a small ovenproof dish. Add cider and enough water to come halfway up sides of bacon. Cover lightly with foil and bake 3 hours, turning bacon halfway during cooking. Check occasionally and add boiling water as necessary to maintain level of liquid in dish. Remove dish from oven and cool until warm; bacon should be very tender but intact. Place a heavy plate on bacon to weight it as it cools. Place dish in refrigerator for 2 hours.  3. Heat oven to 350 degrees. Drain sauerkraut and place in a ceramic baking dish. Break bacon slab into large irregular pieces or cut into 1 1/2-inch cubes, and scatter over kraut. Remove 2 tablespoons of solidified fat from bacon dish, and reserve. Stir remaining jelled liquid and fat in dish, adding enough water so there is about  1/2 cup in dish. Spoon about  1/3 cup over bacon and kraut, cover, and bake for 30 minutes.  4. While bacon and kraut bake, prepare potatoes: If potatoes have smooth skins, they need not be peeled. Cut in two lengthwise. Melt reserved fat in a medium skillet, and add potatoes cut-side down. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Sauté over medium heat until browned on bottoms, about 5 minutes. Turn and continue to cook for a few minutes, then add remaining braising liquid and remove from heat.  5. When kraut has cooked for 30 minutes, remove from oven and push kraut to one side of dish. Add potatoes and their liquid to other side, and return to oven until potatoes are tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
Note: Naturally fermented kraut is sold in health food stores, in some food markets, and from Morse's Sauerkraut, (866) 832-5569, $10.50 plus shipping for 3 pounds.
