At 57, Douglas Warner was out of work, depressed and had lost everything betting on football. Before that, he had flopped playing the stock market, and the bills were piling up. He was a Willy Loman of the post-dot-com age.
But Mr. Warner had a plan to set his life straight, his fiancée and the Suffolk County Police said on Tuesday. He would kidnap the owner of a Long Island company that had given him sports betting advice and demand that the $200,000 he had lost be returned. So last week, the police said, Mr. Warner packed a handgun, stun gun and bullet-resistant vest into his fiancée's Buick and drove from his Ohio home to New York to get his money back.
Mr. Warner's trip ended in a jail cell after an unsuccessful attempt to extort the $200,000 from Platinum Sports Advisory, the Oakdale sports betting firm he had relied on for tips. But not before Mr. Warner had enacted his own forlorn, wintertime version of ''Dog Day Afternoon,'' the cinematic tale of a robbery gone awry.
''I just can't believe he's done this,'' said his fiancée, Gilda Davis, who shared a home with Mr. Warner in Springboro, Ohio, near Cincinnati. ''He's been acting kind of high-strung and temperamental with me. We didn't even talk.''
Mr. Warner had been traveling back and forth to Las Vegas to gamble, and when he took off last week in her car, Ms. Davis said, she assumed he had set off on another routine trip to try to regain his losses.
After arriving in New York on Thursday, Mr. Warner parked himself outside Platinum Sports Advisory and watched its employees come and go, Suffolk County Police Detective Lieutenant Edward Reilly said in a news conference on Tuesday. Mr. Warner had had heated phone conversations with the firm's executives that he meticulously tape-recorded and documented, Ms. Davis said.
On Sunday, Mr. Warner followed one of the firm's executives out of the parking lot and onto the road, but soon lost him in the Long Island traffic, the police said. He drove back to the company and waited until its owner, George Villano, 47, walked out, then grabbed him at gunpoint.
They drove to Mr. Villano's home nearby, and Mr. Villano persuaded Mr. Warner to accept $4,800 in cash as a down payment. Mr. Villano dropped Mr. Warner off at the Sayville Motor Lodge, promising that the two would meet again the next morning, when Mr. Villano would give Mr. Warner the rest of the $200,000.
Mr. Villano called the police.
At 10 a.m. Monday, Mr. Warner returned to Platinum Sports, wearing a blue bulletproof vest and carrying a stun gun. He left his loaded pistol in the Buick. When officers approached him, he pulled out the stun gun and tried to fight them off, the police said. It took five officers to subdue him.
Mr. Warner will be arraigned on Wednesday at First District Court in Central Islip on a litany of charges including kidnapping, robbery and attempted grand larceny, the police said. When his fiancée reached him by telephone, he told her not to hire a lawyer, that he would rather rot, Ms. Davis said.
She said she had been up for hours listening to Mr. Warner's taped conversations and poring over his financial records to figure out how the middle-aged, middle-class guy she had been with for 11 years decided to salvage his life in such a hapless, desperate fashion.
It began two years ago, when he lost his job with a marketing firm after having worked there for 15 years. He was a college graduate who had played football on scholarship, Ms. Davis said.
Mr. Warner tried to play the stock market, but he lost even more money, Ms. Davis said. Then, last fall, Mr. Warner heard about the legal gambling advice Platinum Sports offered for a fee, and he dived in.
Ms. Davis said he began flying to Las Vegas every week to gamble and often spent three days there and four at home. He was secretive, but Ms. Davis said that the phone rang often when he was home and that he often sent large sums of cash to New York.
Investigators said Mr. Warner had paid $20,000 to $40,000 to Platinum. The police and Suffolk County's Consumer Affairs Department said there had been no prior complaints or charges filed against the company.
Mr. Warner mentioned that the owners of Platinum were going to cut him into their business, Ms. Davis said, but there was no sign he was doing anything but losing.
''He lost everything he had,'' said Ms. Davis, who blames Platinum for her fiancé's woes. ''They took it all. He's got about $6,000 sitting in a little piddly checking account, and the bills are atrocious. He's got nothing.''
