The share prices of Brazil's top poultry exporters are soaring, lifted first by a case of mad cow disease in the United States, and now rocketing as flocks in Thailand are decimated by the deadly avian flu sweeping Asia.
Shares of Sadia, Perdigão and Seara Alimentos, three companies that have led Brazil's drive to overtake the United States as the world's top poultry exporter in dollar terms, were up an average of 16.5 percent on Tuesday from last Thursday. That was when the news of avian flu broke, and markets began evaluating the havoc wrought on Thailand, the world's fourth-largest exporter behind Brazil, the United States and the European Union.
Since Dec. 23, the day before the United States reported a case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy in Washington State and several countries closed their borders to American beef, the rise has been even more marked -- an average of 36 percent.
''It's a sign that Brazil in general, and these companies in particular, stand to gain from these health scares,'' said Daniel Pasquali, who tracks the sector for Fator Doria Atherino, a São Paulo broker.
To maintain that advantage, Brazil is tightening controls at ports and airports. That is a sizable undertaking for a nation that last year exported two million tons of poultry worth $1.9 billion to more than 120 countries, according to the Brazilian Poultry Export Association.
The agriculture ministry is also expected to spend $40 million on sanitary measures this year, double the amount spent last year.
''We have the benefit of being far away from these flashpoints, so we must keep it that way by controlling ins and outs very carefully,'' said Julio Cardoso, president of Seara and the export association.
Since the outbreak of avian flu in Asia, Mr. Cardoso said, Seara's 4,000 suppliers have been forbidden to receive visitors from potentially infected areas. Brazil has banned all imports of eggs or any genetic material from affected countries.
So far, the disease has killed at least eight people in Southeast Asia; in Thailand alone, 10 million chickens have been culled to head off a potential epidemic among humans.
Japan, which bought 60 percent of Thailand's $1.3 billion in poultry exports last year, and the European Union have both closed their borders to fresh and frozen Thai chicken.
But in Brazil, where poultry exports have doubled in three years, that misfortune means new business.
According to Mr. Cardoso, orders from Japan have risen in recent days, and prices are up 30 percent. Mr. Cardoso predicted that Brazil's poultry exports would rise at least 10 percent this year.
To that end, a delegation of sanitation specialists from Brazil's Agriculture Ministry left for Asia late last week, hoping to drum up new business not only in poultry, but also in beef and pork exports to Japan, Taiwan and South Korea.
But while Brazil meets all international sanitary standards for poultry, it does not for beef.
The bans by Japan, Taiwan and South Korea on imports of United States beef after the case of mad cow disease was reported on Dec. 24 were widely seen as an opportunity for Brazil and Argentina, two main rivals of the American beef industry. Cattle in those countries graze on pasture and are not fed the ground-up animal parts often blamed as a cause of mad cow disease.
Yet so far, South American beef producers have not won access to Asian markets because they cannot meet international standards that demand that herds be free from foot-and-mouth disease and have not had to be vaccinated against the disease.
Although Brazil has registered no cases of foot-and-mouth disease since 2001, about 15 percent of the country's commercial herd of 180 million animals, especially cattle in remote northern states, still cannot be guaranteed free of the disease, government officials say.
Still, the delegation hopes to persuade Asian authorities by pointing to the $600 million the Brazilian government has spent over the last four years on vaccination programs and improvements in sanitary standards across the meat industry.
The main problem, said Marcus Vinícius Pratini de Moraes, a former minister of agriculture who now heads the Beef Exporters Association, is that rich countries protect their own farmers and frequently change regulations to suit those ends. ''Today, sanitary standards very often are just another word for protectionism,'' he said.
Still, both Mr. Pratini de Moraes and Mr. Cardoso agreed that increased access to Asian poultry markets would probably give Brazil more leverage to prize open those countries' beef markets.
Mr. Pratini de Moraes predicted that Brazil could become the world's undisputed top meat producer and exporter within three years.
Unlike the energy and telecommunications sectors, big agribusiness and the government of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva are in agreement, both stressing the importance of investments to guarantee sanitary standards in Brazil.
''Even in these times of budget cuts, the president has guaranteed us we will have every cent of every dollar we need to attain top standards,'' Mr. Cardoso said.
