A Long Island man has been charged as one of three drivers who struck a young woman during a hit-and-run killing on Jan. 18 in Queens, the police said last night.
The driver, Raymundo Herrera, 32, a chef at a restaurant in Long Beach, on Long Island, where he lives, was arrested at his home and charged with criminally negligent homicide and leaving the scene of an accident, a police spokesman said. He was in custody in Queens.
The police said they believed that the car they said he was driving, a gray Nissan S.U.V., delivered the lethal blow to Natalie Guzman, 18, after she had been knocked down by a first car and struck by a second while crossing Roosevelt Avenue near 111th Street at 5:30 a.m..
Police detectives tracked a license plate number provided by a witness to an address in Long Beach, where they found the car and impounded it. The car's undercarriage appeared to have traces of human flesh on it, the police said. A report yesterday from the medical examiner showed the flesh matched that of Ms. Guzman.
''We're very happy,'' Shi Rodriguez, Ms. Guzman's cousin, said of the arrest. ''Her mother won't rest until her daughter has justice.''
Two livery cab drivers at the scene of the accident were instrumental in helping the police find Mr. Herrera. One stopped when he saw Ms. Guzman lying in the road. Then, the gray Nissan sped toward her, forcing that cab driver and others who had stopped to help to jump out of the way. Her body flipped three times, that driver told detectives.
He then called out to the other driver, ''Go get him, chase him,'' according to the police spokesman. The second driver followed the car to the next stoplight and was able to copy the plate number onto a napkin.
That driver, reluctant to approach the police, gave the napkin to the first driver, who passed it on to detectives. ''He has done a great public service by recording this, and we want him to come forward,'' the police spokesman, Paul Browne, said.
Mr. Browne said that Mr. Herrera acknowledged that he had been in Queens on Jan. 18th but denied driving past where Ms. Guzman had been hit on Roosevelt Avenue.
