Before Aaron Boone joined a pickup basketball game on Jan. 16, the Yankees could name their 25-man roster for the season. The only question was a minor one: would Steve Karsay, one of several setup relievers, be recovered from shoulder surgery?
Then Boone severely injured his left knee playing basketball, and now the Yankees need a third baseman and cannot do much about it. General Manager Brian Cashman has conceded he is all but helpless to find a replacement soon.
Third base has become a difficult position for teams to fill, and even Jose Hernandez, a veteran third baseman coming off a bad season, is not available. Cashman called Hernandez's agent yesterday and learned Hernandez was signing with the Dodgers.
''It's thin,'' Cashman said yesterday, referring to the third base market. ''This is not the time of year and definitely not the position you want to be looking for. I don't anticipate finding one externally for quite some time.''
Boone would most likely have been the No. 9 hitter in a loaded lineup. The Yankees can get by without his bat, but they will greatly miss his defense. ''The biggest issue for me is defense and support for our pitching staff,'' Cashman said. ''Boone is a tremendous defensive player with a lot of range. That's going to hurt more than losing his offense. But we're not there yet.''
Cashman said it could be 10 days before the Yankees receive an official diagnosis of Boone's knee, which still has substantial swelling. But the team has received a magnetic resonance imaging report, and while Cashman would not reveal what it showed, he acknowledged that Boone could miss the season.
''In the event that we don't have Aaron for a short period or long period or at all, it'll be like when we lost Jeter last year,'' Cashman said, referring to Derek Jeter's shoulder injury last March 31. ''You look at other people to step up.''
In the Yankees' case, those players have limited experience at third base. Enrique Wilson has played 155 games there in his seven-year career, with a .955 fielding percentage, which is slightly better than the average. Miguel Cairo, a free-agent signee from St. Louis, has played 62 games at third in his eight-year career, with an .871 fielding percentage.
Those are the players Cashman expects to compete for Boone's position, with Erick Almonte, who has never played third in the majors, a faint possibility. Drew Henson has virtually no chance of taking the job. It is uncertain whether he will even return to baseball. Cashman said Henson had not informed the Yankees that he is concentrating on football. But Henson, a former quarterback at Michigan, may soon opt out of the three years and $12 million remaining on his contract.
Henson worked out yesterday with college football players at the IMG Academies, a training facility in Bradenton, Fla. The Houston Texans own Henson's rights and want to sign him and trade him, but Henson may go back into the draft in April.
The Yankees thought Henson would be their starter by now, but he has never shown the progress they hoped, striking out prodigiously and making too many errors. Cashman said the Yankees had unrealistic expectations of Henson. ''He's tried to close the gap of many years of sharing baseball with football,'' Cashman said. ''That certainly has caused an impediment to his doing something very few can do: get into our sport and get to the major leagues at a very rapid rate. We force-fed that, and because of his great athleticism, we wrongfully expected that time frame to be a lot faster than, in reality, we should have expected.''
The Yankees had turned to Boone to fill the hole, but now they may end up releasing him. Boone's $5.75 million contract had been guaranteed, but because playing basketball is forbidden under his Yankees contract, the team can release him and be obligated for only 30 days' pay. If the Yankees cut Boone, they could re-sign him to a minor league deal at once, allowing him to rehabilitate with them and maybe return later in the season.
BASEBALL
