Bill White rolled into City Hall on Friday as residents here welcomed the new year with a new mayor and a new light-rail system a contentious quarter century in the making.
The soft-spoken Mr. White, 49, is a wealthy investor and former energy official in the Clinton administration who was all but unknown to voters here a year ago. But he rode to his inauguration as Houston's 60th mayor on one of the sleek electric cars of MetroRail, the city's fledgling, $324 million venture into rapid transit.
The first 7.5 miles of what planners see as a 47-mile, $8 billion network by 2019 opened on Thursday with free rides. Travelers thronged the snub-nosed blue and silver cars, and many people were unable to board on the 14 platforms between the University of Houston campus downtown and Reliant Stadium, where the Super Bowl will be held on Feb. 1.
Early Thursday, the maiden voyage was piloted by the departing mayor, Lee P. Brown, 66, a former police chief in Houston, Atlanta and New York. Mr. Brown pushed for the rail link as a hallmark of his six-year, three-term administration, the maximum allowed by city law, and speeded the work up by almost a year so he could drive the first train.
''I think it's a great way to get to the inauguration,'' a beaming Mr. White told crowded fellow riders as the train whooshed along street-level tracks at the legal speed of city traffic, no more than 40 miles an hour, although it was capable of going 66.
''Houston is always changing,'' he said. ''It can't be recognized one period of 30 years to the next.''
Traffic congestion has been high on the list of irritants here in the nation's fourth largest city, which has long been a monument to the automobile and was the last big urban holdout against rapid transit. Mr. White said his first task would be to resynchronize traffic signals and speed up the roadwork that seems to be reconstructing all major thoroughfares at once.
When the train stopped at Hermann Park, near Rice University and the sprawling Texas Medical Center, Mr. White, his wife, Andrea, and their three school-age children, Stephen, Elena and Will, joined an exuberant procession of Chinese dragon dancers, Fire Department bagpipers and drummers, and City Council members and their families. They were there for another first: the swearing in at the Miller Outdoor Theater, a venue for concerts.
Mr. White said Houston was ''America's great city of opportunity'' and called on residents to keep championing diversity and tolerance.
''Make a special effort to get to know as friends, not just acquaintances, someone from a different background,'' he said.
The audience of about 1,500 people gave a cheer when the announcer summoned the new controller, Annise Parker, to be sworn in alongside her partner, Kathy Hubbard.
The mayoral election was strongly contested by candidates representing the three, roughly equal, major voting blocs: non-Hispanic whites, Hispanics and African-Americans. But it was significantly devoid of racial or ethnic animosity. Mr. White, who is white, drew support across the board and won the endorsement of Mr. Brown, the city's first African-American mayor.
''I'm delighted,'' Mr. Brown said in an interview after the inauguration. ''He'll do a good job for the city.''
To serve as mayor, Mr. White gave up his job as president and chief executive officer of the Wedge Group, a consortium with multibillion-dollar investments in oil and gas, engineering and construction and real estate companies. A former chairman of the Texas Democratic Party and deputy energy secretary in the Clinton administration, he began his race for mayor as the underdog and spent a record $8.6 million, including $2.3 million of his own money, to blanket the airwaves with campaign messages that touted his managerial experience.
In his inaugural address, Mr. White praised the opportunities the city offers. He recalled first coming to Houston with his family from San Antonio and visiting the Humble Oil building, then the tallest building west of the Mississippi.
''Those lights looked so bright and the city looked so big to that little boy who was 10 years old on top of that building,'' he said. ''Fifteen years later I came back here with nothing but the values and education bestowed on me by my family.'' Not long afterward, he said, he was running the building next door.
The opening of the rail link marks a triumph in a process that began 25 years ago with the founding of Houston's Metro agency. The goal was to expand mass transit after the demise of the trolley system in 1940, a victim, like networks around the country, of highway, bus and gasoline interests. Over the years, many opponents of rail service said the money would be better spent expanding highways. One group, the Business Committee Against Rail, fought a recent referendum on expanding the system 22 miles by asserting that investing the next $2.8 billion appropriation could generate enough interest to give every prospective rail rider a new Lexus. But voters gave the rail expansion their blessing in September.
The trains are scheduled to run every 12 minutes. The hours are in flux, but the Web site lists 5 a.m. to 10 p.m. for now. Rides cost $1 and transfers to intersecting bus lines are free.
On Thursday and Friday, thousands flocked to the stations for free test runs before the fare kicked in on Monday. During tests in recent weeks, the biggest hazard was train-car collisions. In the five accidents, none serious, motorists made illegal turns across the tracks or failed to stop for an oncoming train.
So far, reaction seems largely positive. ''Very smooth, roomy on the inside,'' said Matt Helfrich, an unemployed welder from Houston who had ridden back and forth several times.
Carlene Gordon, a church worker from the suburb of Pasadena, said that while it did not help her commute an expansion might. ''We need to come out of the horse-and-buggy era, the cow-town mentality,'' she said.
Moments later, the train came to an unexpected halt at the Ensemble station, about midway along the route. ''This train is out of service, please unload this train,'' came the announcement. Conductors on the platform said someone had pulled an emergency brake. ''Folks,'' one said, ''do not pull this hammer. Nobody can go anywhere.''
Five minutes later, the order came to reboard and the train lurched forward. ''Yea!'' people cheered.
