Jimmy's Bronx Cafe, which drew everyone from Yankee stars to Bronx politicos to Fidel Castro, closed its doors for good on New Year's Eve after a decade of salsa-inflected evenings.
The spacious banquet hall, restaurant and nightclub on Fordham Road has been leased by its owner, Jimmy Rodriguez, to new proprietors who will open a seafood restaurant and cocktail lounge on the site.
''I can't believe it myself,'' Mr. Rodriguez, 41, said. ''It's a sad day.''
During its 10 years in business, the restaurant became something of a landmark in the Bronx. Fidel Castro went to Jimmy's while in New York visiting the United Nations. Derek Jeter celebrated two birthdays there. Bill Cosby turned up occasionally, as did Tito Puente, David Bowie and a host of other sports stars, musicians, Bronx politicians and ordinary folks. They were drawn by the Latin music, the celebrity memorabilia on the walls and the glad-handing, kinetic energy of Mr. Rodriguez, a politically connected Bronx native whose first business venture was selling live lobsters on the street with his father.
In an interview yesterday, Mr. Rodriguez said he had leased the property, which overlooks the Major Deegan Expressway and the Harlem River, to Felix Cabrera, a concert promoter and restaurateur who recently opened Zona Rosa, a restaurant in Midtown Manhattan.
Mr. Cabrera, who was reached while on vacation in the Dominican Republic, said his new restaurant would be called the Seafood Factory and will serve seafood with a Latin twist. Another group of investors would run the X Bar, a cocktail lounge, in an adjacent space.
Mr. Rodriguez would not disclose the details of the deal, but he said it was too good to pass up. Some months ago, he said, he sought a loan to renovate Jimmy's, but when Mr. Cabrera offered to pay him rent on the space and to assume the costs of the renovation, it was too tempting to resist. Closing the restaurant also fit Mr. Rodriguez's plans to expand the Jimmy's brand to London and other European cities, he said.
''I can't run four restaurants and be in Europe at the same time,'' he said, referring to his Bronx flagship and three other properties -- Jimmy's Downtown in Midtown Manhattan, Jimmy's Uptown in Harlem and Jimmy's City Island.
''We're looking to go to two restaurants,'' he added. He said he had not yet decided which of the remaining three to close.
''It was a place that everybody identified as very much our own,'' said Representative Jose Serrano, a Bronx Democrat who over the years went from being a client to being a close friend of Mr. Rodriguez. ''It was a local guy who got together with his family and put together a place.''
The walls at Jimmy's, which opened in 1993, were known for their display of Mr. Rodriguez's impressive collection of offbeat memorabilia, which included lederhosen worn by the Duke of Windsor on a 1937 trip to Austria and a dress that Jennifer Lopez wore to the Oscar ceremonies.
In 2000, Mr. Rodriguez began to expand his empire southward, opening successful nightspots in Harlem and Midtown. Last year, he opened Jimmy's City Island, a restaurant and lounge on City Island, the quaintly nautical retreat in the Bronx.
Still, the Bronx Cafe remained his flagship, mentioned in popular songs -- most famously in Angie Martinez's ''Live at Jimmy's,'' featuring the rapper Big Pun. Ms. Martinez was a regular customer, Mr. Rodriguez said.
In 1995, Jimmy's became a center of controversy when Mr. Serrano organized a dinner there for Fidel Castro, who was in New York for the 50th anniversary of the United Nations. Cuban groups protested the event, but at the packed dinner Mr. Castro, under heavy security, was warmly greeted and drew laughs from a crowd of about 300.
The Castro dinner was not the only controversy in the early years. The restaurant also attracted police attention as a suspected hangout for drug dealers.
At one point, Major League Baseball asked its players not to go there, but the admonition did not stick. For the last five years, in fact, the kitchen at Jimmy's has catered postgame clubhouse meals for the Yankees and opposing teams, a job that Mr. Rodriguez said would probably be taken over by Jimmy's Uptown.
Mr. Rodriguez said he had informed his staff of 80 of the restaurant's closing on Monday. Work had already started on the Seafood Factory, but Mr. Rodriguez said that most of the employees assumed he was simply doing long-planned renovations of his own.
The workers, who include about a dozen of his relatives, will have the chance to interview at the new restaurant, he said.
Jimmy's closed for the final time after a quiet night on New Year's Eve. ''We couldn't do a party, because it was a sad day for everyone,'' he said.
Or perhaps not exactly everyone. On New Year's Eve, a wildly diverse, dancing-on-the-tables crowd packed Jimmy's Downtown.
Jimmy himself arrived just before midnight, greeting the fawning hordes and apparently taking the whole thing pretty well.
