Investigators who are trying to determine whether anyone in the Bush administration improperly disclosed the name of an undercover C.I.A. officer have asked some White House staff members to sign forms waiving their right to have private conversations with reporters, government officials said on Friday.
The waiver forms were presented to the White House employees starting about a month ago, one official said, confirming a report broadcast on Friday evening by NBC News. However, it was not clear whether any of the staff members had actually signed the forms or disclosed the names of reporters with whom they had confidential conversations.
A White House spokeswoman, Claire Buchan, said Friday night that the White House was fully cooperating, but that it had not made any requests of its own to employees to sign any waivers.
The officials said that privacy waivers were routinely sought from government employees in the course of investigations to find the sources of sensitive or classified information, even though the procedure was not widely known.
The investigators used the forms in an effort to find out who among White House employees had spoken to the columnist Robert Novak, presumably to narrow the list of who might have told him about the undercover officer. Investigators in leak cases focus on government employees because they almost never succeed in obtaining information from reporters about their sources. It is unclear whether the waiver process would place any additional pressure on a reporter to reveal a source.
The waiver procedure seemed to suggest the intensity of the Justice Department's inquiry to uncover who disclosed the identity of Valerie Plame, a C.I.A. employee, to Mr. Novak, who named Ms. Plame in his syndicated column last July. She is married to former Ambassador Joseph Wilson IV, who has criticized the Bush administration's policy toward Iraq.
Whether anyone at the White House was compelled by their superiors to sign the waiver form is unclear. The legal validity of such forms is uncertain, and government officials said they could not require anyone to sign them or take any action against anyone who refused.
This week, the leak inquiry gained fresh impetus when Attorney General John Ashcroft relinquished control over the three-month-old inquiry. In his place, Justice Department officials named Patrick J. Fitzgerald, the United States attorney in Chicago, as a special prosecutor in the case.
Mr. Fitzgerald, who is known as an aggressive prosecutor, will divide his time between Chicago and Washington and was at the Justice Department on Friday reviewing the case.
Mr. Ashcroft's decision to step aside came after months of criticism from Democrats in the Senate who complained that the attorney general could not impartially lead an investigation that focused in part on his political patrons and friends at the White House.
