Finally, LeBron James looked like the 19-year-old that he is, the fan in him coming out in the moments after the Cleveland Cavaliers' 97-82 loss to the Nets on Friday night.
In the visitors' locker room, wearing nothing but a towel, he smiled and began ribbing his teammate J. R. Bremer about a scintillating move that Jason Kidd had put on him.
''That was nasty,'' an animated James said as he simulated the move himself. ''One of the sickest moves of the season. That's top five.''
Driving toward the basket on a fast break, Kidd faked a behind-the-back pass to a teammate, sending Bremer spinning like a top. With his defender hopelessly out of the play, Kidd laid the ball in fashionably, forcing even his opponents to squeal in delight.
That type of play happens almost every time the Nets take the floor at Continental Arena, yet it took the presence of James to give the Nets their first sellout of the season. James, the one the 19,968 fans came to see, does not understand the apathy.
''Me and D Miles talked about that earlier,'' James said, referring to his teammate Darius Miles. ''The fans should really just come out here and support their team. The excitement, that's gravy. But they've won the Eastern Conference championship two years in a row, and I don't understand why the fans don't come out. Hopefully, if we played here all the time, they'd be here. It would bring some of the fans here.''
James, who is doing what no teenager has ever done on the court, did what no star has come close to doing this season -- put life in Continental Arena.
When the Houston Rockets and their international sensation, Yao Ming, came to town in November, fewer than 12,000 fans showed up. Tim Duncan and the San Antonio Spurs drew fewer than 13,500. Even the astounding Vince Carter and the Toronto Raptors put only 13,755 fans in the seats.
The Nets, who are second to last in the league in home attendance at 13,891 a game, have grown accustomed to the empty seats. It makes them appreciate a full house that much more, even if it did take an opponent to do it.
''Does it bother me?'' Nets Coach Byron Scott said before the game. ''I wish he was here every day. Then we'd get a sellout every night. I think our guys are past that -- not getting the sellout crowds we feel we should get. We just come out and play and try to create our own energy. Tonight, it'll be a little more electrifying.''
Kidd, aware that his dazzling plays cannot pack the arena, had a novel idea.
''The atmosphere was there because of the sense of LeBron coming, but we were just happy to see people in the seats,'' Kidd said. ''Maybe we're going to have to lie to the people and say LeBron's coming every night.''
James, who has the hottest-selling jersey in the league and has helped the Cavaliers (10-23) sell out 12 of their 17 road games, did not live up to his billing Friday. With his fickle jump shot off, he scored only 14 points while making 6 of 19 shots. But he still had nine assists, reminding fans that even on bad nights he can still have an impact.
Although James may be the next Michael Jordan in terms of marketing, he might be more like Magic Johnson as a player. Scott, Johnson's teammate on the Los Angeles Lakers, said the comparison was apt.
''He's not as good as Earvin was when he came into the league,'' Scott said, using Johnson's given name. ''But I haven't seen a 19-year-old better than him, besides Earvin. At this stage, he's lived up to the hype.''
Indiana's Al Harrington and Jermaine O'Neal, who each entered the N.B.A. directly out of high school, are astounded by the quickness of James's transition to the pros, on and off the court.
''It's unbelievable,'' Harrington said after Indiana beat Cleveland on Tuesday. ''His situation is a lot different from a lot of guys. He had that savior thing on his back. The biggest thing I'm impressed with is how he handles it like there's no pressure on him.''
Dozens of fans lined up for James's autograph before the game. Cheers were heard when he scored, oohs when he made a nifty move, and oddly, boos when he touched the ball a few times.
It was a schizophrenic crowd, but that's understandable -- 7,000 or 8,000 were probably not used to attending N.B.A. games, at least not in the Meadowlands.
PRO BASKETBALL
