IN the fairy-tale world of college football, in which apples and oranges are compared, voters who watched Southern California abuse Michigan on Thursday in the Rose Bowl have concluded that the Trojans are Kings of the Hill.
Before Oklahoma and Louisiana State even play a down in the Sugar Bowl here tomorrow night, the University of Southern California is being hailed as the People's Champion.
I inadvertently fed into this feeling a couple of weeks ago, when the computers cheated U.S.C. out of its rightful place in Bowl Championship Series title game. But my criticism of the B.C.S. was hardly intended to make U.S.C. the People's Champion.
First of all, there is no way a private college in Southern California can be the People's Champion. This defies logic, but so does the broken B.C.S. system.
Bob Stoops, the Oklahoma coach, was asked about the movement to make U.S.C. the People's Champion. He made an observation that came close to trash talking. ''Everybody claimed that the Dallas Cowboys were America's Team and it didn't bother Pittsburgh a whole lot,'' he said. ''So I don't think it'll bother L.S.U. or Oklahoma, whoever is crowned champions of the B.C.S. and the Sugar Bowl.''
Many of the voters in the Associated Press poll will probably crown U.S.C. on the basis of what it did against Michigan, a team that was flawed -- from its inability to play on the road to its lack of explosiveness on offense. U.S.C. would have had a difficult time contending with Oklahoma in the Big 12 or with L.S.U. in the Southeastern Conference. But let me stop: this is precisely the sort of speculation the B.C.S. svengalis like. They like controversy. They think the news media like controversy.
I would rather write about the finite: about playoffs that end with a clear-cut champion.
The people who will favor voting U.S.C. as No. 1 have this much correct: Oklahoma and L.S.U. are virtually in a no-win situation. If the Sooners win, critics will say they were supposed to win. If Oklahoma loses, the defeat will confirm recent popular sentiment that it wasn't that good to begin with. And L.S.U., bless its heart . . . there's no way the Tigers can win unless they beat the daylights out of Oklahoma.
With that in mind, here's my hope: I would like L.S.U. to rout Oklahoma, 49-0, just to throw the voting into complete chaos. A rout of that magnitude would pay back Oklahoma for running up the score in its 77-0 victory over Texas A&amp;M. And it would throw a well-deserved wrench in the B.C.S. system and restore faith in the underdog.
''We're going to learn a lot from this system,'' Nick Saban, the understated L.S.U. coach, said yesterday. ''Even though this hasn't been an especially good experience for all of us, because we all couldn't be picked to play in this game, it's something that can make us better in the future.''
Saban has become a compelling figure the last few weeks. He has been mentioned as a possible candidate to be an N.F.L. coach. His serious demeanor has created the veneer of an intense, no-nonsense -- no-fun -- competitor. However, he put some of that to rest yesterday when someone asked if he were happy to be miserable.
''I am happy,'' Saban said. ''I wish I naturally smiled, but it's important for me to be who I am. I believe in honesty, integrity, loyalty. I try to be truthful and tell you what I believe and think. It's serious to me.''
Saban will be extremely happy if L.S.U. wins. His contract calls for him to become the highest-paid coach in college football if L.S.U. wins the national championship. Stoops is currently the highest-paid college football coach at $2.2 million plus incentives.
This is what gets me about the moralizing of college presidents. They have no problem paying coaches more than their faculty, then they cry ''protect the student-athlete'' when critics propose aligning Division I-A football with every other college sport by having playoffs.
The reality is that bowl representatives are an impressive lobby and make persuasive arguments for their preservation. In an e-mail sent to reporters a few weeks ago, Keith Tribble, the chairman of the Football Bowl Association and chief executive of the Orange Bowl Committee, argued that a proposed playoff format ''would not fit the goals and expectations of the college football community.''
He wrote: ''College football has the best, most closely followed regular season of all sports because the B.C.S. has helped to create a structure wherein every game is important.''
Tribble argues that playoffs would diminish the regular season. ''Millions closely follow college football games and the B.C.S. polls every week, not just during the postseason. Instead of increasing excitement around college football, a playoff system would diminish the importance of regular-season games.''
Tribble also refers to preserving the passion of the regular season.
What college presidents want to preserve is the money they receive from the 28 bowl games. Tribble says the bowls will pay out more than $2.1 billion over the next 10 years.
All I know is that in this world of Chamber of Commerce college football, in which the unbridled passion of youth funds 28 individual fiefs, the adults always win.
Sports of The Times
