A private delegation of American experts on North Korea, including a former White House official and a former director of Los Alamos National Laboratory, will travel to North Korea and possibly visit a nuclear weapons plant, people close to the delegation said Friday.
Bush administration officials said the delegation did not have any official government blessing and would not carry any message to North Korea. Indeed, the White House officials expressed concern that the trip might complicate the administration's own delicate diplomacy with North Korea.
Since last summer, the United States has held two separate multiparty negotiations involving North Korea and concerning its nuclear weapons program. Those talks, sponsored by China, are expected to resume early this year.
The delegation of Americans going to North Korea, first reported in USA Today on Friday, will be led by John W. Lewis, a professor emeritus of international relations at Stanford University and a former director of the university's Center for International Security and Cooperation, a group that encourages dialogue on security matters.
Accompanying Professor Lewis will be Dr. Sigfried Hecker, a former director of the Los Alamos laboratory and an expert on nuclear weapons. Also traveling with the group will be Jack Pritchard, a former staff member of President Bush's National Security Council who has favored a more flexible approach to North Korea than the one adopted by the administration.
The trip grew out of discussions Professor Lewis held over the last year in visits to North Korea. Members of the group are leaving as early as this weekend for Beijing and will travel from China to North Korea.
''This is not a U.S. government-sponsored trip,'' someone involved in the planning said. ''The U.S. government has no say. Nor were they asked to say yes or no to the trip itself.''
Bush administration officials and people involved in the trip said that because Dr. Hecker is on a consulting contract with the Department of Energy and has a high security clearance, the administration was asked if it objected to his traveling to North Korea and the administration said it did not.
Some officials said that North Korea might seek to use the visit to emphasize the progress it had made on developing nuclear weapons and challenge the United States to do something about that.
''There's a limit to what I can say, simply because it's not our deal,'' said J. Adam Ereli, a State Department spokesman. ''Any efforts that complicate prospects or undertakings to reconvene the six-party talks and to achieve forward movement in dismantling North Korea's nuclear program aren't helpful.''
A person knowledgeable about the trip who spoke on condition of anonymity said that the expectation was that the group would visit a nuclear weapons plant, possibly at Yongbyon, but that their schedule in North Korea would not be known until the group arrived.
If Dr. Hecker is allowed to see Yongbyon, that visit could presumably shed light on the progress North Korea has made in developing nuclear weapons since international inspectors previously stationed there were ejected a year ago.
The main question that American intelligence experts have is how much of the spent nuclear fuel at Yongbyon may have been reprocessed into weapons-grade plutonium. Intelligence satellites have detected activity at the site suggesting the possibility that reprocessing of nuclear rods was taking place there.
Even if the experts are allowed to visit Yongbyon, and could tell how much fuel had been produced, they would need to visit other facilities to answer questions about the full range of North Korea's nuclear activities.
Professor Lewis's group does not have a political agenda, but its members are all known to favor talks with North Korea on its nuclear program as a general principle.
Separately, two senior staff aides of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, both of whom have traveled to North Korea in the past, are to be there at the same time as the private group. Officials for the committee said the two aides might join the group led by Professor Lewis, but that their itinerary was also unclear.
The two Senate committee staff members are Keith Luse, an aide to Senator Richard G. Lugar, chairman of the foreign relations panel, and Frank Jannuzi, an aide to Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the committee's ranking Democrat.
The committee officials said Mr. Luse and Mr. Jannuzi had planned their trip separately to study issues like food distribution and the political situation in North Korea.
''The North Koreans may include them if there is a visit to a nuclear site,'' one Senate official said.
The visit by private Americans comes at a pivotal moment in the discussions over how to proceed in talks with North Korea. Not only are there hard-liners and more conciliatory people in the Bush administration, but the White House is also having trouble forging a consensus with its other partners in the talks.
China has taken the lead in trying to organize negotiations with North Korea. The other participants in the multilateral talks are South Korea, Japan and Russia.
The main difficulty has been over the Bush administration's opposition to any economic concessions or security pledges before North Korea commits to dismantling its nuclear weapons program in a complete, irreversible and verifiable way.
