The closest that Howard Dean has come to truly exploding in public anger during his presidential campaign, top aides say, was at a network television interview after a rally in Boston this fall. When a local news crew tried to muscle its way into the interview, its cameraman banged into someone in the network crew.
Dr. Dean ''stopped the interview and started yelling at the guy,'' said Bob Rogan, who was deputy chief of staff when Dr. Dean was governor of Vermont and is now a top official in the campaign.
That Howard Dean has always had a temper is beyond dispute. He mentioned it himself in an essay he wrote for his high school yearbook. And stories abound from his days as governor of his snapping at Statehouse reporters or blowing up at political opponents.
''Howard gets angry,'' said one longtime friend, Thomas R. Hudspeth, a professor at the University of Vermont. ''He doesn't suffer people being unfair or duplicitous. In the heat of sports events with his kids, for instance, I can remember him yelling, red-faced, his neck muscles bulging,'' if, as a spectator, he saw dishonesty among his children's opponents or poor calls by referees. ''And there were a couple of reporters who were always really good at getting his goat.''
Now, as the Iowa caucuses approach and he shoulders the relentless scrutiny that comes with being the candidate in the lead, Dr. Dean's opponents in the Democratic field are jumping on every wayward off-the-cuff remark, trying to make his temperament an issue. They are questioning whether he has the judgment to be president, and trying to feed the impression that he is a man with lots of anger, an attribute that repels many voters.
His displays of temper are of a kind with political blunders he has made during the current campaign: in either case, they stem from what aides concede is an occasional tendency to speak his mind too quickly.
Just this week, one campaign rival, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, declared that Dr. Dean had made a ''series of embarrassing gaffes,'' which, the congressman said, underscored ''the fact that he is not equipped to challenge George Bush.''
In the last two weeks, Dr. Dean has seemed to criticize the policies of President Bill Clinton and complain about the way Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic national chairman, runs the party. Both times, his campaign had to exercise damage control, with the candidate forced to backtrack and explain.
Before that, it was Confederate flags on pickup trucks. Or a suggestion in an interview with The Concord Monitor that Osama bin Laden deserved a fair trial. (Dr. Dean quickly followed with a statement that said Mr. bin Laden deserved the death penalty.)
''He needs to stop and think before he speaks sometimes,'' said State Senator Dick Mazza, a longtime political ally. ''It got him into trouble in Vermont sometimes.''
The Burlington Free Press, for instance, reported about a meeting with officials early in Dr. Dean's tenure as governor where he responded to an unwelcome discussion about a local highway project by slamming his fists on the table and storming out of the room. At the close of one legislative session, television cameras caught the governor angrily jabbing his finger into a legislator's chest. He has compared congressmen to cockroaches, referred to opponents as boneheads and called Republicans racists.
So there is plenty of fodder for those hoping to turn Dr. Dean's temperament into a campaign issue, much in the way Bush strategists took aim at Senator John McCain in the Republican presidential race of 2000.
Friends and former employees of Dr. Dean say his temper can indeed flare, although of greater concern to campaign aides is the occasional crisis created by his speaking too quickly on the issues. Even that, he and his top aides say, is not as detrimental as his opponents might hope: as long as he talks straight and from the heart, he said in an interview in Iowa not long ago, voters will overlook a little roughness around the edges.
''What people are responding to is that I believe in what I'm doing and it's not calculated,'' he said. ''That's a quality you can't fake. People can tell the difference.''
The greater danger, a number of aides say, might be trying to muzzle him. Dr. Dean maintains that one reason many Democrats have not connected with voters in recent years is that they allow their message to be filtered through layers of focus groups and skittish pollsters.
''He hasn't yet got the filter completely in front of his face,'' Mr. Rogan said. Though some of those around him are urging that he do so, ''his attitude is, 'If I do that, I'll be just like them.' ''
Friends and colleagues say that Dr. Dean's temper is almost never directed at subordinates and that he never erupts out of vanity or petulance.
''This thing about my supposed temper,'' Dr. Dean said in the Iowa interview, ''that was spun by John Kerry's campaign early on, and by the Bush people as well. And it's not that I don't have one at all. It's just that, well, I don't think I yelled at a staff person in 12 years as governor, not once.''
Further, he said, what may strike some as brusqueness, or even temper, can simply be good-natured combativeness.
''One thing that lets the press perpetuate this temper thing is that when I do get pushed, I stand my ground,'' he said. ''And a lot of the techniques among some members of the press corps is to push and see what happens. When they do that, I push back.''
Susan Allen, his press secretary when he was governor, says that what some may read as temper is often nothing more than eagerness to get things done.
''He's a doctor,'' Ms. Allen said. ''He sees a problem, he diagnoses the problem, and he prescribes a fix. And then he moves on to the next problem. It can come across as annoyance, I guess. He also doesn't suffer fools.''
The salient aspects of the Dean temper mentioned by those who have witnessed it are that it flashes quickly and then disappears.
''He might get angry out of irritation, but it was never something that he held against you,'' said State Senator Peter Welch, like Senator Mazza a political ally. ''It always blew over pretty fast.''
Dr. Dean himself said: ''I don't hold a grudge, although I try to sometimes. In the end, it's more trouble than it's worth to keep one. Of course, I have Kate here to remind me.''
Kate O'Connor, his closest aide, smiled and held up a small black bag riding beside her on yet another chartered campaign plane. ''Yes,'' she said, ''I am the keeper of the grudges.''
During the current campaign, with scrutiny heightened, the Dean temper has yet to show much of itself in public and, aides say, has appeared only a few times in private.
''I never experienced his temper, but there are those who say he does have quite a temper,'' said John H. Bloomer Jr., a Republican who is minority leader of the Vermont Senate. ''If anything, he's done well in controlling his thin skin in this campaign.''
His aides say, and Dr. Dean confirms, that each time he has exploded behind closed doors during the presidential race, the cause has been the same: scheduling failures.
''I actually saw him lose his temper once,'' said a younger brother, Jim Dean. ''He blew up at some of the scheduling people. I guess there's a certain point where being nice about it just isn't working.''
At one point, Dr. Dean used ''prickly'' to describe his temperament for a reporter, then seemed to regret the choice when the word was repeated to him.
''I can be prickly with the press corps,'' he said. ''I'm not usually prickly with other people at all. But if you get up there and ask a really ugly question at one of these forums, the chances are I will respond pretty respectfully, unless you are really doing it in a way that is meant to needle me. Then I get tough.''
He also uses his reputation to political effect -- wooing supporters with his whacks at the Establishment -- or even comic effect.
Late one night last August, he found himself way ahead in a heated game of hearts with two of his Yale classmates, David Berg and Ernie Robson, who are among his oldest friends. Suddenly he began losing one hand after another, until his certain win had disappeared.
''He throws his cards all over the floor and gets up smoking and huffing,'' Mr. Berg recalled. ''Naturally, Robson and I are in hysterics, because it's all just theater.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
