IT seems fitting that on one side of Judge Theodor Meron's office walls there are books about Shakespeare and the medieval laws of war, and on the opposite side a set of outsize photographs of men trapped in a modern wartime concentration camp.
The books on Shakespeare Judge Meron wrote himself. The large black-and-white images, showing forbidding fences and hollow-eyed prisoners, are of Manjaca, a Serbian-run camp of the early 1990's when war raged in Bosnia.
Drama, barbarity and accountability are very much the threads that have run through Judge Meron's life, from the time he was a teenage prisoner in a Nazi camp, to when he became a scholar of international law in New York, and now, as the president of the United Nations war crimes tribunal that deals with the atrocities of the former Yugoslavia.
In conversation, he does not like to dwell on his troubled Jewish youth in his native Poland or on the four harsh years he spent in Czestochowa, at a Nazi labor camp. He waved away the subject each time he was asked, as if anxious to avoid any suggestion that his past would somehow affect his tasks as chief judge.
But yes, he conceded, those years in the Nazi camp had unquestionably propelled him to study law in order to ''explore the means to avoid mistreatment, to focus on ways to protect human dignity.''
Less hesitant now, he continued: ''From age 9 to 15, I did not go to school at all. There were tremendous gaps in my education. It gave me a great hunger for learning, and I dreamed that one day I could go to school.
''It is of course even more poignant that someone with my background can become a judge here, and even the president of this body,'' he said. ''I find it daunting.''
At the tribunal, with its sober headquarters near the wooded outskirts of The Hague, all the 16 permanent judges come from different corners of the world and widely varied backgrounds. But none have made quite the zigzagging route from a labor camp in Poland to Israel, then to the United States. Some of his colleagues here have had to cope with political pressures at home, but probably few have directly experienced the kind of persecution that they hear about at the tribunal.
Judge Meron, now an American citizen and until two years ago a professor of international law at New York University, has just been re-elected to a new term as the tribunal president, a post that requires him to serve as an appeals judge, steer the chambers, schedule cases and act as a diplomat. Inevitably, crimes against humanity, like those he witnessed as a young man, appear in his own and in the tribunal's daily workload.
BUT there are other unexpected ways in which now, at age 73, he sees parts of his life coming together.
Judge Meron also brought to the court the uncommon perspective of having studied the evolution of the laws of war, above all by using medieval chronicles and the plays of Shakespeare. It is here at the tribunal, as he watches its trials unfold, that he finds remarkable parallels, the dilemmas and moral doubts that are as much a part of long-ago conflicts as the recent civil wars that tore up Yugoslavia.
Similarities are manyfold, he says: there are the ancient kings and the modern political leaders who avoided signed orders or provided lame pretexts so as not to incriminate themselves; there are the nobles or military commanders concocting alibis; there are the enemy combatants, then and now, who are abused as they are held captive; prisoners and civilians are raped and killed, disregarding centuries-old codes of doing battle.
Those codes fascinated him as a scholar of international law and became the subjects of two books of which he is evidently proud: ''Henry's Wars and Shakespeare's Laws'' (Oxford University Press, 1993) and ''Bloody Constraint: War and Chivalry in Shakespeare'' (Oxford University Press, 1998).
Judge Meron's eyes light up as he turns to what is clearly his passion: the principles of humanitarian law -- the quest to avoid the worst excesses of war -- which appeared in early texts and became part of the modern Geneva Conventions, other international protocols and even the statutes of the tribunal itself.
He declines to discuss the current trial of the court's most famous defendant, Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, or cases against others here charged with massacres or widespread abuse, or both. He would also not comment on the fate of other prisoners of more recent wars.
''As a judge, it would not be appropriate for me to refer to any current case,'' he said. ''But the fact is that before this tribunal we see the same type of age-old human tendency, of leaders and commanders washing their hands. It was already of great concern in Shakespeare's time, and it remains at the very center of war crimes today.
''Shakespeare's dialogues that touch on the moral and legal duties of leaders, their accountability, their attempt to evade blame, will resonate in the ears of anyone who listens to the major trials going on here.''
CERTAINLY, it is hard not to think of the trials at the tribunal that deal with the 1995 massacre of more than 7,500 people, almost all Muslim men and boys, around Srebrenica in Bosnia when Judge Meron invokes a passage from ''Henry V,'' the scene at Agincourt, France, in 1415. In the scene, the invading English troops have won the battle and are holding uncounted French soldiers as prisoners. Then, to the consternation of some of his officers, Henry orders all the French prisoners of war to be killed.
'' 'Tis expressly against the law of arms,'' says one of Henry's captains. The king even summons yeomen not bound by chivalric codes to join the slaughter. Such a call has an echo here at the tribunal. Some trials deal with the actions of particularly violent paramilitary gangs, employed to hound and kill non-Serbian civilians in Bosnia.
In another part of ''Henry V,'' Judge Meron points to a revealing scene outside the French town of Harfleur, long under siege by English troops. Before the town walls, Henry warns the town elders to surrender because he may not be able to stop his troops from committing murder, robbery and rape.
The judge turned to the passage:
What is't to me, when you yourselves are cause
If your pure maidens fall into the hand
Of hot and forcing violation?
Henry goes on to issue a warning:
Your fathers taken by the silver beards
And their most reverend heads dash'd to the wall;
Your naked infants spitted upon pikes.
''This is blackmail, of course,'' said Judge Meron, ''because it did not happen, but it also reads like a list of war crimes of the kind we are dealing with.'' The haunting part, he said, is less that such horrors occurred centuries ago, but that they persist on such a scale today.
Judge Meron, however, sees a shift, not in the facts of violence but in the international perception that the world must deal with war crimes and other large-scale abuse. Even in the former Yugoslavia, which has long been biased against the tribunal, he sees a change of mood, a recognition that a reckoning is needed.
As the tribunal will wind down its work in the coming years -- it intends to end investigations this year and its trials in 2008 -- Judge Meron sees a future in which remaining cases of war crimes and grave abuses will be tried in various parts of the former Yugoslavia. He speaks of special tribunals that will be formed in Sarajevo, Zagreb and Belgrade. Until now, he said, there has been no choice but to hold the trials here in The Hague.
''We must remember,'' he said, ''without this tribunal, what would have followed is impunity.''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE  Correction:  January 5, 2004, Monday  The picture caption on Saturday with a profile of Theodor Meron, president of the war crimes tribunal dealing with atrocities in the former Yugoslavia, misstated a word in his quotation. It should have read, as it appeared in the article itself, ''We must remember, without this tribunal, what would have followed is impunity''; he did not say ''trial.''
