The rash of holiday flight cancellations, security actions and terrorism warnings are going to compel many American companies to reassess whether to send employees abroad in coming weeks, not only out of fear of attack but also because of the inconvenience of canceled and delayed flights, business travel experts said yesterday.
Kevin P. Mitchell, chairman of the Business Travel Coalition, which represents business travelers and corporate travel departments, said bookings could drop 10 percent to 15 percent after the latest incidents.
That would be particularly bad news for the airlines, which have lost business travelers -- who usually pay the highest fares and account for a disproportionate share of airlines' profits -- since the industry's peak in 2000, well before the terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentagon. Dwindling business travel was a big reason, by one significant measure, that airlines had their lowest revenue in history last year.
Airlines hoped that international travel to the United States would rise 5 percent during 2004, to an estimated 42.2 million arrivals from abroad, according to the Travel Industry Association, a trade group. That would have been the first increase since 2000.
Moreover, the carriers were particularly optimistic about the winter travel season, which they expected to improve over last year, when bookings were depressed by the SARS epidemic and the looming war with Iraq. But the industry's outlook dimmed yesterday as more flights were canceled.
''Given the uncertainties involved, all of a sudden you're playing roulette with the possibility that a flight will operate,'' said Robert W. Mann Jr., an airline industry consultant in Port Washington, N.Y. ''The idea of on-time performance has a new dimension: Is the government going to cancel a flight for you?''
By yesterday, seven flights bound for the United States had been canceled during the holidays, including three by British Airways, which also canceled a scheduled flight to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, from London.
The cancellations were in addition to jet escorts by military fighter planes within the United States and the emergency landing of an Air France flight in Newfoundland, where the plane, passengers and baggage were searched.
The moves came a week after the government elevated its terror alert to ''high,'' which raised the prospect that the expected increase in travel between the United States and international destinations this year might be thwarted.
With many companies closed for the New Year's holiday, neither the airlines nor travel industry experts would estimate whether the incidents were causing passengers to cancel other flights yesterday or over the weekend.
''Quantifying the effect on people's willingness to fly, or the overall cost to airlines at this point is nearly impossible,'' said Chris Tarry, an airline analyst in London.
But Mr. Mann said the psychological damage could not be discounted. ''From an industrywide level, this throws cold water on revenue growth,'' he said.
Mr. Mitchell said that the longer the episodes continued, the greater the chances that companies would cut back on employees' trips and that the relatively small number of leisure travelers who fly internationally during winter months would put off their plans.
''There is definitely going to be an impact,'' Mr. Mitchell said.
But, he added, ''that impact will be mitigated if we get through this quickly.''
The prospects of lost business loom largest at the carriers singled out by the government for terrorism concerns, particularly British Airways and Air France. Should companies and travelers not feel safe using those airlines, they are likely to shift their business to other carriers, a practice the industry calls ''booking away.''
A major example is Pan American World Airways, whose corporate business dropped sharply after the 1988 bombing of Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, one of the factors that ultimately led to its bankruptcy and liquidation a few years later.
By that token, some travel managers might be reluctant to book contracts with British Airways, for fear that passengers would refuse to fly the airline and risk being stuck should more flights be canceled, Mr. Mitchell said.
In London, British Airways said it was rebooking passengers from the canceled flights on later British Airways flights to the United States, rather than send them to other airlines. Sending passengers to competitors would cause British Airways to give up the revenue from those tickets, although the airline said it would give refunds to passengers who requested them.
''Obviously, some people may have concerns,'' a spokeswoman for British Airways said.
She would not estimate how many people on the Washington-bound flight had canceled their trips, although she said few passengers had asked for refunds the day before, when another Washington-bound flight was scrapped.
That lack of lost business, at least thus far, reflects some fliers' ability to shrug off such threats, said David G. Neeleman, the chief executive of JetBlue Airways.
''I think our travelers have become more callous and more acceptable of risks'' since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Neeleman said.
