Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri mounted an aggressive attack on Howard Dean here on Friday as he vigorously defended his signature plan to provide health insurance to all Americans.
Mr. Gephardt drew a sharp contrast between his plan to provide health coverage to the 43 million Americans who lack insurance and those of his Democratic rivals, who hope to cover a smaller part of that pool. He also accused President Bush of undermining the federal government's commitment to help the uninsured.
But Mr. Gephardt reserved his sharpest criticism for Dr. Dean, his chief rival in this state's Jan. 19 caucuses. He faulted Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, as supporting Republican efforts in the 1990's to slow the growth of Medicare and as trying to reduce Medicaid services to the poor and disabled in Vermont, and he suggested for the first time that such positions raised questions about Dr. Dean's character.
The health care speech came on a day when another Democratic presidential candidate, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, underlined the problems of insurance coverage for employees of small businesses and Dr. Dean focused on corporate wrongdoing.
In Iowa, Mr. Gephardt said Dr. Dean's penchant for angry retorts and his policy shifts on major issues like Medicare, trade, corporate tax breaks and Iraq might ultimately cost him the election. And he vowed to continue condemning what he described as Dr. Dean's ''indefensible record,'' despite recent complaints from the former governor.
''Governor, if you can't stand up and answer serious questions from fellow Democrats, how can you expect the rest of us to step aside and watch you lose your cool against George Bush and lose the election?'' Mr. Gephardt asked in his speech at the Broadlawns Medical Center here. ''You see, there's a pattern with Governor Dean. First say something indefensible. Then deny you ever said it. Then when it's proven you said it, don't tell anybody why you said it. Then go say it all over again.''
The attacks reflect the mounting intensity of the race here in advance of the caucuses. Mr. Gephardt's advisers say he must win in Iowa to have a chance at the Democratic nomination, and he remains in a tight contest with Dr. Dean for primacy here.
Dr. Dean's aides dismissed Mr. Gephardt's comments on Friday.
''Congressman Gephardt's attacks against fellow Democrat Governor Dean have become increasing shrill in Gephardt's desperate attempt to win Iowa,'' said Jeani Murray, the Iowa director for Dr. Dean's campaign.''We cannot figure out why Congressman Gephardt would trumpet this record of rhetoric on health care. Since 1977, Dick Gephardt has sponsored 20 pieces of health care legislation. Not a single one has become law.''
Mr. Gephardt dedicated much of his speech to defending his 27 years in Congress, noting that he successfully fought to have mammograms covered by Medicare and to provide additional financing for state health programs for children, which he said helped Dr. Dean provide health insurance to children in Vermont.
He promised to repeal the Bush administration tax cuts to cover the costs of his health care plan, estimated at $685 billion in the first three years. The plan, which offers tax credits to employers to provide coverage, has been criticized as much more expensive than plans proposed by the other Democratic candidates.
Mr. Gephardt said Dr. Dean's plan would cover only 30 million of the nation's 43 million uninsured.
''Howard Dean and the other candidates may think leaving tens of millions of Americans uninsured is acceptable,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''I think they're wrong.
''We cannot beat George Bush if our nominee has so little regard for Medicare and Medicaid and their value to seniors and low-income Americans.''
Dr. Dean's press secretary, Doug Thornell, said on Friday morning that the candidate would no longer respond personally to rivals' attacks.
Instead, Dr. Dean on Friday laid out his plan to address wrongdoing in mutual funds. Speaking to overcapacity crowds of nearly 1,000 at the Peterborough, N.H., town hall and more than 300 each at a V.F.W. post in Nashua and an Elks lodge in Concord, he said mutual funds should be required to report the compensation of their managers, make their fee structures clearer and have a majority of their board made up of independent people.
''What the president forgets is that capitalism without rules is like a hockey game without a referee,'' he said in Concord.
While Dr. Dean focused on big business, Senator Kerry met with owners of small businesses to outline his approach to lowering insurance costs.
Visiting an industrial park in Manchester, N.H., he listened as John Maraganis, 57, a mom-and-pop restaurateur, said that he could not afford insurance for himself or his employees, and that he and his wife were looking for second jobs that would give them health benefits.
Mr. Kerry, a one-time cookie-shop entrepreneur, commiserated.
''If you work for a company with more than 50 employees, you're almost certain to have health care,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''If you work for a company that has less than 10 employees, you're almost certain not to have health care. We have to change that.''
He said his health care plan would reduce insurance costs for their employees by two-thirds.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MISSOURI CONGRESSMAN
