A man of fastidious ritual, Coach Phil Martelli did not eat Tuesday before his St. Joseph's Hawks played at Delaware. He also tried to ignore the phone. Thirty minutes before the team bus left the hotel, he set out his clothes and recited the three prayers he always says in the same order. Not until a minute and a half before tip-off did he appear at courtside.
Late in the evening, after securing a 75-54 victory, the undefeated Hawks completed one final ritual, returning to the hotel and checking out before traveling home to Philadelphia. Checkout never comes before a road game, always after. These are business trips, Martelli reasons, and the business day does not end until the game does.
No other St. Joseph's basketball team has opened a season with 10 consecutive victories since 1964-65 or has ascended to a poll ranking as lofty as 10th during a season since 1965-66. In Jameer Nelson, Martelli believes he has the nation's top point guard. A six-guard rotation and willing role players may lift the Hawks deep into the N.C.A.A. tournament, leading some to suggest that Martelli can afford not to be so superstitious, a word he carefully avoids, like cracks in the sidewalk.
For starters, maybe, just maybe, he can now accept that his brother-in-law, Ed David, will not jinx the team by his mere presence at a game.
''He came to a game two years ago and we lost, so now they don't let him come, home or away,'' Martelli said. ''At Christmas dinner, I said: 'You know, Ed, with this group, it probably doesn't matter. You can come to a game.' ''
Expectations for this season mushroomed last summer when the 5-foot-11 Nelson decided to return for his senior year. By all accounts, he played impressively at an N.B.A. predraft camp in Chicago. Still, he received no firm assurances that he would be a first-round pick. Under collegiate rules, Nelson was allowed to remove himself from draft consideration while maintaining his amateur standing.
The decision was the correct one, he said.
''It's helped me to enjoy life, to be happy,'' said Nelson, who is from nearby Chester, Pa. ''Who knows what my attitude would have been if I was in the N.B.A. right now? Who knows where I would be, away from my family? These guys are great to be around.''
Certainly, financial strategy played a role in his return. By staying at St. Joseph's another year, he figured to increase his chances of being a first-round draft pick. First-rounders receive a second N.B.A. contract 89 percent of the time, compared with 28 percent of second-rounders, Martelli said.
''Why take the chance?'' Martelli said.
Martelli believes Nelson stayed for another reason: the possibility of leading St. Joseph's to the kind of enchanted season hinted at by the team's unblemished record so far.
''I think he realized, suppose he goes to the N.B.A. and he's a backup,'' Martelli said. ''Now, he's got all the lights on him, all the notoriety, all the joy he gets out of this. I think that was part of it.''
As a point guard, Nelson serves as a kind of human spackle, filling in whatever cracks appear during a game. He is averaging 18.9 points, 5.8 assists, 5 rebounds and 3.2 steals. Sometimes, he plays too fast when opponents attempt to muscle him, trying to trump power with speed, Martelli said. That was apparent against Delaware, when Nelson committed eight turnovers. Nelson said he has one of those wobbly games each season and promised that would be the last.
''I don't think there's a discussion anymore whether he's the best point guard in the country,'' Martelli said. ''I think the discussion now is whether he's the best player. He's certainly the best leader. Every time he goes on the floor, he reads the situation and thinks, 'What does my team need tonight?' His decision-making is what his value is at the next level. He's going to put the ball in a guy's hands where the guy can do damage.''
Nelson's backcourt mate is a silky, patient 6-4 shooter named Delonte West, who collected 18 points, 6 rebounds and 6 assists in a typically resourceful effort against Delaware. Late last season, West led the team in assists and averaged 28 points in a blistering stretch before developing a stress fracture in his right leg, leaving him and St. Joseph's hobbling into the N.C.A.A. tournament, where they lost to Auburn in overtime in the first round.
If West can remain healthy, the Hawks seem capable of reaching at least the Round of 16 this season. Superb leadership at guard certainly makes further advancement possible. That would be quite an achievement for such a tiny Jesuit university, enrollment 3,850, at a time when power in basketball, as in football, has become hoarded largely by state universities in the major conferences.
Last season, Marquette became the first college without Division I-A football to reach the Final Four since Seton Hall in 1989. (Connecticut did not play Division I-A football when it won a national title in 1999, but does now.) A feverish excitement attends St. Joseph's attempt to duplicate Marquette's feat.
The Hawks reached the Final Four in 1961, only to have their appearance annulled because of a point-shaving scandal involving three players. Just as the team mascot never stops flapping its wings on the sideline, St. Joseph's fans have never stopped longing for a return.
So what if Alumni Memorial Fieldhouse on campus seats only 3,200 fans and national television seldom comes calling? Martelli sells passion instead of visibility. More than 4,000 St. Joseph's fans traveled to Madison Square Garden for a victory over Gonzaga, and more than 1,000 requests came for the 170 available tickets at Delaware. If his team is where it should be in March, Martelli believes it could challenge anyone.
''Because there are only five guys, and because there are so many good players who want to play early on in their careers, you always have a chance,'' Martelli said, comparing basketball with football. ''This is the beauty of college basketball. It's not 105 guys and a bigger weight room. You can do it from a gym like we do it.''
Still, there is little margin for error for a small college in a second-tier conference like the Atlantic 10. About 28 of the 34 at-large bids to each N.C.A.A. tournament go to power conferences. Even this St. Joseph's team, talented and selfless, is built delicately. The frontcourt needs development. The sophomore center Dwayne Jones's first career double-double -- 14 points and 11 rebounds against Delaware -- could not have come soon enough.
''We need other options,'' Martelli said.
In recent N.C.A.A. tournaments, weak low-post defense has proved costly in losses to Kentucky and Stanford. Martelli has altered his defensive strategy, using his guards to pressure opponents on the floor, believing the best way to guard the lane is to keep the ball out of it.
As teams attempt to strong-arm St. Joseph's, he knows the undersized Hawks must get tougher. And, for a long tournament run, Nelson will most likely have to improve his perimeter shooting. He is shooting 43.8 percent over all, and 27.7 percent from 3-point distance.
''He's a pit bull, very aggressive at both ends of the floor,'' Kerry Kinard, a scout for the Utah Jazz, said of Nelson. ''I just would like to see him hit the jump shot a lot better.''
Whatever happens, Martelli will adhere to his rituals, leaving nothing to chance. But he is not so rigid as to be incapable of adjustments. Previously, for each home game, he drove from home to the gym while listening to the same three Bruce Springsteen songs.
''Now it's five,'' he said. ''We moved.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
