A spacecraft with an outstretched scoop roughly the size and shape of a tennis racket flew on Friday through a cloud of dust and gas surrounding a comet, capturing tiny particles from the early solar system to be sent back to Earth.
Officials of the Stardust mission said the close encounter with a comet appeared to be a success. The 770-pound spacecraft suffered no disabling damage as it passed through the thickest dust swirling off the comet's icy nucleus. Scientists will be examining radioed data to determine what the craft learned about the dynamics and chemistry of cometary dust and how much was collected.
''Life is good!'' exclaimed Tom Duxbury, the manager of the project here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, as the Stardust spacecraft sped away from the comet Wild 2, pronounced Vilt.
''We've flown through the worst of it, and we're still in contact with the spacecraft,'' he said. ''We're just all bubbling over.''
Later, at a news conference, Dr. Donald Brownlee of the University of Washington, who is the mission's principal scientist, announced, ''We have successfully collected samples from the comet and are bringing them home.''
Several striking pictures of the comet nucleus taken by the spacecraft had scientists shaking their heads in wonder and surprise. The rough surface was pitted with what appeared to be craters or sinkholes or something not yet thought of. Jets of dusty gas can be seen streaming off the comet.
The comet was 242 million miles away, on the far side of the Sun, when the American spacecraft made its closest approach at 2:42 p.m. Eastern time. It passed within 149 miles of the comet's 3.4-mile-wide core of ice and rock, relatively pristine leftovers from the material out of which the planets of the Sun were formed.
Dr. Brownlee called cometary ingredients ''the material that formed planets that never ended up in planets.''
A comet like Wild 2 is of particular scientific interest, he said said, because it is a fairly recent arrival in the inner solar system and so its material has probably not been altered significantly by the heat of the Sun. Before Wild was jostled in 1974 into a closer orbit by Jupiter's gravity, it had spent several billion years mostly unchanged in the cold of deep space. Wild 2 occupies an orbit that is close to the orbit of Mars for a while and then ranges out.
Scientists believe that analysis of comet dust will provide clues to the earliest history of the solar system, about 4.6 billion years ago. In addition, comets are thought to have delivered a significant amount of the water in Earth's early epochs, and some scientists speculate that comets may have played a role in bringing life to Earth.
Although not the first spacecraft visit to a comet, Stardust was the first to collect samples, dust grains no more than one-third the width of a human hair, and try to deliver them to Earth. The plan is to seal about an ounce of comet dust into a capsule and drop it by parachute on an Air Force test range in Utah when the spacecraft returns toward Earth in January 2006. The comet samples would be the first material from deep space -- beyond the Moon -- to be brought to Earth by a spacecraft.
The mission was planned and controlled here at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The 16-foot-long spacecraft was built by Lockheed Martin Space Systems in Denver. The University of Chicago, the Max Planck Institute for Extraterrestrial Physics in Germany and Jet Propulsion Laboratory provided scientific instruments for the craft.
Stardust started its journey of almost five years and two billion miles in February 1999 from Cape Canaveral, Fla. It followed a circuitous route, returning three years ago to the vicinity of Earth to use the force of terrestrial gravity for a change in trajectory. In November 2002, the craft called on the asteroid Annefrank to practice navigation procedures for the eventual comet flyby.
For the last few days, flight controllers carefully plotted Stardust's course as it approached the comet. The craft's camera took pictures of the dim object to help navigation team's plan final maneuvers for a close but not too close encounter. In the final approach, the camera was snapping a picture every 10 seconds. Stardust was traveling 3.8 miles a second, operating on instructions stored in on-board computers.
Well before the encounter, the spacecraft deployed its dust catcher, a kind of space-age flypaper. The raquet-shaped frame holds a collection area made of aerogel, a silicon dioxide substance that is 99.8 percent empty space. It thus has enough ''give'' in it to slow and stop tiny particles without altering them radically. One side of the collector was used to collect interstellar particles; the other side was for harvesting that one ounce of comet dust.
