Last summer, Justice Douglas E. McKeon, up for re-election to State Supreme Court in the Bronx, decided he needed to raise some campaign money. The judge, though, did not turn to the residents of the Bronx to back his candidacy. Instead, his campaign solicited money from scores of lawyers, including many who regularly appear before him in court. Within weeks, his campaign had reaped more than $50,000.
Justice McKeon's mixing of politics and the courts is neither illegal nor isolated. Over the years, the roughly 20 judges who handle civil litigation in Supreme Court in the Bronx -- virtually all of whom owe their jobs to the Bronx Democratic Party -- have operated, day in and day out, in a world suffused with politics.
Consider, for instance, the court's dealings with Gerald L. Sheiowitz. Judges on what is known as the civil term of the Supreme Court in the Bronx have awarded him more than $300,000 in legal work in recent years, a formidable sum among the lawyers who work the courtrooms on the Grand Concourse.
No one disputes that Mr. Sheiowitz is a lawyer in good standing. But courthouse regulars also understand why Mr. Sheiowitz was treated so generously. He is the treasurer of the Bronx Democratic Party. That fact may also help explain why judges in the Bronx have awarded his daughter more than $50,000 in court work, even though she is not a lawyer.
For much of the last year, prosecutors and top state court officials have examined the reach and effect of politics on the state's judiciary, from Brooklyn to Buffalo. The results of their inquiries, by their own admission, have been grim: the presence of politics is so pervasive that public confidence in the courts has been damaged.
Reform is overdue, the state's chief judge, Judith S. Kaye, has declared.
The Bronx courthouse is certainly not unique in its troubles. But an examination of court records, interviews with judges and lawyers, and hours spent in the courtrooms reveal that its workings are emblematic of the problems identified by Judge Kaye and others.
Almost no one is elected to the bench without possessing deep political connections. Favored lawyers get most of the legal work doled out by the judges. Even the law clerks and secretaries -- the judges' assistants who wield daily influence in the courtrooms -- are mostly political appointees who got their jobs largely because of whom they know.
No judges here have been indicted or sent to prison, in contrast to what has occurred in Brooklyn. The Bronx judges say that they are honest and hard-working and that they have been unfairly tainted by the scandals elsewhere. And to some lawyers and court officials, the judges handling civil cases for the Bronx's top trial court do run a fairly efficient courthouse.
Still, two of the Bronx judges have been censured by a state ethics panel for their conduct. Another two, including the judge responsible for overseeing all civil litigation, are former high-ranking Bronx Democratic officials who were deemed unqualified to serve on the bench by the city bar association when they first ran for election.
The political influence inside the courthouse stretches across decades. It is as obvious and acknowledged today, with the borough's Democratic Party dominated by Hispanic politicians, as it was when the party was run by the old guard of Irish, Jewish and Italian leaders.
In an interview, the administrative judge for the Bronx civil term, Gerald V. Esposito, defended his judges and the quality of justice they oversee. Justice Esposito is a former Democratic district leader who had no judicial experience when he was elected in 1994. At the time, the city bar association found him unqualified; he said the association came to that determination because back then, it was biased against candidates with party connections.
''This system is, by and large, a terrific system,'' he said.
But four snapshots of life in the Bronx courthouse capture, at minimum, some of that system's weak spots.
Judgeship, via Legislature
The career of George Friedman -- his personally engineered move from politician to Bronx judge and dispenser of courthouse spoils -- sums up much about the political grip on the courthouse.
In the early 1990's, Assemblyman Friedman, the Bronx Democratic leader, was essentially facing extinction. He ruled an increasingly Hispanic borough, and it was only a matter of time before a rising class of Hispanic Democrats ousted him.
So in 1994, Mr. Friedman found an alternative. He introduced a bill in Albany to create a new State Supreme Court judgeship in the Bronx. He won the crucial backing of the Bronx Republican leader, State Senator Guy J. Velella, a lawyer whose firm has long won lucrative appointments from Bronx judges.
The bill passed. And so one day in September, Mr. Friedman handed over the party reins to Assemblyman Roberto Ramirez, making himself eligible to become a judge. The same day, the party nominated Mr. Friedman to run for an open State Supreme Court seat.
It was not the first time Mr. Friedman had used Albany to expand the party's influence over the bench. In the early 1980's, as a junior assemblyman, he helped create a separate judicial district for the Bronx, cleaving it from a joint Manhattan-Bronx one.
Back then, Mr. Friedman declared that the legislation would empower Bronx residents. But the people truly empowered were the Bronx Democratic bosses, who received their own set of Supreme Court judgeships to control.
After taking the bench in 1995, Mr. Friedman quickly honored the age-old tradition of handing out court work to the party's favored lawyers. Among them was Gerald L. Sheiowitz, who served as the treasurer for both the Bronx Democratic Party and Mr. Friedman's judicial campaign committee.
In all, Mr. Friedman gave more than $235,000 in court work to Mr. Sheiowitz during his time on the bench. He assigned $40,000 in court jobs to Mr. Sheiowitz's daughter, Hillary R. Sheiowitz, who went to law school but has yet to pass the bar. Justice Friedman often approved her requests for rates of $200 an hour.
Neither Sheiowitz responded to telephone messages at their office.
Mr. Friedman said in an interview that both Sheiowitzes did great work. He said he thought so highly of Mr. Sheiowitz that he used him as his personal accountant and real estate lawyer.
Like many party leaders, Mr. Friedman acknowledges the political nature of the court system. He said political patronage helps the system by creating a stable of lawyers willing to accept the low-paying cases as well as the lucrative ones.
He said he moved to create the judgeship ''long before I had any thought of going on the bench,''
Mr. Friedman added, ''As a matter of fact, I never really had a great desire to go on the bench.''
Mr. Friedman retired from the court in 2002, and was appointed by Judge Kaye to serve on a commission exploring judicial reforms and the need to rid the judiciary of its most blatant political influences. Judge Kaye said through a spokesman that Mr. Friedman was chosen because of his ''varied résumé.''
Mr. Friedman said one of his roles on the commission was to help make proposed changes palatable to political leaders. Still, he suggested that ultimately, reformers were misguided. ''I think the system we have results in an outstandingly good judiciary,'' he said.
To improve the system, he suggested, the state should increase the judges' salaries, which are now $136,700.
Donors With Pending Cases
Public trust in the courts, legal experts have long asserted, depends to no small degree on avoiding even the appearance of conflicting loyalties between judges and the lawyers who go before them. For years, though, New York campaign laws have allowed those kinds of appearances to flourish.
Justice Douglas E. McKeon's race for re-election last year makes that clear.
With Justice McKeon fearing a tough fight, his campaign obtained a membership list from the state trial lawyers' association and used it to send solicitations to Bronx and Manhattan trial lawyers. The lawyers donated by the dozens.
Among the largest donors were law firms and lawyers who routinely file malpractice lawsuits against the city's Health and Hospitals Corporation, which runs the public hospitals. The judge is the Bronx justice assigned to cases against the corporation, handling a lengthy list of malpractice suits charging that patients were neglected at Jacobi, Lincoln, North Central Bronx and other hospitals.
The largest donor was a law firm called Rappaport, Glass, Greene &amp; Levine L.L.P., which gave $2,000 and has four malpractice cases before Justice McKeon, the firm said. In one of the cases, the firm asserts that Lincoln Medical and Mental Health Center mishandled a delivery, leaving the infant permanently disabled.
A lawyer who gave $1,500, Duane Fiedler, has two cases before the judge, according to court records. One of them accuses Lincoln of allowing a mother to bleed to death during childbirth.
Such lawsuits often seek millions of dollars in damages.
In all, the 150 or so donors to the McKeon committee have some 300 current cases before him, according to a comparison of the donor list and an electronic database of court records compiled by LexisNexis.
Justice McKeon's fund-raising strategy is common. In the Bronx, as in the rest of the state, the coffers of State Supreme Court candidates are often filled with money from lawyers who have a stake in the decisions that the candidates make if they reach the bench.
No one has pointed to a particular case in which Justice McKeon improperly favored one side or the other. But lawyers' donations to judicial candidates so troubled the Kaye panel that it proposed that judges disqualify themselves from cases involving lawyers who gave more than $500 to the judges' campaigns in the previous five years. It also said lawyers should disclose all contributions to judges when appearing before them.
Under current judicial rules, to avoid the appearance of a conflict, candidates are not supposed to know who donated to their campaigns. Justice McKeon said that although he had approved the fund-raising mailing, he was not aware who gave.
''This raises no ethical concerns with me personally because I intend to call them as I see them,'' Justice McKeon said. ''I expect that anyone who gave a contribution to me did so because of the fact that in 14 years on the bench I was a worthwhile individual who should then be retained on the bench.'' He added, ''Who else am I going to solicit except people who appear before me and have some idea of my level of scholarship?''
Charles J. Rappaport, a senior partner at the Rappaport firm, said that the firm's donation was not intended to obtain special treatment and that it supported candidates with extensive trial experience. ''Unfortunately, in recent years, many judges have been appointed and elected who have never tried a case,'' he said.
Still, after being questioned by a reporter last month about the donations, Justice McKeon, who ultimately was easily re-elected and spent less than half the money he raised, promised to refund portions of donations greater than $500.
Handing Out the Spoils
Not quite a decade ago, a lawyer from Floral Park, Queens, began turning up in the Bronx courthouse. His name was Robert H. Helweil, and he became one of the top moneymakers among the lawyers who receive work handed out by State Supreme Court justices in the Bronx.
Since 1995, Mr. Helweil has earned roughly $175,000 from nearly 30 cases; many involve managing the financial affairs of nursing home residents with dementia, according to court records.
Mr. Helweil, now 80, may seem an unlikely candidate for such judicial largesse.
He did not have extensive experience handling guardianships, was not a leading expert on the applicable laws and was not a powerhouse in the Bronx County Bar Association. His last full-time job, from which he retired in 1994, was as counsel for a large temporary-staffing company in Westbury, on Long Island.
The reason Mr. Helweil has received so much work in the Bronx is simple, he acknowledges: the judge who appointed him in virtually every case is his former law partner, Jerry L. Crispino.
Indeed, Justice Crispino, who retired from the bench in October, gave roughly a quarter of the work he handed out since 1995 to Mr. Helweil, according to court data. ''He appreciates that I am a conscientious guy,'' Mr. Helweil said, adding that he was pleased to have the work because ''I like to be busy.''
In a brief telephone interview, Mr. Crispino said he had appointed Mr. Helweil ''because he is competent and capable, not because he was my partner'' two decades ago. Mr. Crispino is a former Democratic city councilman who came to the bench in 1992.
Nowhere is the insular nature of New York State Supreme Court more obvious than in the appointment of what are known as fiduciaries: guardians for the young, elderly or infirm, as well as receivers who are supposed to protect businesses and property caught up in lawsuits.
Judges give these assignments to private citizens, usually lawyers, who are generally paid from the assets of the people or estates they are assigned to protect. More often than not, their hiring is heavily influenced by politics and personal relationships, state investigators have repeatedly concluded.
In the Bronx, the list of fiduciaries is chock-full of the borough's political elite. The roster includes State Senator Velella and his law partners; City Councilman G. Oliver Koppell, who is a former state attorney general, and his wife; the Bronx Democratic Party's longtime election lawyer, Stanley Schlein; and the law partners of the former Democratic leader, Mr. Ramirez.
Then there are those with personal links, like Mr. Helweil. In just one case, involving an elderly diamond cutter worth several million dollars, Mr. Helweil earned more than $70,000.
Mr. Helweil said that in some cases he was paid nothing at all for his work, and that Justice Crispino routinely reduced his fees. The files for his cases suggest that Mr. Helweil was diligent.
Last year, court administrators imposed new rules on judges that are supposed to make the awarding of fiduciary appointments fairer. It is unclear whether the rules will curb the cronyism in the system. Past efforts at reform have often failed.
Whatever the impact of the new rules, Mr. Helweil said he did not expect them to affect him. Now that his old friend Mr. Crispino has retired, he said, he is not expecting many appointments from the Bronx.
Well-Connected Clerks
The judges are the most prominent examples of the role of politics in the state's courthouses. They are not the only ones.
Maria Matos-Sepulveda was hired as a law clerk for a Supreme Court justice in the Bronx in 1997, several months after her husband, Luis R. Sepulveda, became a Democratic district leader in the borough. She passed the bar three years earlier and had worked for the state attorney general's office. Her husband had been a repeat campaign contributor to Mr. Ramirez, the borough's Democratic leader at the time.
Another Bronx clerk, Martin Popovic, was once an aide to Assemblyman Stephen B. Kaufman. A third, Daniel O'Leary, has been a member of the Chippewa Democratic Club for two decades and is chairman of its law committee. The personal secretaries to Bronx judges include two former Democratic district leaders and a district leader's wife.
All these people perform critical tasks in the state's highest trial court and, officially anyway, were hired at the discretion of the justices themselves. But in reality, the clerks and secretaries for Bronx judges are often the progeny of politics.
Many were hired not through a process that featured the widespread recruiting of candidates, but through a system in which judges sort through a list of favored candidates sent by political leaders.
Some have worked on judicial campaigns or carried petitions for the Democrats. Some are the spouses or relatives of political leaders, including district leaders, who serve as lieutenants for the party organization.
Asked about the quality of the law clerks being pushed by the party, one judge said: ''The people they send to the judges are by and large competent people. They are not sending hacks anymore.''
Ms. Matos-Sepulveda, who earns $93,000 a year, and the other clerks said they are highly qualified and had earned their jobs on their merits. Their supporters assert that judges with 14-year terms would not saddle themselves with incompetent aides when they need the party's help so infrequently.
In many cases, it is the clerks who determine how effectively justice is delivered. Often it is the law clerk who writes the judge's opinion. Other times, clerks direct pretrial conferences at which opposing lawyers decide whether they can settle a case before trial.
Mr. O'Leary, who earns $110,000 a year, said even if judges were appointed by expert committees instead of being elected, people would still push friends for clerk jobs.
The Bronx Democratic leader, Assemblyman José Rivera, said judges are not penalized for refusing party referrals. ''The final analysis is the judge's,'' he said.
But there is ample evidence that judicial hiring discretion has often been constricted. In the Bronx in the mid-1990's, colleagues of a veteran law secretary accused the Democratic Party of pressuring Justice Kenneth L. Thompson Jr. to dismiss his clerk, Howard Liker, because it was upset that his wife was doing political work for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani. Justice Thompson did not respond to a call seeking comment.
Others who associate with Republicans have fared better. Lucianna Locorotondo is one of the few Republicans hired as a Bronx law clerk in recent years. She acknowledges that her appointment may have been bolstered by her political relationship with Senator Velella, the Bronx Republican leader who has long shared a warm relationship with the borough's Democrats.
Ms. Locorotondo said she pays $300 a year to attend the Bronx Democratic Party's annual dinner, despite her party affiliation, but not to curry favor with the party.
''It's not something I have to do,'' she said. ''It's a good place to talk and to network.''
Ms. Locorotondo, a graduate of St. John's School of Law and Barnard College, said she was picked primarily on merit. ''Being that I'm not a Democrat,'' she said, ''they looked even more at my credentials.''
But critics say the current hiring system is too narrow to produce the best candidates.
''The bottom line is that this is the result of a system that places the selection of judges squarely in the hands of local party leaders, not voters,'' said Jeremy Creelan, associate counsel for the Brennan Center for Justice, New York University School of Law. ''When you do that, you are creating pressure on the judges to satisfy those party leaders.''
