Jake Delhomme walked up to the line of scrimmage for the first play of his first game with the Carolina Panthers. Before the snap, he paused and looked around Ericsson Stadium.
Delhomme had waited six years for this moment, six years with the New Orleans Saints and two summers in N.F.L. Europe. He was cut five times by the Saints, but always found his way back on the roster.
''I just glanced real quick and I said, 'O.K., this is what you wanted, you better make the most of it,' '' Delhomme said.
Coming off the bench with the Panthers trailing Jacksonville, 17-0, in the season opener, Delhomme rallied Carolina to a 24-23 victory.
Just like that, Delhomme's life as a career backup was over.
Four months later -- the blur of an 11-5 record and an N.F.C. South Division title behind him -- Delhomme is preparing for another first: an N.F.C. wild-card playoff game Saturday night at Ericsson Stadium against Bill Parcells and the Dallas Cowboys (10-6).
Delhomme is confident, yet hardly cocky. The past was not that long ago.
''I don't forget where I came from,'' Delhomme said. ''That's one thing that I'll never do.''
Six years should have been time enough for Delhomme to give up on the idea of making it in the N.F.L. At 6 feet 2 and 215 pounds, he is smaller than the prototypical quarterback. He does not have a pure passer's arm or a running quarterback's legs.
And he certainly does not have the résumé. Despite starting for four seasons at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, near his hometown of Breaux Bridge, La., Delhomme, 28, was not even drafted in 1997.
He eventually signed with the Saints and was on their practice squad for part of 1997, but at his lowest point, Delhomme was a backup not only in the N.F.L., but in N.F.L. Europe, too. In 1998, he played in Amsterdam behind an unknown quarterback named Kurt Warner and thought about his future outside football.
''Plan B would be, I'm going to marry my high school sweetheart,'' Delhomme said. ''I had two classes left to graduate from college, so I'd finish that and what I'd do after that, who knew?''
He was never forced to find out. Delhomme led the Frankfurt Galaxy to the N.F.L. Europe championship in 1999 and started two games later that season for the Saints. More bench time followed. He spent three more seasons with New Orleans, throwing a total of 10 passes, before becoming a free agent after last season.
Despite the inactivity, two teams seriously pursued Delhomme: Carolina and Dallas.
''I just think he's kind of a character,'' Parcells said during a conference call on Tuesday. ''I just like guys like him. I've had a few like that before that are kind of spunky and competitive. I think he's not classic in any manner of speaking. There's something about him.''
Parcells could not explain exactly what that something was, nor could the Panthers. They were looking for a quarterback to compete with Rodney Peete and Chris Weinke. General Manager Marty Hurney and Coach John Fox considered veteran starters like Jake Plummer, Kordell Stewart and Jeff Blake, and, of course, considered their price tag as well.
Delhomme received high praise for leadership from those people the Panthers consulted. He was signed to a two-year contract for about $4 million.
''We looked at all of them,'' Fox said. ''It's like clothing. Everybody likes different styles. You have to go with what you think fits you best.''
After a battle in training camp among Peete, Weinke and Delhomme, Fox chose Peete as his starter. Delhomme, a backup again, stayed silent.
''There's no use complaining because that's not what this is about,'' he said. ''If the opportunity comes up, don't say anything. Just try to make the most of it. Sure enough, it came up halftime of that first game.''
That was when Fox decided to bench Peete with the Panthers behind by 17-0 and inserted Delhomme at the start of the second half. Delhomme threw three touchdown passes, including one on his first drive and the winning score on the final drive of the game.
A week later, Delhomme made his first start for the Panthers at Tampa Bay and helped the team to a stunning 12-9 overtime victory over the defending Super Bowl champions.
The Panthers opened the season with five consecutive victories and were never challenged for the N.F.C. South title, beating Tampa Bay and Delhomme's old New Orleans teammates twice along the way. Delhomme led the Panthers to a John Elway-like seven last-possession drives for victories. He threw for 3,219 yards, 19 touchdowns and 16 interceptions with a quarterback rating of 80.6, seventh among N.F.C. quarterbacks.
''He's just one of the most charismatic quarterbacks I've ever been around,'' said Panthers offensive lineman Kevin Donnalley, who has played with Dan Marino, Steve McNair and Warren Moon in a 13-year career. ''He has a way of carrying himself. He's going to find a way to pull out a win.''
Delhomme does not do it with the grace of a Marino, mind you. The Panthers' offensive coordinator, Dan Henning, who brought Delhomme in for a workout with the Jets in 1999, said Delhomme needs to improve his footwork. And Delhomme has what Henning called a ''Favre-ish'' penchant for making plays that he probably should not attempt.
What Delhomme lacks in style points and statistics, he makes up for with results.
''I look at all the quarterbacks and I see Tom Brady,'' Delhomme said. ''All he does is win. I'd rather be known as a Tom Brady than anybody else because his teammates respect him and he gets the job done.
''I'm not the big 6-4, 6-5 guy, sit in the pocket, chuck it all over the field. Do it any way, fight, scratch, claw just to get it done. And have your team believe in you. That's all I want.''
PRO FOOTBALL
