Ell Roberson started at quarterback for Kansas State in the Fiesta Bowl on Friday night as an investigation continued into an accusation that he had committed a sexual assault.
But Craig Krenzel, the Ohio State quarterback, stole the spotlight on the field, throwing four touchdown passes as the Buckeyes held off a comeback by Kansas State (11-4) for a 35-28 victory. Krenzel threw two scoring passes each to Santonio Holmes and Michael Jenkins. The Buckeyes (11-2) also scored on a blocked punt.
The game ended with Roberson's desperation pass from midfield being batted down at the 2-yard line.
Roberson played nervously and inconsistently, particularly at first. But he improved as the game went along and ran for two touchdowns, including a sneak from the 1-yard line to cut the Buckeyes' lead to 7 points with 2 minutes 47 seconds remaining the fourth quarter. He completed 20 of 52 passes for 294 yards. He ran for 32 yards and threw one interception.
''His head wasn't in the game in the first half,'' Ohio State defensive lineman Will Smith said of Roberson, who started the game 3 for 13 passing.
The sound of booing was heard in Sun Devil Stadium as Roberson lined up over center to take the first snap from scrimmage, but it faded during the plays on the first series of downs. The possession ended with Roberson nearly throwing an interception to Ohio State linebacker A. J. Hawk.
A woman accused Roberson, who has not been charged, of sexually assaulting her early Thursday morning at the team's hotel, the Scottsdale Plaza Resort. Roberson told police he had consensual sex with the woman, who is 22 years old and a graduate of Kansas State.
The police in the Phoenix suburb of Paradise Valley have forwarded the case to the Maricopa County attorney, who will decide whether Roberson will face criminal charges. Medical tests were conducted on the accuser, but the results are not expected until next week. In Phoenix, the television station KPNX reported Friday that the police said they did not believe they had enough evidence for a criminal case against Roberson.
Coach Bill Snyder explained his decision to start Roberson, a 6-foot-1, 205-pound senior, in an interview with ABC on the field before the game.
''It's been very difficult for all of us,'' Snyder said, adding that Kansas State officials did not believe that the allegations were just. ''That makes it a bit easier.''
The university's athletic department appeared to give solid support to Roberson, a quarterback from Baytown, Tex.
In a statement issued before the game, Kansas State Athletic Director Tim Weiser said a ''thorough review of allegations against senior quarterback Ell Roberson has led the university to conclude that no criminal act occurred.''
''The university views this situation very seriously and has been working closely with law enforcement throughout this investigation,'' he said.
The team had a curfew of 11 p.m. on the night of the allegation. Police were called by the hotel security department at 4:30 a.m. Because the alleged incident took place in the team hotel, it was not clear whether Roberson was technically in violation of the curfew.
Roberson entered the game 57 rushing yards short of becoming the third player in N.C.A.A. Division I-A history to rush for 1,000 yards and pass for 2,000 in the same season. He finished the season 152 of 295 for 2,545 yards passing, with 975 yards rushing.
The Buckeyes took a 7-0 lead in the first quarter when Harlen Jacobs blocked Jared Brite's punt and John Hollins returned it 7 yards for a touchdown.
The Buckeyes twice led by 21 points. One of their touchdowns was set up by Chris Gamble's interception.
In the third quarter, Roberson scored on a 14-yard run around left end to reduce the deficit to 21-14.
Jenkins had 5 catches for 96 yards to pass David Boston as Ohio State's career reception leader. Krenzel, who was named most valuable player, was 11 for 24 for 189 yards with 2 interceptions.
Ohio State held the all-American Darren Sproles to a season-low 38 yards on 13 carries.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
