Few New Yorkers can claim to trace their lineage as far back as William Hallett can. He is a direct descendant of the William Hallett who arrived in Flushing in the 1640's and was granted a large estate there by the Dutch colonial governor, Peter Stuyvesant. His business card bears the family's coat of arms, decorated with a lion, a shield and three coins.
But Mr. Hallett, a 43-year-old consultant to pharmacists, is no Knickerbocker snob. He grew up in Queens, where his father and brother run a modest funeral parlor on Northern Boulevard and 149th Street.
''I like to joke that we're not historically very adventurous,'' said Mr. Hallett, a genial, ruddy-faced man who surfs on the beaches of the Rockaways in his spare summer hours. ''We got here and just never got around to leaving.''
The Halletts are not the borough's only old family. The Farringtons, who also arrived in the 1640's, still live in Whitestone. Beverly McDermott is descended on her mother's side from the Townsends, who came to Flushing in the 1630's.
Bob Singleton, whose ancestor Edward Hart wrote the Flushing Remonstrance in 1657, a demand for religious freedom sent to Governor Stuyvesant by Flushing townspeople, lives not far away.
Some New Yorkers may see Queens as anything but aristocratic -- a sprawl of highways and airports, where legions of newly arrived immigrants live in cramped high-rise apartments alongside ugly suburban tract houses.
But the borough is also home to a dwindling band of families who arrived in the 17th or 18th centuries and have been there, on and off, ever since. In some cases, their livelihoods have a clear link to the past.
The first William Hallett was a carpenter, and his descendants evolved into makers of wooden caskets and then into funeral home directors. The Farringtons started off as farriers, and when the car replaced the horse, they opened a gas station in Astoria.
Many of them can talk for hours about their family history. But unlike some of their counterparts in fancier ZIP codes, they rarely put on patrician airs.
''It's almost like you were born knowing this stuff,'' Mr. Hallett said. ''The stories are handed down from generation to generation.''
Take Rich Balcom, who runs a cluttered gas station and auto repair shop on Francis Lewis Boulevard at 47th Avenue. With his unkempt hair and blue jeans, he does not look as if his ancestors include Francis Lewis, who lived in Queens and signed the Declaration of Independence.
''My grandmother passed this on,'' Mr. Balcom said, as he hoisted a lengthy sword, complete with a frayed leather scabbard, onto the counter where he greets customers. Two mechanics gasped at the sight and walked over for a closer look.
Tied to the sword was a yellowed tag with seven names on it. ''This saber carried in the Revolutionary War, 1775-76 by Samuel Balcom, who was the father of . . .'' The list goes on, and ends with the current owner's name, added in blue ballpoint.
Genealogical obsession is nothing new in New York. Ever since the patroons reigned, certain natives have carried in their heads ''a forest of family trees,'' as Edith Wharton put it in ''The Age of Innocence.'' The St. Nicholas Society, which is open only to men whose families were in New York State before 1835, still has its offices on East 58th Street. So does the Holland Society, composed of people whose ancestors settled in New York City before 1675.
But few of those societies' members come from the boroughs outside Manhattan -- they became part of the city only in 1898, said Harry Macy Jr., the editor of the New York Genealogical and Biographical Record.
Flushing's high concentration of old families derives in part from its relative stability over time, said R. Scott Hanson, a visiting professor at Philadelphia University who is writing a book on Flushing's religious history.
First colonized as a village in the 1630's, Flushing changed little until the 19th century, when immigrants began to arrive in the scattered towns that grew into present-day Queens. Even after it became part of New York City in 1898, Flushing remained geographically isolated until the 1920's, when the Queensboro subway line was extended to Main Street.
Flushing's late development may also have helped to keep its oldest families from acquiring overly grandiose ideas about themselves.
''There never has been an elite in Queens in the traditional sense,'' said Vincent Seyfried, a historian who has written extensively about the borough. ''The people were mostly farmers, and to the extent they had money they got it by selling their land.''
The Halletts, for example, once had 1,500 acres on either side of where the Triborough Bridge now sits, an area still known on some maps as ''Hallett's Cove.'' But it was gradually subdivided and sold over the years. The last family-owned parcel was sold in the 1960's by William's uncle, Charles Wesley Hallett.
''To think that any parcel lasted that long is amazing,'' said William, who seems to lack any resentment about his family's lost domain, which would be worth billions today.
Other families have long since lost their land, but cling tightly to their historical legacy.
Ms. McDermott, for instance, learned as a girl about the Flushing Remonstrance. When she was in eighth grade at a Flushing public school, in 1956, she and some classmates wrote their own remonstrance, modeled on the original, to protest a teacher they did not like.
Years later, Ms. McDermott dressed in colonial garb at events held at Bowne House, a nonprofit historical society that is based in a house built in 1661 by John Bowne.
Last year she applied to join the Colonial Experience, a rigorous six-month program based in Massachusetts in which participants dress, work, and live exactly as their 17th-century forebears did. At 59, she was by far the oldest applicant.
''I wanted to see if I could be as strong as my ancestors were,'' said Ms. McDermott, a cheerful woman with short graying hair and a rosy complexion. ''But I wasn't chosen.''
Like some other descendants of colonial Queens, she speaks of her preoccupation with a trace of melancholy. Over the last three decades, Flushing has been transformed into a largely Asian community, and many people who were born there have left.
''Neighborhoods always change,'' Ms. McDermott said. ''I just don't want the history to be forgotten.''
In late October, a number of the remaining family members gathered in Flushing Cemetery to say goodbye to Gertrude Jones, a descendant of John Bowne who spent her entire life in Flushing and died just short of her 101st birthday.
The Halletts arranged the funeral. Ms. McDermott was there. So was Bob Singleton, who is president of the Greater Astoria Historical Society. Two members of the local chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution, which Ms. Jones ran for years, attended.
To some of those present, Ms. Jones's death seemed to signify the end of an era. As a girl, she was dandled on Teddy Roosevelt's knee. She had known Flushing when it was little more than a village, and she had a passionate interest in the region's colonial roots.
''All these people around a grave, linked by something that happened 13 generations ago,'' Mr. Singleton said. ''It was a symbolic moment, a testament to a dream that had not died.''
