A year after the opening of western New York's first casino, the drinks are flowing in a decidedly Niagara-like way at Cafe Etc., a martini bar that Steve Fournier Jr. opened just around the corner.
But last Monday, Mr. Fournier's father closed his pizza shop next door after nearly a quarter-century of operating businesses in the decaying downtown tourist district.
The mixed fortunes of the Fourniers are a mirror of the city's as it waits to find out whether the Seneca Niagara Casino will live up to the hopes raised on New Year's Eve 2002 as the first coins dropped in the slot machines: that the Indian-owned gambling hall would help lift Niagara Falls out of its economic tailspin.
Steve Fournier Sr. said the steady exodus of industrial and white-collar jobs over the last 30 years had eroded his customer base. ''The casino helped,'' Mr. Fournier, 52, said as he cleaned out his pizza kitchen. ''But it didn't help enough to make up for what we had lost previously.''
His son, however, planned on drawing casino workers and executives rather than counting on gamblers to tear themselves away from the slot machines and blackjack tables. He took a former dance club, restored its vintage wood bar, scrubbed and painted it, and started booking live jazz acts. So far, the plan seems to be working.
''Any time you've got 2,000 people working down the street from this kind of place, it's got to be good for business,'' said Mr. Fournier, 31.
No one doubts the casino is thriving. It took in $4 billion during its first year, casino officials say, and draws an estimated crowd of 10,000 to 12,000 people on weekdays, and double that on weekends.
But it remains to be seen whether the booming trade will spill out beyond the curved shell, reminiscent of an oversize Quonset hut, that houses the gambling operation.
Even the casino's strongest advocates concede that the kind of development boom that transformed the city's Canadian neighbor -- Niagara Falls in Ontario -- after a casino opened there in 1996 has yet to take place on the American side.
''It's helped some businesses in the area, but I don't think the general economy of the city has changed at this point,'' said Mayor Vince V. Anello, who was sworn in on Thursday. ''It's certainly brought new attention to our city and attracted new investors.''
A state-financed effort to turn a long-vacant downtown building a block from the casino into a high-tech meeting center is scheduled to be completed in the spring.
On Dec. 26, officials of the Seneca Gaming Corporation, which operates the casino, announced plans to build a 26-story, $140 million hotel, restaurant and entertainment complex adjacent to the casino. Some fear that the new complex will siphon customers from other hotels and businesses downtown, without providing revenue to help rebuild the city around it, because the 55-acre parcel owned by the Seneca Nation is exempt from taxes. Others, though, say that the more development, the more tourists and investors the city will draw.
Other projects proposed by private companies and the USA Niagara Development Corporation, a state economic development agency, remain either in planning or stalled by jurisdictional disputes.
It may be too soon to expect the kind of boom that remade the Canadian city, many officials say.
''The major development there didn't happen for two years after the casino opened,'' said State Senator George D. Maziarz, a vocal proponent of Albany's casino compact with the Seneca Nation. ''There hasn't been as much spinoff as we'd like to see, but that's going to take time.''
Niagara Falls Redevelopment, supported by the New York City financier Howard Milstein, owns or holds options on 142 acres near the casino. The company announced plans in August to spend $110 million in five years to develop hotels, restaurants and other attractions.
But Roger Trevino, a vice president of the company, said tourism-industry investors were waiting to see if the steady flow of casino patrons continues.
''There's a consistent stream of traffic, which is what developers, retailers and the hospitality industry would like to see,'' Mr. Trevino said. ''Most people we've talked to would like to see a fuller track record, to make sure it's not a curiosity.''
Both state and city officials hope to parlay their portions of casino revenues into making the city more attractive to outside investors. Under terms of the casino compact, the state is scheduled to receive $38 million in the next few weeks as its share from Seneca Niagara's first year, with about $9.5 million of that going to the city.
Mr. Anello, a Democrat, and Mr. Maziarz, a Republican, hold two of the five seats on a commission overseeing the distribution of the city's casino money. While they have differed on how the revenue should be spent, both said the bulk should go toward infrastructure and housing projects. Those needs are glaring within a few blocks of the casino, where vacant buildings, crumbling curbs and cracked sidewalks line potholed streets.
''Hopefully, they'll use the money to clean things up a little bit,'' said Chance Gabrus, 31, a printer who lives here. ''It seems like things are changing here, and the casino is putting some fresh air back into the area.''
Other businesses near the casino, like Surjit Bajwa's service station, have gotten a lift from casino patrons and employees, as well as construction workers who renovated the former convention center and are building a 2,400-car parking garage, part of which opened this week.
Mr. Bajwa, a New York City native who moved here almost three years ago, said he planned to expand his business to include a fast-food franchise.
''It's been a good boost for business,'' he said of the casino. ''So far, there's been no downside.''
USA Niagara announced plans last fall to help smaller entrepreneurs refurbish the Third Street commercial district, where the Fourniers do business. Some private investors are not waiting for government assistance to spruce things up, though.
Daniel W. Vecchies and his family have spent more than $500,000 buying and renovating properties on the same block as Mr. Fournier's bar. Mr. Vecchies's Shadow Martini Bar and Restaurant opened in October, and he plans to have a steakhouse operating across the street by next tourist season.
''Forty years of decline isn't going to turn around overnight,'' Mr. Vecchies said. ''The casino is like a gold mine for this city and people like me have to think, 'What's the best way to mine that gold?' ''
