It was only the second day on the job for Steve Levy, the new Suffolk County executive, but the problems had already stacked up like the still-unpacked cardboard boxes that filled his corner office.
First, there was the matter of a $240 million projected shortfall in the 2005 budget -- the biggest hole the county has ever seen, and one that is likely to grow in coming months. Then, there were the proposals to tinker with the form and function of the Republican-controlled County Legislature, a move that Democrats criticized as an attempt to centralize power and block Mr. Levy's agenda.
Mr. Levy, the first Democratic county executive in Suffolk in a dozen years, surged into office as a shirt-sleeve reformer who promised to cut spending and eliminate waste and mismanagement. Republicans and Democrats alike have said he is dedicated and driven, but it remains to be seen whether Mr. Levy can navigate the legislative opposition and grim financial prospects.
''People ask me, am I nervous,'' Mr. Levy said on Friday in an interview in his 12th-floor office. ''I answer, not at all. I already know what I want to accomplish. I have my game plan in place.''
But on Friday, the Legislature debated parliamentary changes that could prove an obstacle to that game plan, and the flood of legislation Mr. Levy is likely to introduce. Republican legislators, led by Joseph Caracappa, have proposed changes that would create a rules committee to review local laws and charter laws before deciding whether they should be voted on by the full Legislature.
The proposal was not adopted during Friday's session, but will be discussed at a Jan. 15 legislative meeting.
Mr. Caracappa said that the county needed the rules committee to keep poorly written bills from reaching the floor, adding that Nassau County, New York State and the federal government all have similar bodies.
He said that Suffolk's rules committee would consider only about 5 percent of all pieces of legislation and would not look at budget amendments, bond issues and other policy decisions.
''This is legislative housekeeping,'' said Arthur J. Kremer, a former Democratic state assemblyman, referring to the work of rules committees. ''They are the committee that is the final resting place before a bill is acted on, and there's absolutely nothing wrong with them.''
The committee would most likely be led by Allan Binder, a Republican who is considered one of the Legislature's most partisan members. Brian X. Foley, a Democratic legislator, said such a committee could block legislation for months, or indefinitely.
And though Republicans insisted that the parliamentary changes under consideration were not politically motivated, David A. Bishop, a Democratic legislator, said their move was directed squarely at Mr. Levy.
''They have a very feisty, populist county executive, and they can frustrate him with rules like this,'' Mr. Bishop said. ''It would seem that the plan is to frustrate the Levy agenda by bottling him up.''
At the same time, Mr. Levy and his administration are looking ahead to 2005, and the projected $240 million shortfall stemming from rising costs of Medicaid, employee health care and pensions. Mr. Levy and the Suffolk Legislature plan to lobby Albany to ease the county's budget gap.
The projected shortfall is equal to about one-tenth of the county's annual operating budget, which is $2.3 billion for 2004.
Fred Pollert, deputy county executive for management and finance, said next year's shortfall ''really eclipses anything we have dealt with in the recent past.''
''That projected gap is going to get worse before it gets better,'' he said.
In many ways, Suffolk is in much better shape than many counties. Its bond ratings improved over the 1990's, and it ended 2003 with a multimillion-dollar budget surplus. Suffolk's situation is not unique, Mr. Pollert said, as rising Medicaid and pension costs are afflicting counties across the state.
Mr. Levy said that a handful of cost-saving executive orders he signed on Friday limiting the ability of employees to cash in sick days and rescinding some administrative raises are the beginning of necessary cost-saving measures. The Police Department needs to find $20 million in savings, he said, and he has also proposed consolidating county departments, putting bus contracts out for public bid and some other ideas, like selling advertisements on the county's Web site.
''It's daunting,'' Mr. Levy said. ''It is certainly the biggest shortfall we've ever head. If the Legislature does not pass our restructuring plan very early on in the year, we're facing a large property tax increase and deep budget cuts in 2005.''
