The Knicks seemed in sync. They had finally found a point guard and were playing with a defensive edge. They had won four games in a row and were shooting for their longest winning streak since March 2001, now under the watchful eye of Isiah Thomas.
After a week of roster moves, a trade and newfound emotion, the other shoe dropped last night. Injuries struck. The new starting point guard Frank Williams pulled a groin muscle Wednesday and could not play last night against Chicago. Allan Houston's surgically repaired right knee swelled up and forced him to sit.
Against a young and quick Bulls team -- led by the gutsy guard Jamal Crawford -- the Knicks could not compensate for their missing mates any more than they could play the defense that defined them in their recent surge, losing, 104-99.
When Shandon Anderson, starting for Houston, could not finish his layup off an inbounds play with 28.9 seconds left, Crawford grabbed the rebound and made the clinching free throws. His game-high 28 points led the Bulls to the victory -- only their 10th of the season -- in Madison Square Garden.
''We should have won this game tonight, regardless of who was out there,'' said Keith Van Horn, who had 25 points and led the Knicks in scoring for the fifth consecutive game.
The Knicks (14-20) were left wondering what might have been. Charlie Ward's 3-pointer with 43.8 seconds left cut the Bulls' lead to 98-97. Eddy Curry missed one of two free throws, giving the Knicks an opportunity with 32 seconds remaining. The inbounds play worked perfectly. Anderson had a clear baseline drive until he was staring at 285-pound Curry, expecting contact. He did not get it.
''That's the worst thing when you're going against a big guy and he does nothing,'' Anderson said. ''You want him to jump. He didn't do anything, and that's what threw me off.''
Curry was involved in an earlier game-changing play, too. He had dunked on Van Horn to give Chicago a 96-89 lead with 2 minutes 35 seconds to play. Kurt Thomas hit a jumper to cut the lead to 5 points. On the next play, Van Horn drove through the lane, dunked over Curry and fell in the lane.
The basket dropped, but the referees blew the whistle. One called a charge, the other called a blocking foul. There was a jump ball for the offsetting whistle, and Dikembe Mutombo lost it to Curry. Crawford got the ball and hit a jumper to extend the lead to 7 points with 1:22 to play.
Knicks Coach Don Chaney was upset by the call. So was Van Horn.
''They were talking about a double foul, but I had no idea where that was coming from,'' Van Horn said. ''I just wanted them to count the basket. I thought that I got it off over him. That was just one call and one call doesn't make a game. There are a lot of other reasons why we lost this game tonight.''
It started -- as did the Knicks' winning streak -- with defense. The Bulls are one of the worst offensive teams in the league, averaging 89 points and 41 percent shooting. They shot 48.8 percent last night.
Crawford, who shot 11 of 21, and the rookie point guard Kirk Hinrich combined to score 47 points.
Ward cut the lead to 2 points again with 20.7 seconds left, but missed a 3-point attempt with 13.9 seconds left. Ward and Anderson combined for 32 points. Despite Van Horn's night and a double-double from Mutombo (15 points, 16 rebounds), the Knicks could not make up for their injured players.
Moochie Norris, acquired on Tuesday, played 11 minutes, scored 5 points and seemed out of sorts in the end. Howard Eisley, a former starter who had two turnovers in the eight minutes he played, watched from the bench.
Eisley's reduced playing time fueled speculation that he was the point guard among the Knicks' four that Isiah Thomas wanted to trade, even if Eisley's contract makes it difficult.
Williams injured himself on New Year's Eve while working on his one-on-one moves. He was supposed to have the day off. He said that his condition was day to day, but he was walking with a limp.
The timing could not have been worse. ''It is frustrating you get hurt like this rather than game time,'' Williams said. Over the last four games, Williams had been averaging 14 points and 5.5 assists in 25.5 minutes.
Houston had been averaging 17.3 points the last four games, but he said he had been in pain and planned to have his knee drained soon. ''You don't want to shoot all your bullets until you have to,'' Houston said.
Antonio McDyess played only 16 minutes off the bench and had one point and one rebound. After the game against Miami on Tuesday, McDyess said he had to have his knee drained.
''We were short-handed tonight, but that is no excuse,'' McDyess said. ''We should have come out and played harder and tougher defense.''
REBOUNDS
With the Knicks' surplus of point guards, the easiest contract for ISIAH THOMAS to trade or buy out would be CHARLIE WARD's. His contract becomes guaranteed Jan. 10.
PRO BASKETBALL
