By Jacob Wachowiak's account, he and his wife, Devorah, almost didn't meet at all. ''We were set up on three blind dates and never met,'' he said. But once they got together, the relationship stuck, and they were married in 1977.
It has been difficult, however, for Mr. Wachowiak, 48, to focus on the good times.
Adversity seems to have followed the Wachowiak family for years. Among the challenges was the birth of their son, Adam, in 1979. He was six weeks overdue. ''The doctor said, 'You're going to have to make a choice, your wife or your baby,' '' Mr. Wachowiak recalled. ''Well, they both made it.''
That same year, Mr. Wachowiak had to contend with his own health problems -- doctors removed a tumor from his face.
Even greater challenges lay ahead.
Mr. Wachowiak said his wife learned in 1980 that she had a kind of schizophrenia, and her illness grew worse soon after she gave birth to their daughter, Monika, later that year.
In 1983, Mr. Wachowiak said, his wife committed suicide by overdosing on prescription medication and he was left to raise Adam and Monika alone. He says he never got over that loss. He channeled his energies into taking care of his children. ''I live for my kids,'' he said. ''I was engaged twice after my wife died, but it didn't work.''
That April the family moved to Baltimore, where Adam, who has dyslexia, attended a program for learning-disabled children. Mr. Wachowiak, who studied bookkeeping, found a job managing a liquor store.
In 1990 he and his children moved to his grandmother's house in Cheektowaga, N.Y., to live near her as she battled colon cancer. She had used the house as collateral for her medical bills, though, and when she died later that year the house was lost. ''I went through a year where I couldn't get it together,'' Mr. Wachowiak said.
Later in 1990 Mr. Wachowiak went to Israel, where a rabbi counseled him to return to America, to Crown Heights, Brooklyn, where he had previously been involved in the community, to try to be a father to his children.
His own health problems have significantly complicated his effort to take care of his family. Mr. Wachowiak has suffered from manic-depression and kidney stones. In October 1999 he was hospitalized for a month, and he was found to have diabetes and Crohn's disease. The health problems continued in 2002, when he learned that he has a prostate disease.
He fell behind on his rent and bills and started having anxiety attacks, which led to frequent hospitalizations. Monika, who had been living in Seattle, returned to New York to help care for her father.
Monika suggested they go to Hadassah for help, where they were referred to the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty, an agency affiliated with UJA-Federation of New York, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Elissa Smith, a caseworker at UJA-Federation, secured $1,900, with $475 coming from the Neediest Cases, to pay for telephone and electricity bills that had piled up while Mr. Wachowiak was in the hospital.
The council also provides Mr. Wachowiak with counseling and has helped the family with food vouchers.
Monika is a junior at Brooklyn College, where she is pursuing a degree in Judaic studies. Adam, who had been studying at a yeshiva and working as a laborer in Israel, also returned to New York recently to help care for his father. Adam took a job at a laundry to support his father and sister, earning $250 a week. Mr. Wachowiak receives $575 a month from Social Security. They pay $240 a month for their two-bedroom apartment; a federal subsidy pays the remaining $900.
The Wachowiak family is still trying to balance good moments and bad, discouragement and optimism.
On his way to a store recently , Mr. Wachowiak slipped and fell in the rain. His glasses broke, as did two of his teeth. Now he has to have dental surgery. To make matters worse, Adam was laid off from his job.
''It's going to be very hard,'' Mr. Wachowiak said. ''But he'll find something in the community.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,422,350.21  Recorded Wednesday: 215,206.02  Total: $5,637,556.23  Last year to date: $5,985,811.29
Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  An article on Saturday about Jacob Wachowiak, a father of two whose family received financial help through the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty, misstated the affiliation of Elissa Smith, the caseworker who helped arrange it. She works for the council, an affiliated agency of UJA-Federation of New York -- not directly for the federation, which is a beneficiary of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
