Representative Ralph M. Hall, a longtime Texas Democrat who once said it was his duty to remain in his party and pull it ''back to the middle,'' announced Friday evening that he was becoming a Republican, a switch that will virtually assure re-election in his East Texas district and help Republicans maintain control of the House.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Hall said the change stemmed from his close ties to the Bush family and to his ideological differences with the Democratic leadership. He also said that as a Democrat in a Republican-controlled House, he had recently been denied financing for special projects in his district.
''I always said that if I felt it was hurting my district by my being a Democrat, I'd either switch parties or resign,'' he said.
President Bush praised Mr. Hall, The Associated Press reported.
''I welcome Congressman Ralph Hall to the Republican Party,'' Mr. Bush said. '' He is a well-respected leader of the highest integrity, and a tireless advocate for the people of Texas.''
Mr. Hall, at 80 the oldest member of the House, almost always sides with Republicans on important votes and has made no secret of his dislike for Democratic leaders. ''I'm not comfortable in the caucus with them running down a president that I've known since he was 11,'' he said.
His switch brings the number of House Republicans to 229, against 204 Democrats and one independent; one seat is vacant.
Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader, hailed the move. ''Democrats are reaping what they've sown,'' he said in a statement. ''They've made their message clear: 'Moderates need not apply,' and that's a sad trend for a once-great party.''
Correction:  January 6, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Saturday about the decision of Representative Ralph M. Hall, a longtime Texas Democrat, to switch to the Republican Party gave an incorrect figure in some copies for Democrats remaining in the House. It is 204, not 205. (The rest of the seats are held by 229 Republicans and one independent, with one seat vacant.)
