When Procter &amp; Gamble employees forget a computer password or need to change the number of dependents they claim for tax purposes, they call one of three places: Manila; San Jose, Costa Rica; or Newcastle, England.
Procter &amp; Gamble, with about 98,000 employees in more than 80 countries, needed two years to consolidate its back office and personnel operations -- and help from a slew of consultants. Various firms first helped the big consumer products company join those that have become flexible in how and where they operate the business. Now they are helping Procter &amp; Gamble hire outside contractors to help run the three ''shared service centers'' that it set up.
''P.&amp;G.'s the leader,'' said Dennis A. McGwire, president and chief executive of TPI, a consulting firm that helps companies decide whether to move operations offshore and if so, how and where. ''They're just one of the smartest companies that I have run into.''
What Mr. McGwire calls smart, others call the makings of an economic nightmare. The business of his privately held company, one of Procter &amp; Gamble's consultants, is to advise companies about moving white-collar jobs overseas.
That process is a hot-button issue in American business and politics, both awash in worries that the job losses in American manufacturing over the last three decades are beginning to corrode the service and technology sectors, as well.
But such advisory work is proving to be a boon for many consulting firms, which have been hit hard by the slack economy and the reluctance of corporate executives to spend on big information technology projects. Advising on whether and how to move operations offshore and if so, whether to pay someone else to run them, is too small a market to offset broader revenue declines for the consulting industry, said Rebecca S. Scholl, a principal analyst in the Paris office of Gartner Inc., a research and consulting firm that has studied the phenomenon. But such advisory work is growing quickly and, in any event, may also be one of the only new games in town, said Tom Rodenhauser, president of Consulting Information Services in Keene, N.H. ''Strategy firms are really focusing on sourcing as a big business for them, because the traditional cost-cutting work is drying up. Clients are doing that themselves,'' Mr. Rodenhauser said. ''This is the only new phenomenon on the horizon that the strategy consultants can advise on.''
Moving operations to cheaper locations has always been a response to economic weakness; in this case, though, consultants say the shift is unlikely to slow or reverse as the economy improves. With excess capacity for almost every kind of service function making competition intense, companies have every reason to take advantage of the lower wage scales in other countries, where the workers may be better educated than their counterparts in the United States. Client companies often do not want employees to know that the consultants are investigating whether their jobs can be shipped elsewhere, said Vas Kodali, a principal at the A.T. Kearney consulting firm, a subsidiary of EDS. One of the most important parts of the process -- and a step that may often fall victim to the bottom line -- is attending to employees whose functions are moved, he said.
''How do we make sure that the jobs that are offshored,'' Mr. Kodali explained, ''that the people who were in those jobs, have opportunities?,''
That task may become more difficult as the kinds of jobs that companies want their overseas employees to perform continue to change. No longer are they just operating call centers, which call for relatively little exercise of judgment or authority. Overseas facilities are now handling all aspects of employee compensation, benefits, finance and even accounting -- in short, any functions that are not unique to the company and are not part of its essential business, said Rudy Puryear, director and head of the information technology practice for Bain &amp; Company in Chicago. ''Activities that are highly proprietary and that are unique to the company, it's particularly difficult'' to move, he said. And companies are reluctant to relocate those operations whose secrets they need to protect -- the development of corporate strategies, for example.
Todd Furniss, the chief operating officer of Everest Group, another firm specializing in helping companies move operations offshore, distinguished between rules-based and judgment-based operations. ''Rather than the entire mortgage application process, we might say we can outsource the underwriting process offshore,'' Mr. Furniss said. ''Or instead of saying all of H.R., we might say just the payroll component.''
The consultants study exactly what a company does and then identify which services, like payroll, can safely be delegated to overseas staff or purchased from a third-party supplier. The number of such advisory projects that A.T. Kearney is working on has more than tripled over the past three years, Mr. Kodali said.
The next step is figuring out possible host countries, he explained, and deciding whether to hire another company to provide a service there or to build a center that will provide the client with exclusive service.
The experience of Procter &amp; Gamble illustrates both what more and more companies are trying to do and what roles consultants play.
Intent on cutting costs, the company began in 1998 to evaluate ways to consolidate back office operations worldwide into shared service centers, as they are known, said Alfonso Cos, a vice president for client services at Procter &amp; Gamble who was picked to join a team of about 10 executives to lead the consolidation effort. ''We were latecomers to the shared services space,'' said Mr. Cos, behind companies like Boeing and Allied Signal.
Procter &amp; Gamble figured it could eliminate duplication -- there would not be separate payroll functions in 70 different countries -- and cut staff. By setting up the shared service centers overseas, Procter &amp; Gamble also calculated that it could benefit from salary arbitrage: wages would be lower in the selected host countries.
Andersen Consulting, the company now known as Accenture, played a critical role at this juncture, helping Procter &amp; Gamble identify countries that would be hospitable. The company and its consultants narrowed the list of cities to 12 from 104 and eventually picked San Jose, Manila and Newcastle.
''It was very controversial,'' Mr. Cos said, because the consolidation would take business processes away from well-established units of the company in cities like Cincinnati, Mexico City and Caracas, where it had a highly visible presence. Now Procter &amp; Gamble employs about 1,200 people in San Jose, 1,000 in Newcastle and 600 in Manila.
The centers began operating in 2000 and were so successful that Procter &amp; Gamble considered offering to sell payroll and other human resources services to other companies, Mr. Cos said.
''If we are as good as we think we are or are becoming, what is the opportunity to compete for other business outside?'' Mr. Cos recalled thinking. ''We toyed with the idea for a while and realized it was totally out of our strategy.''
Instead, the company has sold most of its employee services operations in each location to International Business Machines, which runs them for Procter &amp; Gamble but can also offer the same services using the same facilities to other companies. So far, about 600 Procter &amp; Gamble employees have become I.B.M. employees as a result, Mr. Cos said.
More and more companies are going to combine shifting operations offshore with outsourcing as Procter &amp; Gamble ultimately has done, said Ms. Scholl, the Gartner analyst. Her firm predicts that such combination deals, which account for about 1 percent of the business process outsourcing market today, will account for about 14 percent of the market, or $24 billion, in 2007. The trend is not limited to American companies. Taca, an airline based in San Salvador, El Salvador, hired Bain to help it cut costs by identifying functions that could be purchased more cheaply from outside providers. Because of relatively low wages in El Salvador, it made no sense to outsource operation of its computer help desk, for example, said Jaime A. Pocasangre, vice president and corporate controller at Taca. But for computer hardware repairs, which require visits by technicians, the airline has hired Decision One, a company based in suburban Philadelphia.
''Before, it was our staff,'' Mr. Pocasangre said. ''We could give 24-hour response time,'' but only if flights from San Salvador to whatever office had the problem -- a broken printer or other piece of equipment -- were not full, he said. If the printer in the New York City ticket office broke and could not be fixed for a day or more, that could have serious revenue implications, he added.
Pure consulting firms face tough competition from big companies that are both consultants and service providers, like I.B.M. and Accenture. The latter often offer to operate back offices for companies regardless of their location, said Brad Smith, vice president for research at Kennedy Information, a company in Peterborough, N.H., that tracks the consulting industry. ''Companies like I.B.M. and Accenture are literally hiring thousands and thousands of people in places like Bangalore and Shanghai and wherever else they think a strategic location should and would be'' for running such operations, Mr. Smith said. But keeping up with what the consultants and their clients are doing is difficult because many do not want to advertise their actions for fear of public or legislative backlash, said Mr. Kodali of A.T. Kearney. ''They're very careful about confidentiality,'' he said. ''But at the end of the day, they know they have to reduce their cost structure.''
Correction:  January 6, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Business Day on Saturday about the role of consultants in advising companies on moving some operations overseas misspelled the surname of the chief executive of one such firm, TPI. He is Dennis A. McGuire, not McGwire.
The article also misidentified the firm that advised Procter &amp; Gamble on its offshore operations. It was Arthur Andersen, not Andersen Consulting (now called Accenture).
