Those seeking visions of the new Cupertino do not have to look far. It may be found in the neat rows of shoes on front doorsteps, in the tanks of live seafood at the Tin Tin supermarket, or the shopping malls bristling with signs in Mandarin.
But perhaps the most potent symbol of the transformation of this sprawling Silicon Valley suburb may be found at the Joy Luck Place in the Cupertino Village shopping center, where members of the city's Asian-born power elite strike deals over dim sum and tea in a new twist on the smoky backroom.
Perhaps best known as the headquarters of Apple Computer, Cupertino is gaining new attention as a beacon of Asian-American political participation. Asian-Americans now make up 19.3 percent of the population in the Bay Area, and 31.1 percent in San Francisco. But Cupertino, which is about 45 miles southeast of San Francisco, has undergone an even bigger change. Its population of 50,000 is now 44.8 percent Asian-American, compared with less than 10 percent in 1980.
Unlike in other places with booming Asian populations -- most notably Los Angeles -- the demographic shifts here have translated into significant political involvement. Nine out of 28 local elected officials are Asian-American. Although the job of mayor, which rotates among members of the City Council, is currently held by a non-Asian, Sandra James, her immediate predecessor, Dr. Michael Chang, is a Chinese-American college professor, and Patrick Kwok, a Chinese-American civil engineer, is next in line.
Asian-American candidacies have been bolstered by increasingly sophisticated efforts at political organizing. Local community colleges have become candidate hatcheries, led by mentors like Dr. Chang and Paul Fong, a political science professor who lives in Cupertino and is considered something of a political kingmaker for Asian-American candidates.
''When we talk about Asian-American politics, we tend to center on San Francisco and L.A.,'' said James S. Lai, an assistant professor of political science and ethnic studies at Santa Clara University. ''But Cupertino is a new model -- a suburban phenomenon -- one that hasn't been talked about in racial and ethnic politics but one that is happening at the grass roots.''
The political trajectory of Kris Wang, 50, a former software engineering executive who was recently elected to the City Council, is in many ways typical of the new Asian-American elite. Ms. Wang grew up in Taiwan and arrived in San Jose in 1980 with $300 in her pocket.
Her first employer, Altos Computers, paid for her master's in business administration. Ms. Wang eventually married, had two children and became involved in local schools, camping out on the sidewalk to enroll her sons in William Faria Elementary School, an academically rigorous school with a student body that is now 97 percent Asian-American. While an executive, she became an active volunteer and then a city parks and recreation commissioner.
Ms. Wang said her interest in local government stemmed in part from her desire to encourage a cultural shift among her peers. ''I tell them, 'You folks care about education, but it is the city that supports you. It's like water and air.' ''
Dr. Chang, who just finished his second term as mayor, uses his own career as a case study for his Asian-American studies students at De Anza Community College in Cupertino, where Mr. Fong is a trustee. ''I tell them to get involved -- it's the American way,'' Dr. Chang said. ''What better way to learn about community than to be in the midst of the action?''
The epicenter of Asian-American political achievement is still Hawaii, where Asian-Americans, who make up more than 40 percent of the population, have been elected at all levels of state and local government since statehood in 1959. California, like the rest of the mainland, has had further to go. Donald T. Nakanishi, director of the Asian American Studies Center at the University of California, Los Angeles, said that unlike such older communities as Monterey Park, outside Los Angeles, which tend to elect only one Asian-American official at a time, Cupertino has ''gone way beyond the firsts'' of an older generation. Earlier local pioneers include Transportation Secretary Norman Y. Mineta, who was the first Asian-American mayor of a major American city, San Jose, from 1971 to 1974, and is now the first Asian-American cabinet member.
Cupertino, Mr. Nakanishi said, is a place ''where 30 years ago you couldn't imagine an Asian-American living, let alone being elected.''
Cupertino's changes have not come without tensions, and some resentment. In the past few years, controversies have erupted at public meetings over the abundance of Chinese-language signs at local malls, and over whether it is appropriate to have a Chinese dragon and lion dance at a Fourth of July parade.
The most serious tempest erupted in March, when Ms. James opposed a plan to adorn the city's new community hall with a plaque bearing the name of an Asian-American donor who had pledged $250,000 to the project, saying, ''What do we know about these people?''
Her comment was perceived by Dr. Chang, then the mayor, and some others as insensitive. Ms. James said that her remarks were misinterpreted, and accused Dr. Chang of ''playing the race card.'' She later apologized in a news conference that included reporters from The World Journal and Sing Tao, two widely read Chinese-language newspapers.
Richard Lowenthal, a City Council member and co-chairman of the city's Lunar New Year Unity parade, said such cultural clashes were inevitable.
''In San Francisco, change happened over a century, but here, it's happened very fast,'' said Mr. Lowenthal, a former executive with Cisco Systems. ''There's a certain sense people have that there's not enough room for two cultures. There are people making change and resisting change.''
To spend some time in Cupertino is to be aware of them all.
Jack Hubby, a board member of the Chamber of Commerce, speaks of the ''ghettoization'' of Cupertino, citing predominantly Asian shopping centers that make longtime residents like himself feel like ''minorities.''
A Taiwanese-born mother of a fourth grader spoke of differences in values, particularly education. ''You probably notice there are not many Caucasians,'' she said, parked outside William Faria Elementary. ''Caucasians want their kids to have fun and later they'll catch up. I think Asian parents have a lot higher expectations for their kids.''
Despite the increased visibility of Asian-American elected officials, even in the Bay Area their numbers do not fully mirror the population, said Eugene Leong, executive director of the Association of Bay Area Governments, a regional planning agency. He recently co-founded the Public Administrators Network and Caucus of Elected Asians, or Panacea, to encourage public service.
''Frankly, there are not enough Asian-Americans aspiring to serve,'' Mr. Leong said. ''It's a combination of distrust in public institutions, citizenship and language problems, and apathy.''
There is also a deeper issue. ''You don't sit around in an Asian house and say, 'Oh, you should grow up to be a bureaucrat,' '' he said. ''We've done very well with lawyers, doctors, scientists and engineers. But public service has not been sold as a worthy calling.''
Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Jan. 3 about the political involvement of Asian-Americans in Cupertino, Calif., referred incorrectly to signs prevalent in shopping malls there. They are written in Chinese characters. (Mandarin is a form of spoken Chinese that shares the written language with other Chinese dialects.)
