Nearly 40 years ago the scheduling of American tournaments changed drastically. The standard weekend board-a-match team event virtually disappeared, and the Swiss teams, then a novelty, became normal. With Swiss, relatively inexperienced teams could win occasionally. Almost every board-a-match victory went to the top experts, and average players grew tired of being ground down, week in, week out.
This was demonstrated in a two-day board-a-match a week ago at the Winter Regional Championships of the Greater New York Bridge Championships. Almost all the best players in the area took part, including many national champions, and the top eight teams in the final standings consisted almost entirely of established stars.
The title went to Glenn Milgrim, Chris Willenken, Michael Polowan and Michael Rosenberg. Second were Brian Glubok, Jim Krekorian, Ivar Stakgold, Adam Wildavsky and Aaron Silverstein.
The experts were intrigued by the diagramed deal from the board-a-match qualifying stage. Could the normal contract of three spades, reached after a pre-emptive opening in third seat, be defeated? It was obvious that the defense could take four winners in the red suits, and the spade queen was the key to the situation. If South could reach the dummy and take a normal spade finesse, he would succeed. What could the defenders do? On the face of it, nothing. Can you see the road to a winning defense?
Obviously West leads the heart king. Equally obviously East overtakes with the ace and returns the suit. West takes his two heart winners, and East's discard is crucial: it must be a diamond.
Now West must lead a fourth heart, deliberately conceding a ruff-and-discard. If the declarer ruffs in the dummy, he cannot take the spade finesse and will lose eventually to the queen. His best chance is to discard a club from the dummy. He trumps in his hand, but East seizes the opportunity to discard a second diamond.
South leads a diamond, hoping to reach the dummy. Unfortunately for him, West snatches his ace and leads his fifth and final heart. Again, South cannot afford to ruff in the dummy. He ruffs in his hand, but East throws his last diamond.
When South then tries to reach dummy with a diamond lead, East can ruff. A diamond ruff by East was quite unexpected, looking at the original diagram.
BRIDGE
