The number of journalists who died on assignment rose sharply last year, to 36 from 19 in 2002, largely because of their work in Iraq, according to a report released Friday by the Committee to Protect Journalists, a research and advocacy group based in New York.
Thirteen journalists were killed by hostile actions in Iraq last year, the report said, and six more died as a result of traffic accidents or illness. Outside Iraq, nearly all other journalists killed were targets because of their reporting.
''The war that began in March posed many hazards for journalists,'' Ann Cooper, the group's executive director, said in a statement. ''But seasoned war correspondents tell us that even in the postwar period, Iraq remains the most dangerous assignment they have ever had.''
The deaths of 19 journalists in Iraq is the highest toll in a single country since 24 journalists were killed in Algeria in 1995 at the height of the conflict between the government and Islamist insurgents, according to the report. Because of the new process of assigning reporters to travel with the American-led military forces during the Iraq war, journalists fell prey to the same deadly hazards that soldiers faced. But during the last nine months of the occupation in Iraq, the risks have not abated.
Reporters face threats from both sides of the guerrilla war in Iraq. Like Iraqis themselves and occupation soldiers, journalists risk being at the wrong place at the wrong time in this period of frequent car bombings and roadside explosions. Three American reporters for The Los Angeles Times and five of their Iraqi colleagues were wounded and eight people were killed on New Year's Eve when a car bomb exploded next to a Baghdad restaurant popular with foreigners and affluent Iraqis.
When reporters travel to the restive areas of the so-called Sunni Triangle north and west of Baghdad, a swath that formed the power base of the ousted government, their cars are routinely chased by gunmen and frequently fired upon. Reporters have also been attacked by angry crowds when covering suicide bombings.
But at least four journalists have been killed to date by the American military, including a Palestinian cameraman for Reuters, who was shot as he filmed outside a prison in August. The committee ''continues to demand a full public accounting from the Pentagon'' for the incidents, Ms. Cooper said.
