Regulars at the Silver Spoon Diner on the Upper East Side say they never had to place an order. They merely had to walk through the door and nod hello to George.
''As soon as you came in the door, George would have your eggs on the grill,'' Jacquelyn Pepe said as she ate breakfast yesterday at the diner, on First Avenue near 71st Street. ''He knew exactly what you wanted and how you liked it.''
Another regular, Joe Puglisi, 45, nodded and said: ''George knew more than my order. He knew my whole family. Now how many diner customers can say that about a short-order cook?''
That is because George Rigos was one of those diner operators who made the place feel like a big family kitchen in a small town, not a bustling place of business in Manhattan. Mr. Rigos helped run the Silver Spoon since it opened in 1986, along with his son, Louis Rigos, who owned it.
George Rigos was found stabbed to death on New Year's Day in his home in Queens, a killing that initially made news as the first homicide reported in Queens in 2004.
But his death was the farthest thing from a statistic for Mr. Rigos's extensive family -- seven children and 21 grandchildren -- and his extended family of regular customers.
At 68, Mr. Rigos, a Greek immigrant, helped support his family by working virtually every day at the diner. He rose early at his home in Bellerose, Queens, and drove to Manhattan in his Mitsubishi Eclipse, in time to open the diner at 5 a.m. When he failed to show up to open the diner on Thursday, workers immediately contacted Louis Rigos, 45. He went to his father's apartment and found him dead, with stab wounds in his chest and facial injuries.
As of last night, the killing was unsolved. Police officials said there were no signs of forced entry. Detectives were initially seeking to question Mr. Rigos's longtime roommate, Vasilios Spiliopoulos, 67, but a police spokesman said yesterday that Mr. Spiliopoulos was not considered a suspect.
''They located him. They spoke to him and they moved on,'' the spokesman said.
Mr. Rigos, a widower, lived in a small apartment and may have taken a roommate so that he could save more money for his children, said Josephine Tozzolo, 67, whose daughter Jodi is married to Louis Rigos.
''Louis said there was blood all over and that they must have caught him when he came out of the shower,'' she said. ''Somebody must have thought he had something. One of his daughters said he kept cash in the house.''
Kathleen Aponte, who owns the narrow two-floor house where Mr. Rigos lived, said that when she bought the house in 1999, Mr. Rigos and Mr. Spiliopoulos had been living there for seven years.
''I never had a complaint about them,'' she said. ''He kept diner hours. When he wasn't sleeping, he was working.''
Angela Echevarria, 31, who lives in the apartment below Mr. Rigos, said Mr. Rigos's son knocked on her door at 8:30 a.m. Thursday.
''He was distraught and said that his father was dead,'' she said.
''If you sneeze too loud in this house, the next-door neighbors hear you,'' she said. ''And we were up New Year's Eve till about 2 and never heard anything from upstairs.''
Mr. Rigos's wife died at age 38, Ms. Tozzolo said. Mr. Rigos was left to raise his four sons and three daughters-- the youngest was 3 at the time -- while running a diner in New Hyde Park, N.Y. He closed that diner and helped Louis open the Silver Spoon in 1986. Over the years, each of George Rigos's children worked at the diner at some point.
Signs in the Silver Spoon's window show a city skyline in a soup spoon, and call the food the ''finest quality on the Upper East Side.''
Inside yesterday, Mr. Puglisi said he had eaten breakfast there almost every day since it opened.
''Even strangers were treated like family here,'' said Mr. Puglisi, the superintendent at a nearby building, ''and if you were a regular, forget about it.''
He pointed automatically toward the kitchen. Not seeing Mr. Rigos's face across the counter near the grill, he stared back into his oatmeal.
Ruth Unterberg, 77, a retired secretary, said that Mr. Rigos made her breakfast and lunch every day for the past 12 years.
''This is my second home and George was a good friend,'' she said. ''He could have retired, but he chose to keep working because he loved everybody here, and we all loved him.''
Ms. Pepe, 47, sat with Raju Dorwani, 47, a computer consultant, and Rita Capek, 65, who said ''He burnt my home fries just the way I like them.''
Another customer, Herbert Miller, 75, an importer from Manhattan, said: ''We had more than just an owner-customer relationship, we were good friends.''
''Everyone called him Uncle George or Papa George,'' said Aida Gashi, 23, a waitress. ''He made us all feel like family.''
