The Yankees were not the only team that noticed Braden Looper on Oct. 22. The Mets were observers of the World Series, and they paid attention to what Looper did while pitching for the Florida Marlins in Game 4 that evening.
It was the top of the 11th inning and the Yankees had the bases loaded with one out. Ugueth Urbina had already blown a save in the game, and Chad Fox was in trouble. One fly ball, and the Yankees would have the lead and could turn the game over to Mariano Rivera.
It was up to Looper, who came in from the bullpen throwing hard. He fired seven pitches to Aaron Boone -- six for strikes, one reaching 98 miles an hour -- and Boone struck out. When John Flaherty popped out to end the inning, the Marlins had survived. They won the game in the 12th inning to even the Series. Several days later, they were the world champions.
Now that Looper is a free agent, the Mets would like him to bring the same toughness to them.
''That one defining moment probably saved it for the Marlins,'' Mets General Manager Jim Duquette said yesterday. ''That was a big inning, a big moment in that game. I think that showed he could pitch in that type of situation.''
The Mets are moving forward in their effort to sign Looper and make him their closer. They have exchanged offers with Looper's agents, Alan and Randy Hendricks, for about a week, and the sides seemed optimistic yesterday.
''We have made progress,'' Randy Hendricks said in an e-mail message. ''We'll know more next week.''
Looper, a 29-year-old right-hander, went 6-4 with a 3.68 earned run average in 74 games for Florida last season. He has worked 71 to 78 games in each of the last five seasons, and is the Marlins' franchise leader in games pitched, with 368.
But the Marlins feared what Looper, who made $1.6 million last season, could receive in arbitration, and they did not tender him a contract last month, making him a free agent. Duquette said Looper was the Mets' first choice among potential closers.
''He's got a good power arm, and if he's here, he has a chance to be a really good closer or a setup guy down the road,'' Duquette said. ''And he was 28 out of 34 in saves last season. I know he got replaced by Urbina, but he's got a pretty good fastball -- 92 to 96 -- with a hard slider. We don't have that type of power arm in the bullpen right now.''
Urbina is also a free agent, and Duquette said the Mets had stayed in touch with him and Danys Baez, a right-hander who closed for Cleveland last season.
The Mets are also trying to fill holes in right field and in their starting rotation with players who do not make much money.
BASEBALL
