David Wells sulked through much of last season, irked by the controversy he caused with his bawdy autobiography and dismayed that the Yankees' principal owner, George Steinbrenner, was ignoring him.
Wells and Steinbrenner were pals once, but the friendship is over, perhaps forever. In his first public comments since signing with the San Diego Padres on Wednesday, Wells acknowledged that he and Steinbrenner are former friends.
''I'm sure now I won't hear from him ever again,'' Wells told reporters during a conference call reported by The Associated Press. ''He's been good to me in a lot of ways. And in other ways, he's been very stubborn. That's George Steinbrenner.''
On Dec. 24, 2001, Steinbrenner signed Wells over lunch at a Clearwater, Fla., sports bar, persuading him to renege on a handshake agreement with the Arizona Diamondbacks' owner, Jerry Colangelo. This time, Wells gave Steinbrenner the holiday surprise, going back on his oral commitment to rejoin the Yankees.
The Yankees had guaranteed Wells $3 million if he made the team out of spring training. But he is coming off back surgery and would have most likely been sixth on the starting rotation depth chart, behind Mike Mussina, Kevin Brown, Javier Vazquez, José Contreras and Jon Lieber.
Still, Wells said he imagined the Yankees were reeling after losing him, Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte. Clemens retired and Pettitte signed with the Houston Astros. ''They lost a lot of guys at once, and I think they're in shock,'' he said.
Wells, a San Diego native, will be the No. 1 starter for the Padres in a rotation that includes another former Yankees left-hander, Sterling Hitchcock. Wells's deal will be worth $7 million if he reaches all his incentives, but he said, ''I'm no savior.''
General Manager Brian Cashman said the Yankees had moved on. They are concentrating on completing Vazquez's four-year, $45 million contract extension, planning for a possible salary arbitration hearing with second baseman Alfonso Soriano and trying to sign a backup first baseman.
They are close to signing Tony Clark, who played for the Mets last season, as the backup at first. But the Yankees have not announced the deal, and after seeing how Wells signed with them two years ago and left them this time, they are not sure of anything.
''He's the guy we're gravitating toward,'' Cashman said of Clark. ''But as we learned with Boomer, a deal is never done until it's done.''
Steinbrenner's spokesman, Howard Rubenstein, said Steinbrenner had no comment on Wells.
BASEBALL
