The first air ball brought jeers. The second one brought noise.
LeBron James will eventually be remembered for his power dunks and pretty passes, but his personal highlight reel will not include the air balls, the two most memorable moments from Friday night's game against the Nets. In an embarrassing second half, James failed to strike iron on two open jump shots.
After each air ball, the Nets sensed weakness and pounced on James, the 19-year-old rookie with all the endorsements and magazine covers. The Nets held him to 4 points in the second half, marring his first game in the New York metropolitan area, and recorded a 97-82 victory over the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Before the game, James proclaimed himself the leader of his team, indicating that he would no longer play the limited role he carved for himself heading into the season. Afterward, he sounded frustrated.
''I wasn't as aggressive as I've been,'' James said. ''It was very cold out there, but that's no excuse. I should have been aggressive and attacked more.''
For the first sellout crowd of the season at Continental Arena, James was the undisputed main event. But the Nets might be a growing attraction. They won for the 11th time in the last 14 games and provided 19,968 fans with a reason to return.
While James finished 6 of 19 from the field with 14 points and 9 assists, the Nets had the brighter superstar and the better balance. In an obvious effort to show who's in charge around here, Kidd smothered James on one end and mauled the Cavaliers on the other.
''When we talked about LeBron coming here and I said Jason would guard him, if you didn't think he'd accept the challenge, there's something wrong with you,'' Coach Byron Scott said.
Kidd made only 2 of his first 10 shots from the field, then nailed 7 of his next 8 and finished with 26 points, 10 assists and 9 rebounds. After James launched his first air ball early in the third quarter, Kidd started his dash, finding the range from outside and then faking a behind-the-back pass that he pulled in for a dizzying layup. James called it one of the top five plays of the season.
The Cavaliers cut the deficit to 2 points in the fourth quarter, but when James threw up another air ball, the Nets finished Cleveland with a 12-0 run. After the Nets built a 19-point lead in the quarter, Kidd tried to bounce a pass off the court for an alley-oop, but the ball went too high for Kenyon Martin.
''He's crazy, man,'' Martin said of Kidd. Asked whether he thought James had received an eyeful from that play, Martin said, ''Jason tends to do things people don't even think about attempting.''
The Nets seemed almost offended at the fuss made over James, who had averaged 27 points over his previous 10 games. He had three news conferences Friday and did a choreographed dance with his teammate Darius Miles at the shoot-around.
When he finally came out of the locker room for pregame warm-ups, hundreds of youngsters were leaning over the railing, squealing, and James slapped their hands and casually walked onto the court.
Some Nets were so tired of the hype surrounding James' arrival that they declined to answer questions about him. ''I'm not going to be in awe of his every move,'' Martin said.
The Nets took turns upstaging James. Kerry Kittles went 8 of 11 from the field, scoring 20 points, and moved into fourth on the franchise scoring list. Martin had 13 rebounds, 5 steals and 3 blocked shots. Richard Jefferson added 20 points and Kidd went 4 of 6 from 3-point range.
''They were making a lot of jumpers and getting the rebounds,'' James said. ''Jason Kidd is still arguably one of the best point guards in the league, if not the best. It was a great time running up and down the court with him.''
James showed his range of skills in the first half, playing inside and out, leading all scorers with 10 points and 5 assists. He gave the Cavs a narrow halftime lead.
The Nets made adjustments at halftime to keep James out of the paint and pressure him in the full court to get the ball out of his hands. Scott wanted to make him a jump-shot shooter, and although James has refined his perimeter game recently, he did not show it Friday night.
Last season the Cavs won both meetings from the Nets, but now Cleveland is being approached differently by everyone in the league. Not only are the Cavs selling out opposing arenas, but they are also riling opposing teams.
''We thrive on when people come into this building, pay a lot of attention and bring that fun atmosphere,'' Kidd said. ''Tonight, it definitely was.''
When it was over, Kidd waited for James to finish his final news conference before he held one. Perhaps it was just a coincidence. Or perhaps he really did want the last word.
REBOUNDS
The Nets do not have a healthy center in their rotation. AARON WILLIAMS was expected to return Friday, but he sat out his seventh game with a pulled groin muscle. JASON COLLINS has complained of a sore ankle and knees.
PRO BASKETBALL
