When Glen Sather replaced Bryan Trottier as the Rangers' coach last Jan. 30, he said, ''It really had more to do with discipline and accountability than anything.''
In the aftermath of the Rangers' undisciplined, mistake-filled 5-4 loss to St. Louis on Thursday night, Bobby Holik wondered just where the accountability was.
''You have to send a message across, no matter who it is,'' he said. ''Otherwise, we're not going to learn.''
But Sather, who is also the team's general manager and president, said benching players was not the answer. ''I would rather trade a guy than bench him,'' he said after a Rangers practice here before a flight to Pittsburgh for a game Saturday. ''It's a more drastic move.''
On Thursday, gaffes by right wing Aleksei Kovalev and defenseman Vladimir Malakhov led to a short-handed goal that broke a 1-1 tie with 0.5 seconds left in the first period. The Rangers, who also allowed four power-play goals, are the most penalized team in the N.H.L., averaging 19.8 penalty minutes a game.
Sather has long threatened to send players to the minor leagues or sit them in the stands, but his threats have been empty for the most part. The few exceptions have not involved marquee players.
''Benching somebody for a couple of shifts is fine,'' Sather said. ''Taking a guy out of the lineup is another whole ball of wax. If I felt that Alex was floating, maybe it would be different. Maybe it's going to get to that point if he doesn't snap out of it. But that's when it gets tricky. You can lose a guy.
''Until you do something, they're not quite sure what you're going to do. When you do bench someone, there's no coming back from that point.''
Sather pointed to the pressure he had felt from critics to bench center Eric Lindros ''when he was playing brutal'' earlier this season, and goaltender Mike Dunham, who has been inconsistent the last two months.
Sather said that his preferred approach, talking and coaxing players through their slumps, had worked with Lindros, who extended his point-scoring streak to five games (one goal and six assists).
Dunham remains a work in progress. He was pulled Thursday at 5 minutes 2 seconds of the second period after allowing 4 goals on 12 shots. He has been pulled in two of his last three starts.
Sather said he would change his lines for Saturday's game, rewarding the 25-year-old rookie Jed Ortmeyer by moving him into Kovalev's spot on the top line with Martin Rucinsky and Holik. Kovalev was moved to Mark Messier's line.
''We send a message every day,'' Sather said. ''I think they're all trying and they all care. If I thought a guy didn't care or that he wasn't trying, he wouldn't be playing.''
SLAP SHOTS
Defenseman TOM POTI (sore hip flexor) and left wing DAN LACOUTURE (bruised right ankle) did not practice and are questionable for Saturday's game. Defenseman DARIUS KASPARAITIS, who has missed two games with a pulled rib muscle, practiced and is probable.
HOCKEY
