Edward J. Zander, who takes over on Monday as chairman and chief executive at Motorola, will arrive at the company's headquarters in Schaumburg, Ill., having served notice that he packs a sense of humor.
After flying from California to wintry Chicago three weeks ago for the announcement of his appointment, Mr. Zander joked that his immediate plans were to return home to get warm clothes. He said he planned to ''buddy up to Oprah,'' the city's famous talk show host.
And when asked about relations with Mike S. Zafirovski, Motorola's president and chief operating officer, a popular 51-year-old executive who was passed over for the top job, Mr. Zander, 56, said, ''We'll go to charm school together and we'll sit in the hot tub like we do in California.''
But while the laughs flowed easily at the introductory teleconference, Wall Street will quickly tire of Mr. Zander's effervescence if Motorola's sluggish performance does not improve fairly quickly.
Motorola remains a wireless communications giant but it is no longer seen as the dynamic innovator and blue-chip stock it once was. The erosion of Motorola's share of the cellphone business to Nokia and other smaller competitors in the last six years, the sagging fortunes of much of its huge microchip business and the plunge in orders for telecommunications networking equipment cost the company billions of dollars in losses and led to a corporate revamping that cut 60,000 jobs.
Mr. Zander's assignment boils down to two main challenges: better execution of Motorola's business plans and developing a clear strategy for growth. In his teleconference call, he agreed with analysts that Motorola's delay in getting to market with camera cellphones -- the hottest new niche in the business -- was a recent example of the kind of execution problems Motorola must address quickly. But Mr. Zander, who made his reputation at Sun Microsystems as he rose to No.2 to Scott McNealy before stepping down in 2002, declined to discuss possible strategy changes. His first job will be getting to know his new company firsthand after months of talks with board members, reading analysts' reports and chats with customers he knew from his days in Silicon Valley. One of his first meetings Monday as chief executive will be with his predecessor, Christopher B. Galvin, the company said.
Some management experts say they think Mr. Zander is taking over the reins at Motorola at an opportune time because its biggest businesses -- telecommunications products and microchips -- are on the rebound. Several other trends, like the ever-expanding use of electronics in autos and strong demand for more versatile and secure radio equipment for military and public safety agencies, also play to Motorola's strengths.
''If the businesses they are in have turned around, he could never show up for work and still look good,'' said Toby E. Stuart, an organizational strategy professor at the school of business at Columbia who argues that the control chief executives exert over their company's performance is often overestimated.
Mr. Galvin, the grandson of Motorola's founder, Paul Galvin, managed to stabilize Motorola before announcing his decision in September to retire because of disagreements with the board over strategy and the pace of change at the company. Motorola reported a net income of $404 million on revenue of $19.04 billion for the first nine months of the year and analysts project profits in the quarter that ended last week will be higher still. Shares of Motorola rose 50 cents to close at $14.50 on Friday. They were up 61.8 percent in 2003.
Mr. Zander's biggest contribution toward his near-term goal of helping Mr. Zafirovski ''make the first and second quarter numbers'' may come from visiting and wooing major customers. He proved unusually skillful at high level salesmanship in his years at Sun, which he helped build from a vendor of engineering work stations into a business computing powerhouse, according to Laura Conigliaro, an analyst at Goldman Sachs who follows the computer industry.
''He's a very straight shooter,'' Ms. Conigliaro said. ''It doesn't feel like he is measuring every word with a teaspoon, which boosts his credibility.''
One difference for Mr. Zander is his lack of experience with the kind of fad-driven consumer markets for phone, radio and set-top television devices that Motorola makes.
''Consumer electronics market research provides a lot less reliable data than he is used to in the server computer business,'' said Richard Doherty, director of the Envisioneering Group, a research firm based in Seaford, N.Y. Figuring out how to address such markets -- and adapt to miscalculations -- will require more time than Mr. Zander expects, Mr. Doherty predicted.
In terms of his management team, experts in executive succession say that Mr. Zander may want to bring in outside executives but he should not rush to shake up senior management ranks that have already undergone a sweeping overhaul under Mr. Galvin.
''In the turnarounds that do well with new C.E.O.'s from the outside, they come in with performance standards but they give people a chance to perform,'' said Rosabeth M. Kanter, a management professor at the Harvard Business School.
Of course, some decisions may be taken out of his hands. While Mr. Zander praised Mr. Zafirovski and characterized leading Motorola as a ''two-man job,'' Mr. Zafirovski has expressed disappointment at not getting the top job and declined to make a long-term commitment to Motorola. His departure sometime this year is considered a virtual certainty on Wall Street.
Even so, management experts say, Mr. Zander needs to avoid treating him as a lame duck or pushing him to leave quickly. The relationship will be closely watched by Motorola executives loyal to Mr. Zafirovski, they said.
As an outsider, Mr. Zander can probably expect a grace period of six months or so before Wall Street starts pressing him to produce strategic plans for Motorola's future. During his teleconference, Mr. Zander reminded analysts that Louis V. Gerstner Jr. resisted announcing his strategic prescription for I.B.M. when he took over its reins in 1993. He didn't need to add that I.B.M.'s rebound under Mr. Gerstner has become the gold standard for high-technology corporate revivals.
Mr. Zander may also get some breathing room because Motorola announced in October that it would spin off its semiconductor operations by the end of 2004. That divestment, which has long been pushed by Wall Street, is expected to go a long way toward focusing the company more clearly on its core communications markets. But semiconductor analysts say Mr. Zander will have to devote considerable time to working out the financial details and figuring out how to split up the intellectual property involved.
Some analysts have also advocated that Motorola should sell off the broadband equipment business it acquired when it bought General Instrument in 2000 and leave the highly competitive market for telecommunications networking equipment.
Such moves may be relatively easy ways to improve profitability -- and they clearly serve Wall Street's yen for deal-making -- but some experts say Mr. Zander may have a tough time assessing their impact on the company's long-term needs. For example, while cellphone networking equipment and the phones themselves may have little technological overlap, strong relations to the largest phone companies are important to selling both, noted Gerhard Schulmeyer, a professor at the Sloan School of Management at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and a former executive at Motorola, as well as at ABB and Siemens, two strong European multinationals.
''Whether it works to be in both businesses,'' Mr. Schulmeyer said, ''is much more a case of how it gets managed than a strategic decision.''
