On a warm spring day in 2002 Kim Longinotto, a British filmmaker, stood ready with her camera before a gathering of about 15 women -- middle-class housewives, a few teachers -- in a house in Eldoret, Kenya, ''a very nice, provincial town with a bus station and a big market,'' she said, about four hours by car from the capital, Nairobi.
The women ''were chatting, there were drinks, it was almost a social tea,'' recalled Ms. Longinotto, who had traveled to Eldoret with Fardhosa Ali Mohamed, a nurse who runs a clinic in Nairobi and had volunteered as guide and translator for Ms. Longinotto.
The conversation was in Somali. ''I wasn't sure I was going to know when to start filming, but at one point Fardhosa, who's terribly clever, looked at me and smiled,'' said Ms. Longinotto, speaking by phone from London. ''The women had been talking about their daughters, about education. But as soon as Fardhosa mentioned F.G.M., female genital mutilation, the conversation exploded.''
''The Day I Will Never Forget,'' which is set in Kenya and will be shown on Cinemax on Monday evening, boldly confronts the issue of female circumcision, a term that refers to the removal of part or all of the external female genitalia. The ritual is performed on young girls in many parts of Africa, often without anesthesia. Ms. Longinotto's previous documentary topics include divorce in Iran and feminism in Egypt.
In its least intrusive form, female circumcision means ''pricking the clitoris so that it bleeds,'' Ms. Mohamed said, speaking by phone from Nairobi. At its most extreme, the procedure involves removing the clitoris and the inner and outer vaginal lips, and stitching of the vaginal opening, which ''leaves a small hole the diameter of a matchstick to allow urination and menstruation.'' It is performed on girls as young as 4; health risks include difficulty during urination and menstruation, infertility, infection and hemorrhaging. According to the World Health Organization at least 132 million women around the world have undergone circumcision; in Kenya, despite an official ban, it is performed on about half the women.
''The Day I Will Never Forget'' covers its subject thoroughly, moving as if it were a travelogue through Kenya, alighting in a hospital, in a home where a circumcision is performed, at a school where girls are challenging the practice in court.
Writing in The New York Times when the film was screened in New York at the Walter Reade Theater as part of the New Directors/New Films series last March, Elvis Mitchell called it a ''powerful documentary,'' adding, ''Ms. Longinotto knows that the subject is so discomforting that it's best for her to let it unfold without hysteria.''
Which is not to say that the film is without harrowing moments. In one scene the procedure is performed on two girls. ''After the circumcision I was weeping, and Fardhosa was weeping,'' Ms. Longinotto said. ''We went back the next day, and I expected the girls to be angry with their parents. But they said, 'We're happy we did this.' That shows how strong peer pressure is.''
Addressing the origins of female circumcision and why the practice continues, Ms. Mohamed said, ''Everybody blames somebody else. Some say it's since creation; some believe it originated with the pharaohs. Some say it's from the Koran, but when you ask them where, no one gives you an answer. The main thing is, the people want to control the sexual life of their girls.''
Fouzia Hassan, now 12, who appears in the film, vividly recalls her own circumcision. ''I remember my mum telling me to keep quiet,'' she said, speaking by phone from Eldoret. ''I was screaming. I could see blood everywhere. All the ladies were laughing at me, telling me, 'Don't be a fool.' ''
Fouzia is poised and articulate. She and Ms. Longinotto met at the gathering of women in Eldoret; Fouzia had come with her mother. ''This sweet little girl had been watching us with big eyes,'' Ms. Longinotto said. ''She came up to me after the meeting and said: 'I've been waiting for you. I want you to come to my house.' ''
At her house Ms. Longinotto recalled, ''Fouzia said, 'Kim, you stand there,' and she recited a poem right into the camera.'' Fouzia then confronted her mother, before the camera, asking her not to have her little sister circumcised. Fouzia is ''a pioneer, a hero, really,'' Ms. Longinotto added, not unlike the other girls throughout Kenya who are, independently of one another, speaking out against the practice.
''The Day I Will Never Forget'' is the name of the poem Fouzia recites. She describes how ''three women sat and crucified me on the floor,'' how ''I cried until I had no voice,'' ending with the lines, ''My loving parents, is that what I really deserved? I'm asking all of you, is this really what I deserved?''
''My mom is regretting now that I was circumcised,'' Fouzia said by phone. ''But at the time she thought it was good, it was part of the culture. I forgive her. But my little sister is not going to be circumcised. I saved her. I told my mom that if she circumcises her, I will never forgive her.''
