An index of American manufacturing surged to its highest level in 20 years last month, providing another sign that the economic revival that began in the second half of last year should continue this year.
The country's manufacturing sector, which had been the hardest hit since the stock market declined in 2000, has been growing for six consecutive months, according to the survey released yesterday by the Institute for Supply Management.
The survey's job component also indicates that 40 consecutive months of manufacturing job declines could end with the national employment report for December, which is expected Friday.
''We are taking on new projects; we see a lot going on now,'' said Bill Weiller, the owner of Purafil, Inc., which makes air filtration systems that eliminate toxic, corrosive, odorous and hazardous gases. ''Recently we started hiring at the upper end; Ph.D.'s to develop technology and our production lines.''
The Institute of Supply Management's index of manufacturing activity jumped to 66.2 in December, from 62.8 in November, the highest since December 1983, while the employment index climbed to 55.5, from 51.
The index has now gone up 20 points in nine months. The last time that happened, in the period ending in August 1983, manufacturing was booming, Robert J. Barbera, chief economist at ITG/Hoenig, said. And this is only the third time since January of 1985 that the employment index has been over 55. Mr. Barbera said that the jump in the manufacturing index ''is consistent with a very strong overall economy'' and provides further evidence that ''the upside breakout of the economy in the third quarter is continuing.''
While Mr. Barbera said that the stunning 8.2 annual rate of growth in the third quarter is not sustainable, the economic expansion should continue in the 4 percent to 5 percent range.
This kind of economic growth would help corporate earnings continue to rise and support stocks. But after the three major stock indexes posted double-digit gains last year, ending a three-year slide, both the Dow Jones industrial average and the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index fell yesterday. The Nasdaq composite index rose slightly.
The bond market fell with the yield on the Treasury's 10-year note jumping to 4.37 percent, a sign that investors are taking the strong growth seriously. Some investors may be worrying that this level of growth could force the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates sooner than expected.
But as some analysts and the data in the manufacturing index showed, this performance does not mean that the manufacturing sector, which has lost 2.8 million jobs since August 2000, is booming again or that manufacturing job growth has resumed.
''The employment index is only loosely correlated with the monthly change in manufacturing jobs,'' said Richard Berner, chief United States economist at Morgan Stanley. ''So this does not guarantee a revival'' in manufacturing job growth.
Norbert J. Ore, the chairman of the institute's survey committee and director of procurement at the Georgia-Pacific Corporation, said ''there are still some businesses lagging and wondering when they will see the improvement that others are experiencing.''
According to the survey, 17 segments of the manufacturing industry are growing, including industrial and commercial equipment and computers and electronic components and equipment. The three segments that are still declining are petroleum, chemicals and paper.
Susan Hanafee, a spokeswoman for Cummins Inc., which makes engines and power generation systems, said ''we've seen increases across all segments of our business.'' But, she added, ''we have not seen sales increases that support that level of improvement,'' referring to the jump in the manufacturing index.
Fletcher Steele, president of the Pine Hall Brick Company, whose brick-making plants have been running at full steam since the fall, said that many of the executives he knows have said their businesses picked up in the fall.
But he said that initially these companies only increased overtime to accommodate the new demand because executives wanted to see if this upturn was a blip or would last. Now, he said, ''they have begun hiring or have said they will in the new year.'' While manufacturing makes up only about 11 percent of the work force, Mr. Berner said that ''if manufacturing is reviving, that spills over into other parts of the economy, like services, transportation and warehousing.'' And, he added, that is good for the sustainability of the entire economic recovery.
He also said that a revival in manufacturing ''has a strong political dimension because it could be an ''antidote'' to calls for protectionism. Although the Bush administration has withdrawn its tariffs on imported steel, other industries still want help against foreign competition, and there may be pressure to grant that assistance during a presidential election year.
