Seeking to increase his appeal among female voters as the clock winds down before the Jan. 27 New Hampshire primary, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman unveiled a new plan on Friday to reduce domestic violence and aid its victims.
At an emotional meeting with victims of domestic abuse and their advocates here, Mr. Lieberman, with his wife, Hadassah, by his side, sketched out a proposal to strengthen legal protections and make available more housing and services for battered women and their children.
''Dealing with violence against women and domestic abuse generally, including against children, will be a priority of my presidency,'' Mr. Lieberman said as some of the women, gathered at the home of two campaign supporters, wept quietly. ''Because the fact is that violence against women is a serious crime and it has to be treated as a crime in our country.''
Mr. Lieberman, who supports abortion rights and recently denied a report suggesting that he favored revisiting Roe v. Wade, is trying to lay claim to the women's vote, an important swing constituency. He is trying to catch up to Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor who has a sizable lead in most New Hampshire polls, and he is trying to ward off a perceived surge by Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who has significantly more cash to spend on the early contests.
Although Mr. Lieberman recently released a series of family-oriented proposals, much of his campaign's rhetoric has focused on his support for the war in Iraq and his plan to roll back some of President Bush's tax cuts. But with the New Year has come a more explicitly female-oriented approach.
Mrs. Lieberman, who joined her husband at a housewarming of sorts on Thursday at their Manchester apartment, is suddenly a constant presence at campaign stops, whether addressing crowds, chatting with voters, gazing at her husband or picking the occasional bit of lint off his sweater. The two also plan to campaign together all day on Monday, when Mr. Lieberman is to focus on health care, another issue considered important to women.
''Women are traditionally swing voters and they are traditionally late-deciding voters,'' a Lieberman aide said. ''If there's a group that can be swayed in the final weeks of the primary, it's female voters.''
Mr. Lieberman said his wife was influential in developing the domestic violence proposal after she visited several shelters over the course of the campaign.
Mrs. Lieberman told the group, ''I sit here today as the wife of a man who is trying to be the nominee, and I am proud that he listened to me when I went home and said, 'Joey, it's awful.' ''
Under Mr. Lieberman's plan, which was well received among those at the meeting here, the violation of protective orders would become a criminal offense. The proposal would also establish 24-hour state hot lines for victims to get restraining orders at any time.
Mr. Lieberman would also create 300 special shelters nationwide for victims of domestic abuse and their children to stay in for months if necessary. The plan would also create educational programs for law enforcement and criminal justice officials, as well as for young people to help avoid violent behavior. Mr. Lieberman also said he would continue to discourage the promotion of violence against women in entertainment and the media.
''I want to say to women who may be in this situation, 'Come out of the shadows,' '' Mr. Lieberman said, ''Don't take it. Ask for help. And I say to men: 'Strong men don't beat women. Strong men take care of their women.' ''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONNECTICUT SENATOR
