Iran has rebuffed an offer from the United States to send a delegation led by Senator Elizabeth Dole to assist in the distribution of relief supplies to earthquake victims in Bam, the Bush administration said Friday.
The offer had been seen by the administration as a gesture of American concern for Iran at a time when the United States has declared that some -- but not all -- of Iran's recent actions have been positive and could lead to a resumption of dialogue to improve relations.
Administration officials said Tehran cited the overwhelming difficulties facing relief workers in the ancient city of Bam in southeastern Iran as the reason it could not accommodate the American offer now. The officials did not rule out the possibility of a future visit, however.
''We have heard back today from the Iranians that, given the current situation in Bam and all that is going on there now, it would be preferable to hold such a visit in abeyance,'' said J. Adam Ereli, a State Department spokesman. ''Therefore, we are not pursuing it further at the moment.''
Mr. Ereli said the message from Iran had been conveyed to James B. Cunningham, the deputy American representative to the United Nations, by the Iranian permanent representative at the United Nations, Dr. M. Javad Zarif.
Dr. Zarif could not be reached for comment.
Administration officials said the decision to make the offer to send Mrs. Dole, a former president of the American Red Cross, came after the senator suggested the idea herself.
A spokesman for Mrs. Dole, a North Carolina Republican, said that based on her experience overseeing relief deliveries from the Red Cross to Rwanda, Somalia and other disaster areas, she wanted both to assist operations in Iran and to report back to Congress.
The mere possibility of an exchange between Washington and Tehran, even on a nonpolitical subject, piqued the interest of diplomats and specialists who have been watching the twists and turns of American policies since President Bush labeled Iran a member of the ''axis of evil'' two years ago.
The United States has repeatedly denounced Iran for what American officials say is an advanced nuclear weapons program and broad support for Hezbollah and other militant groups that have attacked Israelis, Americans and others.
On the other hand, the United States has recently praised Iran for its support of the American invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq. In October, the United States welcomed Iran's agreement to open its nuclear facilities to inspection, but considered as inadequate Tehran's decision to ''suspend'' its uranium enrichment operations, which Washington wants to see dismantled. Direct conversations between American and Iranian officials on Iraq and other subjects were held sporadically until May, when the United States suspended the talks after determining that a series of bombings in Saudi Arabia were carried out by groups based in Iranian territory.
From the beginning, there has been an internal debate over whether the administration should take a conciliatory approach to Iran or a confrontational one, including military pressure and interdiction of nuclear materials shipped to and from the country.
Mrs. Dole's spokesman said she broached the idea of a relief mission with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on Monday and also with Bill Frist, the Senate majority leader.
The offer to send Mrs. Dole was first disclosed Friday by The Washington Post.
In a statement issued Friday evening, Mrs. Dole said she had acted after seeing television reports of the ''horrendous Iranian tragedy.'' She said she still hoped that ''this humanitarian visit will be accepted by the Iranians because the American people are most willing to help.''
An administration official said Mr. Bush had, at the same time, been discussing with his aides the possibility of making a stronger show of American concern, possibly by sending a high-level delegation that would include a member of his own family.
''It occurred to everyone to add A and B and get to C,'' said the official, referring to those two factors. ''The administration was looking for a message saying that we care and wanted to help them in a moment of need.''
No political intent aimed at signaling a change in administration policy was intended, the official said. Indeed, Mr. Bush on Thursday said Iran still had to rid itself of terrorists and nuclear weapons programs and to open its political system before relations could improve.
''Political motives should not be read into it,'' an administration official said, referring to the offer to send the delegation. ''Nor do we read political motives in the fact that the Iranians said it's not a good time to do it.''
There was even some debate in the administration about whether Iran had definitively shut the door on a visit to deal with the disaster, which struck last week and killed as many as 40,000 people. One official described Iran's reaction as a rejection but then corrected himself to say the trip was ''in abeyance -- whatever that means.''
The United States has ordered a temporary easing of trade restrictions on Iran to speed the flow of aid.
Like North Korea, another member of the ''axis of evil'' proclaimed by Mr. Bush, Iran has bedeviled the administration by what American officials regard as its erratic behavior -- occasionally supportive on some matters but unrepentant on backing Islamic militant organizations and on its nuclear ambitions.
By all accounts, the relief delegation envisioned by Mrs. Dole was not intended to serve as a vehicle to renew talks. But officials acknowledged that in such a situation, one small step could lead to another, and that before long the two sides could be talking again.
Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the Bush administration's suggestion that it might send a special delegation to help with Iran's earthquake relief omitted credit for the publication that first reported the development. It was The Washington Post. (Later developments are reported today on Page A1.)
