Make your own kind of music
Sing your own special song
Make your own kind of music
Even if nobody else sings along
This is not really a creed you want to be stuck with if you're a pop songwriter. Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil never were. This song, ''Make Your Own Kind of Music'' (his music, her words), was just one of their many hits. Their kind of music was everybody's kind at some point. The first song in ''They Wrote That?,'' their songbook revue playing at the McGinn/Cazale Theater through March 14, is ''On Broadway.''
Which hit version did you grow up with: the Drifters' early-60's classic or George Benson's charged-up 80's remake? The phrase ''blue-eyed soul brothers'' was exciting when black disc jockeys first applied it to the Righteous Brothers, low-moaning their way through ''You've Lost That Lovin' Feeling.'' The Animals had true Brit-grit when they sang about the ''dirty part of the city'' and cried, ''We gotta get out of this place.''
But maybe you're more the soaring-ballad type who can still chart the agony of a breakup with the words ''Just once/Can we find a way to finally make it right/To make the magic last/for more than just one night.'' Maybe the romance of your life began the year the refrain ''Sometimes when we touch/the honesty's too much/And I have to close my eyes and hide'' poured forth from every radio in the land.
We cherish our favorite songs. We analyze and justify our love for them. But in the grand pop scheme of things, personal taste means nothing. I do love ''On Broadway'' and ''You've Lost That Lovin' Feeling.'' I feel something like hatred for ''Just Once'' and ''Sometimes When We Touch.'' But they are successful pop artifacts. Something in the combination of words and melody sinks into us. (Not for just an hour, not for just a day, not for just a year, but always.)
The culture of the 1980's was all about talk show confessions, self-help books and relationship counseling. These songs put that into a sensory rhyme-and-tune package of less than three minutes. They flare into melodrama, then ease back into domesticity.
Mr. Mann and Ms. Weil married young and joined the famous Brill Building group, all young, ambitious New Yorkers who staked out a borderland between Tin Pan Alley and rock 'n' roll in the late 1950's and early 60's. You know their names: Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller; Carole King and Gerry Goffin; Ellie Greenwich and Jeff Barry; Neil Sedaka and Howard Greenfield. Each team had ''a cubicle with an upright piano, a chair and most important, an ashtray,'' in Ms. Weil's words. ''Everyone was writing like crazy, and we could all hear each other through the cubicle walls.''
Competition goaded them on. They survived the British invasion and the rise of what Ms. Weil calls ''the singer-songwriter with something to say.'' She and her husband wrote for the movies and turned out hits for a second generation of pop performers. Mr. Mann has always longed to be a singer-songwriter with something to say. Ms. Weil's first passion was Broadway musicals, and she is finally writing one.
There is a lot of talk in ''They Wrote That?'' (There was none in the Leiber-Stoller Broadway revue of 1995, ''Smokey Joe's Cafe.'') This is a cabaret evening in a cozy little theater, so we want talk. But what we get is amazingly unshaped. Ms. Weil wrote the script and delivers nearly all of it. She could be the mistress of ceremonies at some local banquet, moving between happy but shadowy recollections and big clumps of detail.
Mr. Mann was a tough-looking kid from Brooklyn. What drove him into songwriting? What was it he wanted to say and never got to? We don't get a clue. Ms. Weil broke into the music business at 19, working for the great Frank Loesser. How? What was Loesser like? Ms. King and Mr. Goffin were the pair's best friends and fiercest competitors. With what songs did the teams challenge each other? Ms. Weil is not a performer, either. She's pleasant and eager to please, but she's stilted.
We do get a lot of fun from the music. Mr. Mann, wearing hipster black, does most of the singing at a piano, backed by a good five-piece band. A trio of backup singers provides close harmony and choreographic teases. Moeisha McGill, Deb Lyons and Jenelle Lynn Randall also do a medley of Mann-Weil ''chick songs.'' Talk about time-traveling and role-playing. There's the naughty urban ingénue of ''Walking in the Rain'' and the tough-but-sweet soul girl of ''He's The Boy I Love''; the seductive swinger of ''Just a Little Lovin' '' and the perky American girl gone Latin for a night with ''Blame It on the Bossa Nova.''
The show's director, Richard Maltby Jr., was responsible for the very successful ''Ain't Misbehavin' '' and ''Fosse.'' They were all-music, all-dance and no-talk revues. I wish he had persuaded Mr. Mann and Ms. Weil to follow the same hit formula.
THEY WROTE THAT?  The Songs of Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil
Directed by Richard Maltby Jr.; musical direction by Fred Mollin; sets by Neil Patel; lighting by Heather Carson; sound by Peter Fitzgerald; vocal supervisor, Jo Lynn Burks; production supervisor, Joe Witt; producing associate, Douglas MacArthur; production associate, Sharon Rosen; production stage manager, James Latus; production manager, Kai Production Strategies; general management, Snug Harbor Productions. Presented by James B. Freydberg and CTM Productions. At the McGinn/Cazale Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
WITH: Barry Mann, Cynthia Weil, Deb Lyons, Moeisha McGill and Jenelle Lynn Randall.
THEATER REVIEW
