AS two pots of viscous goo bubbled away beside Susan Born in the dank, fluorescent-lighted classroom, she described for a rapt group of 30 students the molecular composition of the substances and, with the aid of time-temperature graphs on the chalkboard, discussed lipids and their solubility.
A fairly typical scene at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Except this was not a materials science class. It was a meeting of one of the school's newest student organizations, a chocolate appreciation club called the Lab for Chocolate Science.
Ms. Born, 28, a technical writer and 1998 graduate of M.I.T., gave a two-hour lecture on the science of chocolate with pots of melted chocolate chips as props. Professors argued whether chocolate could glassify, and words like eutectic -- something to do with melting points -- hung in the chocolate-scented air.
The group was started last fall by Ariel Segall, 23, a senior from Englewood, N.J., whose chocolate fascination dates from childhood, when, by age 10, she had developed a preference for dark chocolate from Zabar's. By her early 20's, she tasted a Black Pearl truffle, a combination of wasabi and ginger dipped in dark chocolate and sprinkled with black sesame seeds, from Vosges Haut-Chocolat in Chicago. Inspired, she replicated the flavor with friends and started being the host of truffle parties two years ago. The lab is an extension of those parties and a way to experiment with the types, flavors and textures of chocolate.
The chocolatiers' first experiment was making 4,000 truffles for a freshman fair.
While many came to the lecture for the chocolate -- leftovers were on sale from the group's last truffle sale, which included cardamom-Kahlua, hot pepper-cinnamon and peach-passion fruit -- since this is M.I.T., many wanted to know if they should take their test tubes to the next meeting.
''We'd gotten some e-mails from people wondering if we were an actual laboratory,'' said Kat Allen, a junior and the treasurer of the group, which now boasts about 20 full-time members.
In a place populated by chemists and engineers, group members knew it would be a hit with students. Ms. Born added that a fashion trend among students and alumni involved T-shirts bearing molecular diagrams of chocolate and coffee.
Who wears these shirts?
''Nerds,'' Ms. Born said.
Cocoa butter, along with cocoa powder, the main component of chocolate, is made, Ms. Born said, of fatty acids, including palmitic acid, a 14-carbon chain; stearic acid, a 16-carbon chain; and oleic acid, an 18-carbon chain. She said the mixture of fat in cocoa butter has six stable stages -- distinct consistencies -- which is why processors have to temper, or heat and cool, chocolate, to attain the desired consistency.
Ms. Allen and Ms. Segall were keeping an eye on the pots of chocolate, dark chocolate chips in a slow cooker and white chocolate chips in a double boiler. Once melted, Ms. Allen poured the dark chocolate into a Pyrex container and the white into a metal bowl and added water to each, altering the crystalline structure of the chocolate (known as seizing). The dark chocolate became gritty, while the white chocolate looked like an ivory and yellow oil slick.
''The part I liked the most was when they explained the three different fatty acids,'' said Vigi Braviam, 27, a postdoctoral biology student. ''Now I feel like I can mess with my chocolate a little more. I can just add more palmitic acid, and it will solidify a little more.'' Palmitic acid, she said, is just palm oil, which she can buy at a local chemical supplier.
The club plans to continue its nonscientific activities, like brownie bake-offs and chocolate tasting. But Ms. Allen thinks the science of chocolate could catch on.
''It would be cool if we could teach an actual for-credit class one day,'' she said, ''but that's pretty far out there.''
Correction:  February 25, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 11 about a student organization at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that examines the science of chocolate misstated the properties of three chemical compounds in a major component, cocoa butter. Palmitic acid is a 16-carbon chain, not a 14-carbon chain; stearic acid is an 18-carbon chain, not a 16-carbon chain; and oleic acid is an 18-carbon chain with a double bond, not just an 18-carbon chain.
