Osmo Vanska, the 50-year-old Finnish conductor, took over the Minnesota Orchestra this fall convinced that it had the makings of a top-flight international ensemble. The blazing, incisive and risk-taking performance of excerpts from Prokofiev's ''Romeo and Juliet'' ballet score that he conducted on Monday night at Carnegie Hall offered clear evidence that he is getting results.
The performance touched on larger matters as well. For decades, managers and concertgoers assumed that there was a Big Five of American orchestras: Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, New York and Philadelphia (in alphabetical order). But in recent years you could argue that the orchestras of Los Angeles and San Francisco, both hotbeds of dynamic music making and adventurous programming, have been generating the most news. The general level of playing of the Top 25 American orchestras has risen notably as a new generation of accomplished and eager musicians have joined their ranks.
For me, too much attention has been focused on how orchestras play and not enough on what they play and why. The Minnesota Orchestra has an admirable history, something made clear by the recent release of a 12-CD set celebrating its 100th anniversary: a collection of recordings and broadcasts from 1924 to 2002 under conductors like Eugene Ormandy, Dimitri Mitropoulos and Antal Dorati.
What came through on this occasion was that Mr. Vanska, a tireless worker and dogged perfectionist, has energized an already gifted roster of noticeably young players, whose ranks seem divided pretty evenly between men and women. The sense of on-the-edge involvement and the sheer joy in letting the music rip were what hooked one in the Prokofiev, not any quantifiable level of technical finesse. And if Mr. Vanska pushed too hard during the vehement, lashing outbursts of ''Tybalt's Funeral Cortege,'' a little raucousness was a small price to pay for such high-decibel ferocity.
He has conceded in interviews that he has some work to do to catch up with recent American music. But Mr. Vanska does have wide experience with European 20th-century repertory, like the three works on this program. Any conductor who begins an important New York concert with Stravinsky's ''Symphonies of Wind Instruments,'' an ingenious and seldom-heard 1920 work, revised in 1947, has my respect.
Stravinsky uses the term ''wind instruments'' loosely since the work is scored for both woodwinds and brass. Mr. Vanska captured the astringent beauties and clattering contrapuntal intricacy of the score, but not its fascinating choppiness. The music unfolds as a series of almost disconnected episodes: ''litanies'' is the term Stravinsky uses. Mr. Vanska strove to bring continuity and flow to the episodes, which wound up making the music seem more homogenized and less radical.
The audience's lustiest ovations went to Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg for her impassioned performance of Shostakovich's stunningly difficult Violin Concerto No. 1. Ms. Salerno-Sonnenberg mostly reined in her penchant for punkish excess and played with subdued intensity in the ruminative Nocturne movement, brusque rhythmic brio in the Scherzo and hyper-charged velocity in the breathless Burlesca finale.
MUSIC REVIEW
