SEX. Garlic. Magic. Feet.
The smell of a truffle is supposed to be indescribable, but that hasn't stopped anyone from trying. The cult of the truffle has flourished since Babylon. Romans lusted after pink truffles they imported from present-day Libya, and today the frenzy reaches a peak every Valentine's Day, when all kinds of defenseless foods are slathered in black truffle cream sauce or drizzled with white truffle oil.
Ouest will be making truffled omelets and Payard Bistro truffled ravioli and truffled steak. Even World Yacht's dinner cruises in New York Harbor will send out truffled crostini and truffle sauce for the holiday on Saturday.
Why? Like other rare, expensive and slightly weird foods -- caviar, for instance, and oysters -- the truffle has long been confined to the adult section of the kitchen. In 1981, German researchers reported that they had isolated the source of the truffle's erotic allure: it is packed with androstenol, a hormone secreted by humans and, in much higher concentrations, by male pigs. Their findings explained what truffle hunters have long observed: that sows have a passion for digging truffles that verges on the unseemly. (Androstenol, the scientists theorized, inspires rutting behavior in female pigs.)
But like certain pop singers, the modern truffle could be losing its erotic appeal through overexposure. ''Truffles are the most abused item on restaurant menus,'' said Richard Urbani, whose family business, Urbani USA, is America's largest truffle importer. And, indeed, fresh black truffles are everywhere money eats these days: drizzled over $45 tuna maki at the hot spot Geisha; slipped into miniature B.L.T. sandwiches at the opening party for Per Se, Thomas Keller's new restaurant in the Time Warner Center; and infused into vodka for a $14 martini at Mix in New York. But they're also offered at relatively modest destinations like Luxia, Giorgio's of Gramercy and Domicile.
Are they any good? The truffles you see on Valentine's Day menus may come from France or Italy -- or, equally possibly, from China or North Carolina. And a host of truffle-impersonators: months-old black truffle butter, dried truffles, and even what the importers would like us to call truffle carpaccio (canned truffle slices), are lurking out there as well. The most popular form is white truffle oil, even though it's also the most synthetic: all white truffle oil is made with artificial truffle flavor. Even the chefs who serve such substitutes agree that they can't touch the real product for aroma or flavor. And given the availability of fresh truffles in New York these days, wise restaurant patrons might redirect their Valentine's Day budget into foie gras or caviar instead.
The chef at Payard, Philippe Bertineau, is serving frozen black truffles on his $88 Valentine's Day menu; the regular menu includes a dish of cod with fresh black truffles that costs $27. ''Obviously cod should not cost that much,'' he said. ''But that's how much the truffles cost.''
Mr. Urbani said, ''There are almost no fresh French or Italian truffles available in New York City this week.'' The season for European black truffles (tuber melanosporum) would normally peak around Valentine's Day, but last fall's weather in France and Italy was abnormally hot and dry: great for wine, bad for truffles. The legendary Italian white truffles (tuber magnatum pico) are always gone by January; in any case, the 2003 crop was so small that the few truffles available were fetching record prices, more than $3,000 a pound. Yesterday, European black truffles were selling for $93 an ounce.
In short, the truffle scene has never been more dismal, but restaurants cannot stop serving them, especially this weekend.
What's a chef to do? At Jefferson, Simpson Wong has embraced the controversial Chinese truffle (tuber indicum), a relative of the European black truffle, which was selling for $6 an ounce. He calls it a Himalayan truffle on the menu and shaves it over dumplings stuffed with Asiago cheese, leek, ginger and chives. The results taste like the love children of Chinese won tons and Italian tortellini. ''When my cooks from Nepal saw how we treat the truffles, they laughed,'' Mr. Wong said. ''In the Himalayas, truffles are cheap; people put them in curries when they can't afford meat.''
Since China started exporting truffles in 1994, there have been several proven cases (and numberless unproven ones) in France, Italy and the United States in which importers have sold cultivated Chinese truffles as European ones. Asian truffles are real truffles, of course, but whether they are equally delicious is open to debate. Certainly they are two things the European truffle is not: cheap and available.
Bruce Lefebvre, who is the chef at the Frog and the Peach in New Brunswick, N.J., says that he has stretched his all-truffle menu into the off-season by rationing the fresh ones. ''I splurged on some white truffles in December and kept them buried with rice and eggs around them to keep them fresh; there are still a few left,'' he said. But a two-month-old truffle, however good, is well past its prime no matter how you slice it; experts recommend using white truffles within no more than 10 days of harvest. To fill out the rest of the truffle menu, ''Yup, I use fresh, frozen, carpaccio, oil, you name it,'' Mr. Lefebvre said. ''Any chef who tells you that he only uses fresh truffles is probably lying.''
At San Domenico, the long-established temple of the truffle in Manhattan, Tony May, the owner, never takes the signature white truffle raviolo off the menu. In the halcyon weeks of truffle season, a sheet of pasta is filled with egg yolks, fresh truffle shavings and butter, and customers can call for a lily-gilding blanket of white truffle on top. Out of season, Mr. May declines to take the road traveled by many restaurants: simply to substitute black truffles for white. ''Black truffles should always, always be cooked,'' Mr. May said. So, most of the year, the dish is filled with white-truffle-infused butter that the restaurant makes and stockpiles during the short season. Even made with truffle butter, a single raviolo costs almost $20.
Most restaurants don't follow the San Domenico model. Instead, they order prefabricated truffle butters, oils and essences from a handful of suppliers. Urbani is the world's largest dealer in truffles and truffle products and had little competition in the New York area until Rosario Safina, the president of Urbani, left in 2002 to start his own truffle company, da Rosario. (The two parties recently settled a $3 million lawsuit over the Urbani name.)
Both now produce truffle oils and purées and are in furious competition over new products like truffle honey, truffle chocolates and truffle flour. These products, and others like them sold in stores as disparate as Dean &amp; DeLuca and Trader Joe's, provide a pleasant, if short-lived, truffle aroma. They are made by infusing a small amount of truffle into amenable ingredients like olive oil, porcini mushrooms and even, as in the case of Urbani's truffle butter, surprising ingredients like soy sauce and synthetic white truffle flavor. Mr. Lefebvre said the truffle products to seek out are those with the shortest ingredients lists, like truffle purée or truffles preserved in their own juices.
No one, as yet, has succeeded in capturing the intensity of the fresh truffle in a bottle or tube. That intensity, which makes some people use phrases like ''thrilled to the core,'' and ''sensually overwhelmed'' when describing their first truffle, is only part of what makes truffles so prized.
Truffles have maintained their mystique and their prices in part because they have never been domesticated. Randomly buried around the roots of trees, invisible to the human eye and undetectable by the human nose, truffles would seem to be one of the few truly wild foods left. In Piedmont, Périgord and other storied locations, truffle hunters in tweed are supposed to spread out stealthily, in the misty dawn, with only a trained pig or dog for company.
David Rose, president of the Connecticut-Westchester Mycological Association and editor of its newsletter, Spores Illustrated, said some hunters learn to use insects as truffle hunters, watching to see where flies hover over the ground.
But the world market no longer has time for such chancy methods; truffles must be found or made, if necessary. So a host of operations that span the globe, from Tasmania to Yunnan Province to North Carolina, are out to tame the truffle. In the 1970's, a French scientist, Gérard Chevalier, finally cultivated truffles by inoculating the roots of local saplings with truffle spores.
Today descendants of those trees and truffles are tended in Hillsborough, N.C., by Betty and Franklin Garland, who harvested about 50 pounds of black truffles last year. The price yesterday was $100 an ounce. The climate in North Carolina and Périgord is roughly similar, Mrs. Garland said. ''There's no reason why we can't grow the same truffles,'' she added, ''though we haven't quite done it yet.''
Ms. Garland's hope is that American consumers will appreciate the freshness of local truffles, especially when imports are not available. North Carolina is gambling on it, having allocated some of the settlement money it received from tobacco companies to transform 50 tobacco farmers into truffle farmers.
Another American hopeful is the Oregon white truffle (tuber oregonense), the only white truffle in the world that has ever been cultivated. James Beard tasted the Oregon truffles in 1983 and said that they were as good as Piedmont's, said Daniel Wheeler, who collects and sells them.
Still, for Valentine's Day this year, perfect black truffles will be almost impossible to find.
The good news? Many New Yorkers don't like them anyway. ''Truffles are absurdly overrated,'' said Amy Zilliax, a graduate student who lives in Brooklyn Heights. Jonathan Morr, the restaurateur behind Bond Street, opened a SoHo restaurant last year that was entirely devoted to truffles. It lasted just a few months.
Even Tony May is sometimes able to curb his enthusiasm for truffles. Like many Italian chefs, he considers the black truffle a distant, displeasing second to white.
''I am not a lover of black truffles, but this is my problem,'' he said. ''Black truffles taste like iodine, and -- how do you say? -- dirt.''
