The views of Central Park that have been selling points for the expensive apartments, restaurants and hotel in the new Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle will also have a television role -- as backdrops for some of the elaborately equipped studios and other broadcast facilities being installed in the building for CNN News and its financial network.
These studios and control rooms, which have been designed to allow operations to continue smoothly as tour groups observe the proceedings, are expected to be in operation this summer.
To accommodate the needs of television, the floors are widely spaced -- 27 feet, slab to slab -- to allow for the installation of intense overhead lights. The building's architects, Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill, ''left out every other floor in the base building so we could get studio heights,'' said Michael Kostow, whose firm, Kostow Greenwood Architects, handled the CNN installation.
Three ''black box''' studios can accommodate the sets, cameras and other equipment for an entire broadcast. There are three smaller studios, likely to be used for interviews, as well as four control rooms and two newsrooms that can also be shown on broadcasts.
About 600 people will eventually be housed at the center, which will be the focus of all of CNN's New York-based activities except the ''American Morning'' program. It will continue to be broadcast from the ground-floor studio in the Time &amp; Life Building at 50th Street and the Avenue of the Americas.
A lot of attention has been paid to isolating the broadcast studios from the noise and vibrations in the rest of the building. The studio floors are ultra-flat to keep cameras from shaking as they move about. And the floors are raised slightly and packed underneath with flexible pads and insulation to minimize even small amounts of noise or vibration.
The studios have double walls as well, with the inner one mounted on the isolated floor and the outer one connected to the building. Although the walls of the big studios are painted black -- hence the term ''black box'' -- they have observation windows mounted near the ceilings.
Those are for the tourists, who will be able to watch a show in operation without disturbing the participants. Indeed, CNN has big plans for tours, which will be conducted along corridors emblazoned with big-screen monitors telling the story of news gathering -- as one executive put it, ''from the Rosetta Stone to the founding of CNN.''
The large studios will have an electrified grid mounted about 20 feet above the floor for the arrays of powerful lights needed for broadcasts. To cope with the heat pumped out by the lights, the studios are connected to powerful air-conditioning systems.
To prevent any mechanical hum from making its way into the studios, a muffler has been installed at the output end of each unit. And extra large ducts have been used to minimize the swish of moving air, said Jane Greenwood, a partner in the design firm, which specializes in broadcast spaces.
Because of the around-the-clock nature of the news operations, the CNN space has been designed with its own power and backup controls, Mr. Kostow said. Linking all the equipment on site with feeds coming in from around the world has produced a wiring job of enormous proportions.
In the room where all these inputs and outputs meet, thick bundles of wire are already crowded under the raised floor with more to be pulled into place, and racks stand ready to accept communications equipment. ''We turned this room over in September, and they are still working to install the equipment and wiring,'' Mr. Kostow said.
One newsroom will be devoted to CNNfn, the financial news network, which has all its operations centered in New York. The newsroom has wide windows with views of Columbus Circle and Central Park. It has been equipped so that cameras can look outside or pan over the room itself to display working journalists and technicians, in addition to newscast anchors behind desks. Live shots of people working in control rooms are possible as well.
''This newsroom is 400 feet long, and we think it is the largest on the East Coast,'' Mr. Kostow said.
Though the headquarters of CNN's broadcast and executive operations remain in Atlanta, there is a newsroom on a lower floor for the network's New York bureau that is also equipped as a broadcast site.
The three smaller studios -- ''flash studios'' in CNN parlance -- are on the side of the building facing the park. Unlike the black box studios, they have large windows to catch the view in the background. Because they face outside, the windows are canted in to reduce the chance of sun glare on a camera lens.
CNN has a freight elevator able to move automobiles and set pieces from the loading dock to the studios. The studios and corridors leading away from the elevators have been equipped with ''elephant doors,'' 10 1/2 feet high and 8 feet wide, to help move bulky sets into place.
Region Markets / Manhattan
