Just as bizarrely as he disappeared on Thursday, a Russian presidential candidate reappeared Tuesday alive and well, if obviously wan and confused about the fuss he had caused.
''I decided last week to take a break from all the bustle around me,'' the politician, Ivan P. Rybkin, told the Interfax news agency from Kiev, the capital of Ukraine, by way of explaining his disappearance, which terrified his family and his campaign aides and prompted a police manhunt.
''I left fruit and money for my wife, who is now occupied with the grandchildren,'' he said, ''but didn't say anything to her, changed my jacket, got on the train and left for Kiev.''
Mr. Rybkin, a former speaker of Parliament who is one of six candidates challenging President Vladimir V. Putin in an election now barely a month away, returned on Tuesday night to Sheremetyevo Airport, outside Moscow. There he faced a scrum of waiting journalists and only deepened the mystery.
''Such tyranny as now, I have not seen or experienced in my 15 years in politics,'' he said, echoing his anti-Putin theme. ''Tyranny is tyranny. Tyranny in Africa is tyranny, only there they eat people.''
Mr. Rybkin's whereabouts managed to roil a political race whose outcome is considered a foregone conclusion. The issues he hoped to raise against Mr. Putin -- the state of democracy and liberal reforms in today's Russia -- have been all but drowned out in the furor surrounding his disappearance.
Mr. Rybkin, 57, left his apartment on Thursday evening and took a train to Kiev, he said. He apparently informed neither his wife nor his campaign aides, who grew increasingly alarmed when he failed to appear at a news conference on Friday and failed to surface when election officials registered his candidacy on Saturday. On Sunday, the police opened an official search for Mr. Rybkin.
His disappearance prompted speculation that he had been a victim of politically motivated violence.
In brief remarks before driving from the airport in a van, Mr. Rybkin expressed contrition over the anxiety he had caused his family and campaign workers, and suggested that he might soon end his presidential campaign, which was a longer-than-long shot from the start.
''What has happened has already happened,'' he said. ''I am not going to say anything.''
Kseniya Y. Ponomaryova, Mr. Rybkin's campaign chairman, said in an interview on Tuesday that she had spoken with Mr. Rybkin by telephone from Kiev. He explained that he was staying with friends, shutting off his mobile telephone and ignoring television, radio and newspapers. ''Can't a person take some rest?'' she said he asked her.
Ms. Ponomaryova met him at the airport, but refused to say more, except that she was flabbergasted.
