Most parents have gotten the message that children are safer in the back seat of the car, but parents with less income and education disproportionately have not, according to a new survey. In response, safety officials plan to announce on Wednesday a program to distribute safety information with the food vouchers given to mothers of young children under a federal program.
In 2002, figures show, 324 children were killed in the front seats of cars. If those had been in the back seat, 100 would have survived, safety experts say, and thousands of others would have been hurt less severely or not at all if they had been in back.
According to the federally sponsored Air Bag and Seat Belt Safety Campaign, foundations and companies in the automotive field, about 1,700 children's lives have been saved since 1996 because they were in the back seat.
Researchers have long known that the rear seat is safer, but a public campaign to keep children 12 and younger off the front seat took hold in the 90's, when children were being killed by passenger-side air bags, often in fairly low-speed collisions.
''Old air bag, new air bag, no air bag, kids are safer in a rear seat, properly restrained,'' Chuck Hurley, executive director of the campaign, said.
The survey, by Public Opinion Strategies, questioned 800 adults of all ethnic backgrounds, and an additional sampling of 300 African-American adults and 363 Hispanics, all of whom said they transported children 12 and younger. The survey found that 6 percent of all adults said they put children 12 and younger in the front seat. Eleven percent of African-Americans and 7 percent of Hispanics said they did so. People with lower incomes and educations were also more likely to put children in the front seat.
''In almost every area of highway safety, risk patterns of low-income people tend to be higher,'' Mr. Hurley said.
The group hopes to reach many of them through the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children, or W.I.C.
The campaign recommends that children 12 and younger sit in back. Infants should be in rear-facing safety seats until they are at least 12 months old and weigh at least 20 pounds. Children older than 12 months who weigh 20 to 40 pounds should ride in forward-facing seats. Those over 40 pounds should use boosters or other appropriate restraints until they are about 4 feet 9 inches tall and can use an adult lap-shoulder belt, the campaign said.
