TWO young women sit down at a bar. ''I'll have a cosmopolitan,'' says one. ''And I'll have a glass of chardonnay,'' says her friend. The second woman is doing something peculiarly American: drinking wine as a cocktail.
At bars, at parties, at receptions and family gatherings, more and more people are drinking wine the way they used to drink spirits and beer, as a social gesture. It is an American phenomenon because so few of us have ever shared the Old World tradition of wine with meals. Wine by the glass probably represents 10 percent to 12 percent of all table wine sales volume in the United States, said Jon Fredrikson, a California wine industry consultant.
There is much to be said for wine by the glass. It represents less alcohol than spirit-based drinks, and it presents the consumer with a wider variety, two or even three different wines at the same meal, if the glasses are small enough. And it can be profitable.
Even so, not everyone approves, not even in the wine trade. ''It's O.K. at the bar, I guess,'' said Joe Delissio, the wine director at the River Cafe in Brooklyn, ''but I love having a bottle of wine on the table. I'm not sure why, but I guess I like to see people sharing the wine, talking about it, not drinking it because it's the thing to do. It just adds something to the dining experience.''
Daniel Johnnes, the wine director at Montrachet in New York and for the Myriad Restaurant Group, is not a fan of wine by the glass either. ''We use fairly large glasses,'' he said, ''and when I pour from a bottle, I usually fill about a third of the glass. We offer a little over six ounces when we serve by the glass, or about half a glass of wine.''
''I've had people say, 'Hey, fill it up; I paid for a full glass,' '' he added. ''That would be almost half a bottle.''
Mr. Johnnes also wondered about restaurants with extensive lists of wines by the glass. ''What happens to the wine that sits around for a week because no one ordered it?'' he asked. Charles Scicolone has one answer for that. He is the wine director at I Trulli, a popular Italian restaurant in Manhattan that has a separate wine bar with its own menu and a variety of wine programs. I Trulli offers eight wines by the glass in the restaurant and an impressive 50 by the glass in the wine bar.
''Most of our wines are sold in the wine bar,'' he said, ''where we specialize in tastings of flights of three wines.'' Mr. Scicolone said a customer can order three wines from the same vintage, one wine from three different vintages, three wines from the same grape or three from the same region. ''We have no problem using up all our wines,'' he said.
A standard 75-centiliter wine bottle holds just over 25 ounces. At Montrachet, the Four Seasons and other top restaurants in Manhattan, that usually breaks down to about four, six-ounce glasses of wine per bottle. Four glasses of a wine usually cost a dollar or two more than a bottle of the same wine, to cover the cost of the extra service and the glassware, restaurateurs say. Which means that two people drinking two glasses each with dinner are better off ordering a bottle.
At the Four Seasons, prices for wine by the glass start at about $13 and can reach $30 or more. At Gramercy Tavern, prices start at about $6 for a Minervois from the South of France and climb to $20 for Billecart-Salmon Rosé Champagne. Gramercy Tavern also offers a three-ounce taste of each of its by-the-glass wines. A taste of the Minervois is $3.25; of the Billecart-Salmon, $10.25.
Some restaurants offer variations on the theme. Orso in Midtown, which specializes in Italian wines, offers its by-the-glass wines in little quarter-liter pitchers. A quarter of a liter is about the same as eight and a half ounces. Orso allows its patrons to sidestep the glass-versus-bottle quandary by ordering its house wine by the carafe. There are liter, half-liter and quarter-liter carafes, the last apparently the most popular. The price for a liter is usually just under the lowest-priced bottled wine, which makes the liter something of a bargain. The wine is anonymous, but the waiter can usually tell you what it is, and it will be a Rosso di Montalcino or something similar.
Lesser restaurants tend to squeeze more wine -- and more profit -- from each bottle of by-the-glass wine. ''We generally go for five five-ounce glasses,'' admitted an East Side bartender who asked not to be identified, adding, ''I've never had any complaints.''
Most casual, bistro-style restaurants use a cheaper, smaller glass meant to hold just five or six ounces to begin with. The customer gets less wine and cheaper wine but invariably a full, or almost full glass. Customers like the woman at the bar ordering her chardonnay rarely specify a brand or label. Which means the bar or restaurant is free to offer relatively modest stuff.
Major wine producers offer wines specifically meant to be sold by the glass. E.&amp;J. Gallo, for example, offers 18-liter casks -- really, bags of wine in boxes -- under the William Wycliff, Burlwood and Copper Ridge labels. Constellation, formerly known as Canandaigua, sells 18-liter casks under their Paul Masson, Almaden and Inglenook labels. Other brands are Pebble Creek, Three Oaks, Cutler Creek and Summerfield. An 18-liter cask, the equivalent of two cases of wine, costs a restaurant about $35. Sold at $6 for a five-ounce glass, casks can be immensely profitable.
Even wine poured from traditional bottles can return respectable profits when sold by the glass. The rule of thumb in the trade is that the first glass pays for the bottle. In other words, whatever the customer pays for the glass of wine is roughly what the restaurateur paid for the bottle. When a restaurateur is being particularly thrifty, eking out five glasses from a bottle of very inexpensive wine, the return on the first bottle will probably pay for the case.
There are deals for the customer, too. Many restaurants built up dangerously high wine inventories during the economic downturn. Some of them have been working off their stocks by offering exceptional wines, by the glass, at bargain prices. This is usually done quietly, and to profit from it, it helps to know something -- not too much, but something -- about wine.
WINE TALK
