To honor the memory of Alexander Gonzales Jr., who died of pneumonia at 45, his family gathered recently under a red canopy at St. Francis Cemetery here, where photographs of the deceased -- in a three-piece suit and in a Marine uniform -- were propped beside the urn holding his ashes.
Mr. Gonzales's distraught father, Alexander Sr., wore black -- black pants, a black T-shirt and a black baseball cap with ''Korea Veteran'' embroidered in gold.
After a rifle salute by six veterans from the American Legion, a Roman Catholic deacon led the 14 mourners in prayers and the 23rd Psalm. Mary Morgan of Mary's White Wings, which provides doves for funerals, gave everyone a snow-white dove to cuddle and release into the sky, where they circled before heading back to their coops.
''What a way to come home,'' said Sandy Tiemann, who in her six months as Mr. Gonzales's companion in St. Cloud, Minn., had seen him get a steady job supervising janitors after years of casting about. ''The doves, the military, all that's kind of neat.''
''Neat'' is not what people normally say about such a service. But nationwide, and especially in the West's fast-growing, less-rooted communities, families are shunning the somber, one-size-fits-all rituals and customs of traditional funerals. Friends and families, often encouraged by funeral directors, gather not for tears and corteges but for a show. Increasingly, funerals are billed as a ''celebration of life'' or a ''life appreciation service.''
A cowboy's hearse might be his pickup, and he might be buried with his saddle. The deceased might have doves, balloons or butterflies released as he slips into the grave to the sound of bagpipers. He might have his ashes sent into the heavens in helium-filled balloons or have them compressed into a one-carat artificial diamond to fit on a ring.
Funeral homes refer to this trend as personalization. It is a way to respond to the decline of organized religion in many communities, the industry says, and to reclaim business lost to families put off by funeral fees and coffin prices.
The homes sell ''legacy candles'' with a portrait of the deceased attached to the wax, as well as framed ''memory boards'' of pictures.
''They make more money if they can provide more junk to put around the casket,'' said the Rev. Henry Wasielewski, a Catholic priest in Phoenix and a prominent critic of the funeral industry.
But funeral directors say they are responding to their clients' wishes.
Daniel Isard, president of Foresight Analysts Inc., a national funeral industry consulting firm in Phoenix, said: ''Funerals in the past were very scripted, staid and structured around religion. Those practices have brought funeral attendance to an all-time low.''
Ten years ago, 90 percent of the deaths of Christians resulted in visits to funeral homes and a service in a church or a chapel, Mr. Isard said. Today, he said, 60 percent result in both of those.
''Our society is less formal, less dictated by formal religions,'' Mr. Isard said. ''It is more humanistic in dealing with death. Traditionally, ministers thought the eulogy was to make a person cry. People who attend a funeral like to see a two-to-one ratio -- two laughs for every sob.''
Families can still choose conventional funerals, with hearses, limousines and $3,000 to $13,000 coffins. But many opt for novelty and highly individualized services, either at funeral homes or in their own living rooms or at country clubs.
In churches, ministers who once delivered the eulogy pass the microphone around. Organists play the Beatles' ''I Want to Hold Your Hand'' instead of ''Rock of Ages.'' In funeral home chapels, families play videotapes of the deceased speaking or swinging a golf club. Services can be recorded and put on the Internet for distant relatives to view.
Something vital may be disappearing along with old-fashioned funerals, said Thomas G. Long, a Presbyterian and professor of preaching at Emory University's Candler School of Theology in Atlanta.
''The ancient rituals are supposed to change and evolve to absorb new needs,'' Professor Long said. But among white suburban Protestants in particular, and also among some Catholics and less orthodox Jews, he said, ''the chain has broken.''
''It's not as if old rituals are evolving to absorb new needs,'' he said. ''It's as if we've broken with tradition and people make things up.''
Funeral homes are responding by becoming more secular. ''We have what we called a chapel,'' said Mark Musgrove, a funeral director in Eugene, Ore., and president of the National Funeral Directors Association. ''A couple of years ago, we removed the pews and put in chairs.
''You can configure the space any way you want. We can have banquet tables, receptions with food, wine. We don't call it a chapel any more. We call it our family center. It looks like something you'd see in a nice hotel.''
Arizona's high temple of personalization is the 22,000-square-foot Messinger Pinnacle Peak Mortuary in Scottsdale. Built in the Santa Fe style, it is as imposing and reassuring as a Wall Street bank. It has a playroom for children, changing tables in the restrooms and a room for catered receptions after funerals. In the rooms where the embalmed are laid out in open coffins, pink, blue and white spotlights lend a vibrant cast to the deceased.
One chapel has a closet with gear for filming and transmitting funerals over the Internet. The other has a 60-inch television screen where the family can put on a show about the dead person's life.
Next to it is a wide mantle for displaying the person's mementos. ''I've had a motorcycle on that mantle,'' said Joseph K. Ashford, the general manager and funeral director, ''and saddles and bales of hay.''
The Catholic Church, in particular, has doubts about aspects of personalization. ''Catholic liturgy is communal, a celebration of the whole church,'' not of an individual, said Msgr. James Maroney, executive director of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops' Secretariat of the Liturgy in Washington.
''As such,'' Monsignor Maroney said, ''it's an event that belongs to the parish, the diocese, the entire church. The purpose of the liturgy is to praise Christ, to praise God for the miracle of the resurrection.''
Music and eulogies, he said, ''must be centered on Christ.''
But that does not mean a funeral mass has to be grim. In churches that allow it, Father Wasielewski, the industry critic, drapes the pews with balloons and crepe paper. ''I try to leave grief out of the funeral,'' he said. ''St. Paul says, 'Do not grieve unless you have no hope.' ''
At the service, he said, he tells relatives and friends of the dead: '' 'How many of you think George here went to hell?' No hands go up. 'Went to heaven?' All hands go up. 'So let's have a celebration. We don't want anyone grieving. If anyone's going to grieve, we'd like them to leave right now.' ''
