A compromise was reached on Tuesday to allow 30 college students here to compete for Fulbright scholarships even though their applications were late because of a missed Federal Express pickup.
The national board that oversees the Fulbright programs agreed to create a separate category for the 30 students, all of whom are enrolled in doctoral studies at the University of California, Berkeley.
In turn, university officials agreed to raise the money for any scholarships awarded by the board to the 30 students. Normally, Congress finances the Fulbright programs. Last year, 15 of the university's 30 doctoral applicants received scholarships, worth $20,000 to $64,000 each.
''At the end of the day these students who built up their careers to get to this point didn't make the mistake,'' said Steven J. Uhlfelder, chairman of the J. William Fulbright Scholarship Board. ''The end game is to get these students into the ballpark, not the question of whether they have the right ticket or not.''
In a letter to the Department of Education, FedEx admitted responsibility for the 30 applications not being picked up at the university by the deadline of Oct. 20, 2003. But the department, which administers the Fulbright-Hays Doctoral Dissertation Research Abroad Fellowship Program, disqualified the applications, suggesting that university officials could have found another way to meet the deadline.
The compromise reached on Tuesday, during a telephone conference call, does not require the Education Department to change its position. Instead, administration of the 30 applications will be transferred to the State Department, which has its own Fulbright programs.
''The question was how to resolve this without forcing the Department of Education to change its mind,'' Mr. Uhlfelder said.
The university's chancellor, Robert M. Berdahl, said that university officials were prepared to dip into endowment funds to keep their end of the deal, but that negotiations were also under way with FedEx, which has expressed some willingness to help resolve the problem.
Mr. Uhlfelder said there were many ways that FedEx could make it up to the students beyond contributing to the scholarships.
''Maybe we can fly them overseas on a FedEx plane,'' he said.
