Martha Stewart sat down at her assistant's computer a month after selling ImClone Systems shares and deleted part of a record of a phone message from her stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, after a telephone conversation with her lawyer, the assistant testified yesterday.
''She highlighted to the end of Peter's name, and then she started typing over that,'' the assistant, Ann E. Armstrong, told the court. ''She was sitting at my desk, and I was watching behind her.'' She said Ms. Stewart had a visible reaction to seeing the message on the screen, and added, ''The abruptness with which she reacted to it indicates something.''
Ms. Armstrong said that within moments of altering the message, Ms. Stewart asked her to ''put it back the way it was.'' But Ms. Armstrong's testimony nonetheless supported prosecutors' accusations that Ms. Stewart tried to cover up information about her sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone, the biotechnology company founded by her friend, Samuel D. Waksal, who is now serving a seven-year sentence for securities fraud and other crimes.
An investigator for the Securities and Exchange Commission who also testified yesterday described interviewing Ms. Stewart about her stock trade, citing that phone message in particular.
''She was asked whether there was a written record of the message Peter Bacanovic had left for her, and she said she didn't know,'' the investigator, Helene Glotzer, testified. ''She said she barely recalled Ms. Armstrong telling her that Mr. Bacanovic had called and wanted to speak to her before the end of the day.''
The message typed into the office phone log by Ms. Armstrong on the morning of Dec. 27, 2001, read, ''Peter Bacanovic thinks ImClone is going to start trading downward.'' On Jan. 31, 2002, Ms. Stewart rewrote it to read: ''Peter Bacanovic re imclone,'' Ms. Armstrong said.
''Have you ever observed her alter a phone message like that before?'' a prosecutor, Michael Schachter, asked Ms. Armstrong. She said she had not. After Ms. Stewart asked her to restore the message, she said, she was unable immediately to find a backup copy of the original but eventually did so.
Prosecutors say the altering of the telephone message, part of a list of messages from Dec. 27, the day Ms. Stewart sold her ImClone stock, shows that Ms. Stewart knew she had done something wrong and was anxious to conceal the traces. The government's main witness, Douglas Faneuil, testified last week that she decided to sell after he told her that members of the Waksal family, then running ImClone, were dumping their own shares. He also said that Mr. Bacanovic initially claimed the sale took place as a way of offsetting gains from other stock trades, then later said it was initiated by an agreement to sell if the share price slipped below $60.
Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic are charged with conspiracy and obstruction of justice. She is also being tried for making false statements and securities fraud, while he is charged with perjury, making false statements and false documents. The trial is in its third week.
At the time that Ms. Stewart, according to Ms. Armstrong, altered the phone message, she was already under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States attorney's office, which were separately looking into ImClone trades made just ahead of a critical company announcement that sent the share price plummeting.
At that point, she had met several times with her lawyers. Ms. Armstrong testified that meetings and phone calls with them occurred from Jan. 28 through Jan. 30, adding that on Jan. 31, Ms. Stewart spoke on the phone for about half an hour to John Savarese, a lawyer from Wachtell Lipton Rosen &amp; Katz, which at that time also represented her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
After the call ended, Ms. Armstrong said, ''she asked me to fax messages to him'' from the phone log, ranging from late December 2001 to early January 2002. ''Then she asked me if she could see the messages,'' Ms. Armstrong said, testifying that it was then that the altering took place.
After Ms. Stewart asked her to restore the message to its original form, Ms. Armstrong said, she could not at first find the original message, and simply cleaned up the punctuation in what Ms. Stewart had typed, capitalizing ImClone, for instance. Eventually she came across an old file that held the original text, she testified, and made paper copies of what she found.
Ms. Armstrong also testified that Ms. Stewart told her that Mr. Savarese ''would be calling me to talk to me about the phone message I took on the 27th, and that she was being investigated for a stock transaction.''
In his cross-examination, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, asked whether another lawyer for Ms. Stewart had asked Ms. Armstrong ''to do anything inappropriate.'' Ms. Armstrong said no, but testified that the lawyer, John Cuti, had taken her out to dinner and discussed the matter with her.
Mr. Cuti is one of the lawyers on Ms. Stewart's defense team for the trial. He is also married to her daughter, Alexis, who watches daily from a front-row seat.
Ms. Armstrong also testified that Ms. Stewart called her to see if she had been able to recover the deleted part of the message. ''She said, Were you able to get it back?'' she told the court. ''I said no. I didn't say, not yet. I didn't know at that point if I'd be able to get it back.''
Ms. Glotzer told the court that Ms. Stewart denied having any contact with Mr. Bacanovic after she returned from a trip to Mexico and Panama on Jan. 6, 2002. But in an interview with investigators on Feb. 4, she told of a ''$60-a-share agreement'' and added that Mr. Bacanovic would have the same recollection.
''We were surprised when she said she knew Mr. Bacanovic had the same recollection she did,'' Ms. Glotzer testified. ''When we asked her how she knew, she said, well, I don't know what his recollection is,'' adding that she and her bookkeeper, Heidi DeLuca, remembered the agreement.
Undermining the possibility that Ms. Stewart's Dec. 27 sale of her ImClone stock was part of a tax strategy, Mr. Schachter displayed several e-mail messages from Mr. Bacanovic to Ms. Stewart, including one advising her that ''Monday is your deadline'' for any tax-loss selling. The e-mail message was dated Dec. 18, 2001, and the Monday referred to would have been Dec. 21.
