After almost 6 billion euros of losses in just two years, the Dutch health care and technology company Royal Philips Electronics said on Tuesday that it was back in the black, reporting a 2003 profit of 695 million euros ($883 million). Philips lost 3.2 billion euros in 2002 and 2.5 billion euros in 2001.
Besides trimming 1.1 billion euros in costs in just two years, Philips profited last year from a revived semiconductor business and a reversal in fortunes at its long-suffering North American consumer electronics business, which eked out a profit of 1 million euros in the fourth quarter.
Philips' annual sales fell 8.7 percent year to year, to 29 billion euros, largely because of a weak dollar. The company said comparable sales were actually up 4 percent for the year.
The company said that it hoped its positive fourth quarter -- with every unit making money and exceeding the expectations of analysts -- would prove a precursor to long-term profitability. It also said it expected a profit again this year.
''Our task is to maintain this momentum while steadily improving our earnings as we move through 2004,'' Gerard J. Kleisterlee, chief executive of Philips, said.
Philips earned 598 million euros ($759 million) in the fourth quarter, its third consecutive quarterly profit, in contrast to a loss of 1.5 billion euros in the period a year earlier. Sales rose 1.1 percent, to 9.02 billion euros.
''There is a lot more positive than negative in these figures,'' Marc Kennis of Van Lanschot told Reuters. ''They took a lot of charges, but now they look ready for the upturn.''
Both analysts and investors were encouraged by the fourth-quarter performance of the North American consumer electronics division. But the division remains a problem for the company. The chip operation, which supplies some mobile phone companies, appeared to have outgrown its problems. The division reported a fourth-quarter operating profit of 166 million euros -- its first in seven quarters -- and sales were up 11 percent, to 1.5 billion euros. Mr. Kleisterlee said that he expected the chip division to match or slightly exceed industry forecasts of 20 percent market growth.
The company's shining example of business success remains its partnership with South Korea's LG Electronics -- the LG.Philips LCD Company -- to make flat-screen displays. The unconsolidated company reported 1.5 billion euros in fourth-quarter sales, more than double the year-earlier figure, and an operating profit of 410 million euros in the quarter.
