A federal appeals court on Monday blocked the execution of the convicted killer Kevin Cooper, reigniting a fierce debate about his guilt and the propriety of 11th-hour legal appeals in death penalty cases.
''Cooper is either guilty as sin or he was framed by the police,'' wrote Judge Barry Silverman, one of 11 judges on the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit who reviewed the case. ''There is no middle ground.''
Lawyers for Mr. Cooper, as well as groups opposed to the death penalty, praised the court's intervention as an overdue opportunity to prove Mr. Cooper's innocence. In addition to staying the execution, which was scheduled for just after midnight on Tuesday, the judges ordered that the case be reopened to review evidence that might exonerate Mr. Cooper.
The United States Supreme Court declined Monday night to overturn the appeals court decision, despite multiple requests from the California attorney general.
''Sure it is late in the game, and sure Mr. Cooper has suffered a lot, but the great thing we can rejoice in today is that our system works,'' Gregory Evans, a lawyer for Mr. Cooper, said.
But prosecutors, state officials and relatives of the four people Mr. Cooper was convicted of killing said the intervention was an unnecessary delay of justice and expressed frustration with a system that allowed it.
Mr. Cooper, 46, has been on death row for more than 18 years, since his conviction in 1985 in the killings of two adults and two children in Southern California. The four were killed with a hatchet, knife and ice pick. A fifth victim, Josh Ryen, who was 8 at the time, survived. He wrote in a letter submitted last month to Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger that Mr. Cooper deserved to die.
Robert Olin, whose nephew was among those killed, said: ''This isn't about whether Cooper is innocent or guilty. This is not even about Cooper. This is about a group of people opposed to the death penalty trying to stop an execution for any reason whatsoever.''
Mr. Schwarzenegger, who last month cited ''overwhelming'' evidence against Mr. Cooper in refusing an appeal for clemency, remained convinced Tuesday that Mr. Cooper was guilty.
The California attorney general, Bill Lockyer, promised to comply with the court's order, but he also expressed frustration. Mr. Lockyer cited an agreement reached with Mr. Cooper's lawyers in 2001 to conduct DNA tests on six pieces of evidence, including a bloodstained T-shirt. The tests linked Mr. Cooper to the killings, but Mr. Cooper's lawyers asserted that some evidence might have been tampered with or planted by the authorities.
In a telephone conference call with reporters on Tuesday, lawyers for Mr. Cooper said an independent investigator should be appointed by Mr. Schwarzenegger. A spokeswoman for Mr. Schwarzenegger said he had not received a formal request from Mr. Davis, but was not inclined to appoint an investigator.
Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a stay of execution for a California inmate, Kevin Cooper, omitted the full name of a defense lawyer who said the governor should appoint an independent investigator to look into the possibility of evidence tampering. He is Lanny J. Davis.
