Gov. John G. Rowland and his wife are officially collecting donations for their legal defense. But with an eye toward propriety, they are prevented from knowing who donates or how much is collected.
The fund was established on Jan. 29 as a blind trust, according to a copy of the trust document released on Tuesday. Its trustees are three men who have worked for the state or federal government.
But Susan Bysiewicz, the secretary of the state, said she believes there is a danger in keeping the names of donors concealed. She will seek a state law that requires disclosure for legal defense funds. ''Since nothing is public, there is no mechanism for determining a quid pro quo,'' said Ms. Bysiewicz, a Democrat who plans to run for governor in 2006.
Mr. Rowland, a Republican in his third term, is under federal investigation and is the subject of a Connecticut House impeachment inquiry. On Dec. 12, he admitted that he had lied about accepting gifts and free work on his lakeside cottage from people doing business with the state. But he has denied that he did any favors in return.
Last fall, Mr. Rowland hired William F. Dow III, a prominent criminal defense lawyer. His wife, Patricia Rowland, who was served a subpoena last week for personal documents relating to gifts that she and her husband may have received, also hired a criminal defense lawyer, Robert M. Casale.
In seeking to avoid any appearance of impropriety, the trust sets parameters for the defense fund. Because it is a blind trust, the Rowlands will not know the amounts of donations or the identities of donors. Lobbyists and anyone seeking business from or doing business with the governor's office are prohibited from donating. (But people doing business with other state agencies can donate, Ms. Bysiewicz said.) Contributions are capped at $2,500. The limits were suggested by Alan S. Plofsky, director of the State Ethics Commission.
Mr. Plofsky's recommendations were made in a memo dated March 7, 2003, in response to an inquiry about the proposed creation of a different legal defense fund. At that time, Mr. Rowland, who was involved in bitter negotiations with the state employees' union, was named a defendant in at least one lawsuit, said Dean Pagani, his spokesman. That fund was never created, but the new one follows some of Mr. Plofsky's suggestions.
Yet it ignores two significant recommendations made by Mr. Plofsky. He urged that the fund be audited by the State Ethics Commission; an independent accountant will audit it instead. He also urged that political appointees and staff members in the governor's office be barred from donating; appointees can donate.
