In a city of bustling concert stages, it is easy to overlook the Metropolitan Museum of Art, but every season the Met presents a wide array of players and ensembles, a sonic salmagundi whose proportions naturally vary. This season brings an especially rich crop of exciting pianists like Louis Lortie and Peter Serkin scheduled to appear in the coming months.
But the Met's piano roster has not been limited to players of Mr. Serkin's renown. Two younger pianists performed there last week: Shai Wosner made his New York recital debut on Thursday night, and Frederic Chiu, a more established young talent, appeared with the Philharmonia Virtuosi on Saturday. Both players offered compelling performances that shared a certain youthful dynamism channeled through two completely different artistic personalities.
For his recital Mr. Wosner, an Israeli-born pianist and student of Emanuel Ax, chose an ambitious and well-conceived program that suggested a timeline of music history that has been looped back upon itself, so that points of the 20th century curiously overlaid those of the 18th. Specifically Mr. Wosner opened with Bach's English Suite No. 5 and then juxtaposed that with Schoenberg's Suite (Op. 25), written in 1924 but inspired by the Baroque dance forms of Bach's day. The movements of the Schoenberg work have titles like Präludium, Gavotte and Gigue but are filled with bracing 12-tone music.
The Bach was delivered crisply, and with a brisk propulsive energy, as if the entire suite were one headlong sprint. The vitality was appreciated though one occasionally missed the music's more lyrical and leisurely pleasures. The Schoenberg also had an impressive sweep as well as a vivid vocabulary of gestures. But Mr. Wosner was at his best in the final work on the program, Beethoven's ''Hammerklavier'' Sonata, whose visionary late style places it closer to the Schoenberg Suite than chronology might suggest. Mr. Wosner attacked the daunting first movement with a powerful percussive thrust and a tone that was broad and at times even harsh. His playing opened up in the slow third movement. The hard edges of his sound softened, and his pacing grew more supple, allowing Mr. Wosner to capture much of the poetry in this music's luminous chords.
Two nights later Mr. Chiu played more Bach, this time the D minor Concerto (BWV 1052) with the Philharmonia Virtuosi under Richard Kapp. Mr. Chiu's Bach had an appealing buoyancy and lightness to its textures. In the fleet third movement he also demonstrated an impressive clarity of articulation and an ability to find lively colors and smart harmonic contours within the rapid stream of notes.
Mr. Chiu was later joined by the group's concertmaster, Mela Tenenbaum, for Mendelssohn's seldom-heard D minor Concerto for Violin, Piano and String Orchestra. This composer's status as a child prodigy is nearly unrivaled, but this early work, written when he was just 14, displays little of the formal coherency and preternatural refinement of other early works like the Octet. It is rarely performed for good reason. Still there were some rewarding moments amid the endless repetition, particularly when Mr. Chiu met the demands for virtuoso display with his special combination of robust technique and pianistic intelligence.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
