BIRNEY ELEMENTARY SCHOOL is a hard place to get an education, even for a purposeful sixth grader like John Cureton. The distractions are plentiful. Students live in the nearby Berry Farm housing project, and many days schoolwork is interrupted by the chop-chop-chop of a police or news helicopter searching the projects for a criminal or a crime story.
''I'm worried about what happened at Ballou yesterday,'' John said last week. He meant Ballou High, just up the hill, where one student shot another to death. The student charged in the killing lives in Berry Farm, not far from John. ''It's kind of hard growing up in Berry Farm -- you might get killed, you might get jumped,'' said John. ''You can't walk down the street without being with somebody.''
Last week, on the killing day, Birney Elementary was locked down, nobody in, nobody out. This was not a novelty. In an upstairs hallway, which has a splendid view of the Washington Monument and the Capitol, hangs a poster, dated Oct. 23, 2003, with one of the school's golden rules: ''I pledge if I see a gun I will not touch it.''
By fifth or sixth grade, it is too late for some. Several have already been ''away'' -- to the juvenile detention center. After welcoming a visitor, Birney's principal, Leroy Owens, dressed stylishly in a gray suit, excused himself to handle a cafeteria food fight.
Even strivers at Birney like Donta Williams, a sixth grader, are affected in ways they don't yet see. When asked what he wanted to be when he grew up, Donta said ''a lawyer,'' though he'd never actually met one. ''So I can help people with their issues,'' he said.
For weeks, the purposeful Birney children had been preparing for the first round of the city spelling bee. Birney's 13 top spellers practiced after school. ''Let's do a warm up spell-off,'' said Lonnice Jones, a fifth-grade teacher. Jubria Lewis, another teacher, asked what kind of words they wanted and several said, ''Latin derivatives.''
''Remember how we are standing on stage,'' said Ms. Jones. ''And you are to wear your finest garments, your linens, your silk.''
''Stand up tall so they know you're proud to be on the spelling bee team,'' said Mr. Lewis. He reminded them about asking the judges for the etymology of hard words. ''If you hear 'dys' and the etymology is Greek, how is it usually spelled?''
''D-y-s,'' said the 13 smart spellers.
''And if it's a Latin etymology?'' Suddenly there were two loud smacks against the windows. Everyone froze. Then something hurtled through an open second floor window and the good spellers shouted, ''Ms. Jones!''
On normal days, the sweetest moment for fifth and sixth grade boys is 2:30, when the school clerk, Quentin Addison, announces over the loudspeaker, ''Would all mentees come to Room 220 after school to meet their mentors.'' The mentors are a dozen successful retired men. ''Gentlemen with an aura,'' the principal calls them, though formally they are members of the Experience Corps, a national organization based here that has 1300 retirees volunteering in schools in a dozen cities.
Like Birney's students, Birney's mentors are African-American, many from tough backgrounds themselves. For three years they've been coming four days a week, counseling boys, helping with their homework, taking them to museums and ballgames and assisting at events like the spelling bee.
Most of the men were mid-level managers, GS-11's to -15's, who took jobs 30 to 40 years ago when the federal government was a rare employer that offered a black man upward mobility. Robert E. Wheeler was a support services manager for Health and Human Services; Josephus Hicks, a communications specialist for the I.R.S.; Julius Montgomery, an information specialist for the Labor Department.
Most belong to Prince Hall, one of the nation's biggest African-American Masonic lodges, and were recruited by Mr. Wheeler, Birney's Experience Corps coordinator. Mr. Wheeler himself was leery at first (''I didn't retire to go back to work''), but got hooked pretty quickly. His philosophy about little boys making mistakes is, ''As long as you're green, you continue to grow.''
The saddest room at Birney is 317B, the guidance office of Walter Bailey. All day students kicked out of class are sent to 317B, where Mr. Bailey sometimes handles 10 at a time. It was in 317B that Mr. Wheeler found Justin Headspeth. ''He was going through Mr. Bailey's desk drawer and I didn't say a word,'' recalled Mr. Wheeler. ''He made a face behind my back, kids laughed and I didn't move. He'd see me in the hall, puff up, I never changed my direction. One day, he says, 'Can you talk? Well, you don't say anything.' I knew I had him. He said, 'You don't like me, do you?' And I said, 'Man, I'm crazy about you.' He stepped toward me, pushed out his hand and gave me a shake.''
Mr. Wheeler became Justin's mentor. ''I said, 'Tell me the places you'd like to go.' He said, 'I've never been to a museum.''' They went to several.
The gains are modest. Most of the 11 sixth graders assigned a mentor last year were failing; by June, nine, including Justin, were promoted.
Dwight Johnson makes sure that his mentees know he was earning $50,000 a year, ''good money,'' as a bookbinder with the Government Printing Office in the 1980's when he retired. ''And I tell them my wife grew up at 1265 Stevens Road in Berry Farm.''
George Solomon, another mentor, says combating their environment is hard, and any progress is three steps forward and two back. ''But that's all right,'' he said. ''If I gain one step, I'm ahead.'' Mr. Solomon had stayed up until 2 the night before drawing a picture of a spelling bee for Ms. Jones.
Everyone's eyes were glued on Ms. Jones. She bent down and picked up a snowball so icy it had not smashed when thrown from two floors below. No one was sure how to react, until Mr. Bailey said: ''Let's ignore that. It's over.''
Mr. Lewis said, ''If I say Latin etymology -- '' and the 13 good spellers said, ''d-i-s.''
Later, Mr. Solomon called the snowball a two-step-back moment. But yesterday, there were three steps forward, literally. After 135 words and 11 rounds, Kenneth Hamilton, Tatiyana Dean and Darnitia House advanced to the citywide spelling championship.
ON EDUCATION E-mail: edmike@nytimes.com
Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  The On Education column yesterday, about a mentor program at the Birney Elementary School in Washington, misstated the name of a nearby housing project. It is Barry Farm, not Berry Farm.
