Forget gambling, loan-sharking and labor racketeering. New York organized crime figures bilked millions of unsuspecting consumers out of more than $200 million over five years by piggybacking bogus charges on their telephone bills, federal authorities said yesterday.
The scheme, involving a network of companies stretching from Midtown Manhattan to Overland Park, Kan., marked what federal authorities believe was the first time organized crime figures have been charged with using the billing fraud known as ''cramming'' to fill mob coffers.
The nationwide scheme was sophisticated, officials said, but the idea was simple: Callers responding to advertisements for free samples of services like psychic phone lines, telephone dating services and adult chat lines were unknowingly charged up to $40 a month on their phone bills for services they never requested and never used.
It worked because many telephone-related services are now paid through local phone companies' monthly bills, with the companies passing on the payments to the service providers. The organized crime figures used a company that consolidated billings for service providers, allowing them to bill through local phone companies and collect their fees, fees with innocent-sounding titles like ''voice mail services'' hidden deep within the phone bills, unnoticed by all but the most dogged consumer. Frauds involving cramming -- the common term for larding a telephone bill with unauthorized charges - have been around for years, but the mob's scheme was particularly audacious, the authorities said.
Two accused Gambino crime family members and several associates were charged in the case yesterday with racketeering, racketeering conspiracy, money laundering and other charges, according federal prosecutors and F.B.I. officials.
Several law enforcement officials said the case underscored how traditional organized crime has moved beyond enduring mob money-makers of the last century to the far more sophisticated -- and potentially lucrative -- criminal endeavors that are a hallmark of the Internet age.
In fact, F.B.I. officials say they believe that the cramming scheme, which the indictment says generated $50,000 to $600,000 a day from 1997 to 2001 with $100 million in profit, is currently the crime family's most profitable enterprise, one senior investigator said.
''These defendants conspired to defraud consumers by using a sophisticated web of shell companies to generate one of the largest consumer frauds schemes in United States history,'' Roslynn R. Mauskopf, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, said in a prepared statement.
Ms. Mauskopf announced the charges in a news release with Pasquale J. D'Amuro, the assistant F.B.I. director in charge of the bureau's New York office, and the United States Postal Service and the Internal Revenue Service, which also worked on the investigation.
Officials could not say exactly how many people were victimized by the scheme, which centered on an Overland Park, Kan., company called USP&amp;C, which was named as a defendant in the case. The news release said the scheme put unauthorized charges on the telephone bills of ''millions'' of consumers. Officials noted that a large number of those who were wrongly billed complained and many - despite the efforts of the company to discourage them - won refunds.
One official said investigators believed that the scheme may be far more widespread than the evidence in the indictment suggested, noting that documents uncovered in the course of the investigation suggested that the scheme may also have operated overseas. ''We think this is just the tip of the iceberg,'' the official said. The 20-count indictment, unsealed yesterday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, adds the new charges to an earlier indictment handed up last spring that accused several of the same men in a $230 million Internet pornography scheme. In the new indictment, prosecutors are seeking the forfeiture of $430 million in what they call criminal proceeds -- the $200 million from the billing scheme and $230 million from the earlier case.
The earlier charges accuse two of the men of bilking thousands of unwitting consumers in the United States, Europe and Asia by offering free tours of adult entertainment Web sites. Those men, Richard Martino, 44, whom prosecutors identified as a soldier in the Gambino family, and Norman Chanes, 57, who they said was an associate, were charged with racketeering and the other charges in the new case.
The lead defendant in both cases, Salvatore Locascio, 44, known as Tore, identified in the indictment as a Gambino family captain, and Zef Mustapha, 42, who officials say is a high-level associate, were charged in the spring with conspiring to launder the proceeds of the Internet scheme. The new charges accuse them of racketeering.
A lawyer for Mr. Locascio, Maurice H. Sercarz, said yesterday that he had not yet seen the indictment because his client will not be arraigned until next week. ''From what we know, this is a patchwork of old allegations, none of which are true, and we look forward to an early trial date and a quick exoneration for Mr. Locascio,'' he said. The scheme worked, officials said, because USP&amp;C had entered into billing agreements with local telephone companies like PacBell, Southwestern Bell and Bell Atlantic, which entitled the company to insert a page into victim's monthly bills to collect for service providers, officials said. The reputed organized crime figures, in particular Mr. Martino and Mr. Chanes, also secretly controlled a network of companies that were supposedly providing the voice-mail services, the officials said.
This let the company use a series of tactics to keep the scheme alive, despite what would become mounting scrutiny officials said. So, when complaints against some of the voice-mail providers arose, officials said, USP&amp;C could simply jettison them and begin using other shell companies.
As a result of its practices, USP&amp;C eventually came under scrutiny itself from state and federal regulatory agencies in the late 1990's, when the volume of consumer complaints began to grow, according to law enforcement and regulatory officials.
In 1999, the number of complaints prompted the California Public Utilities Commission to begin investigating USP&amp;C. The regulator found that over the preceding year, USP&amp;C had billed $51.5 million to California customers, $27 million of which was returned as a result of customer complaints, according to the commission's findings.
The commission ultimately fined USP&amp;C $1.75 million in 2001, and because the fine has not been paid, the commission expects to take them to court soon to collect, said a spokeswoman, Sheri Inouye. State attorneys general in Ohio, Wisconsin and Missouri, among others, also took action, officials said.
Sheldon Krantz, a Washington lawyer who represented USP&amp;C before the public utilities commission, did not return a call seeking comment.
Because of the complaints, SBC Communications, the parent company of PacBell and Southwestern Bell, terminated their collection contracts with USP&amp;C in 1999, a company spokesman, Michael Coe, said.
But in a particularly audacious tactic, which prosecutors said was designed to allow the company to keep collecting from consumers despite losing its ability to piggyback on Southwestern Bell's bills, USP&amp;C began billing its victims directly, according to the indictment.
In an effort to make them believe that the charges were legitimate costs from their local phone service, Mr. Martino, Mr. Chanes and another defendant, Daniel Martino, created a bill page and envelope designed to look like Southwestern's bill, the indictment said.
They sent them out under the name of Southwest Region Bill, a company registered in the name of another defendant, and warned the consumers that if they did not pay, steps would be taken ''to cancel all service.''
The indictment said that a number of victims were thus tricked into paying the fraudulent charges.
Four of the six new defendants in the case were arrested yesterday and arraigned before United States Magistrate Judge Robert M. Levy. They were released on bond ranging from $500,000 to $1.3 million.
The two prosecutors in the case -- two assistant United States attorneys, Andrew M. Genser and Eric R. Komitee -- asked that the defendants not associate with any of their codefendants and witnesses in the case. The other two new defendants will be arraigned later and the USP&amp;C will appear in court next week.
