A clue that Botticelli was too daring in his depiction of earthly pleasures comes as the camera pans down the long white torso in his painting ''The Birth of Venus'' and stops at the goddess's loins.
Whiz thwack. Whiz thwack. Whiz thwack.
The sound of a whip leads to a shot of a bloodied, bare-chested monk flagellating himself in his cell. Whiz thwack. It seems that the artistic freedom sponsored by Lorenzo de' Medici, the great patron of the Italian Renaissance, has met its match.
''One man believed that Lorenzo was leading the city on a decadent path to destruction,'' the narrator warns in the ominous tones of a ''Scream III'' movie trailer. ''A Dominican monk by the name of Savonarola.''
Whiz thwack.
''The Medici, Godfathers of the Renaissance,'' a four-part look at the rise and fall of the Florentine dynasty that begins tonight on PBS, is an unabashedly vulgar, middle-brow gallop through one of the most important periods of Western civilization. As the title suggests, the documentary constantly likens the Medici to the Mafia. (The PBS Web site, pbs.org, is even more shameless, referring to the dynasty as a ''crime family'' and putting their biographies on ''rap sheets'' that include mug shots and aliases of each ''Capo.'' Cosimo de' Medici, for example, is listed as ''a k a Il Vecchio, the elder.'')
The series looks less like PBS than the History Channel, more like Francis Ford Coppola than Kenneth Clark. Purists may want to apply Savonarola's whip to the backs of the PBS executives who decided to dummy down a public television documentary while so many commercial networks ignore history or distort it beyond recognition.
But television, even public television, does not offer many chances to relive the 15th century, let alone show how Brunelleschi built his famous dome on top of the Florence Cathedral. The lurid re-enactments of stabbings, throat-slittings and sybaritic banquets may be hokey, but over all, ''The Medici'' is fairly accurate, engaging and deeply enthusiastic about the artworks it showcases. There are worse ways to lure viewers back to Machiavelli and Michelangelo. The series begins in 1389 with the baptism of Cosimo, who was the first of the great Medici patrons. (His father, Giovanni, established the family fortune by making a lucky loan to a former pirate, Baldassare Cossa, who in 1410 became pope and turned the Medicis into ''God's bankers.'')
To seal their family's position and power, Cosimo and Giovanni picked Brunelleschi, a rough, self-taught architect obsessed with rediscovering the secrets of Greek and Roman temples, to design works in the Medici name, including the cathedral dome. The documentary reverently illustrates the monumental effort behind that task, a trip into uncharted artistic territory that led Brunelleschi to perspective, among other things.
When Cosimo is arrested in 1433 in a plot hatched by his rivals in Florence and has to scheme and bribe his way out, the documentary lapses back into the language of Mario Puzo: ''Money talked and Cosimo walked.'')
Re-enactment scenes in documentaries are like pop-up books in a library, embarrassing but kind of fun. Sometimes they serve a larger purpose. As Cosimo, Pip Torens does not have much to do besides look haughty in a tall red hat and gown, but when he first takes stock of the model for Donatello's sensual, effeminate David, his look of admiration and skepticism speaks volumes.
The filmmakers have the good sense occasionally to put their tableaus and timetables aside and let the works of art speak for themselves. When the camera finally moves to the real statue of David by Donatello or the colossal marble David carved by Michelangelo about 60 years later, the art is the only thing on the screen.
Any documentary that spends so much time on fight scenes, clandestine autopsies and deathbed confessions takes shortcuts with historical narrative. The film altogether skips over Lorenzo de' Medici's son Piero, known as the gouty one, to dwell on the largesse of his father, known as ''Lorenzo the Magnificent,'' and the excess of his brother, Giovanni de' Medici, who in 1513 became Pope Leo X.
Leo, who famously told his relatives and friends, ''God has given us the papacy; let us enjoy it,'' was a drinker, a lecher and a huntsman who spent freely on entertainment and art. After Michelangelo finished painting the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, Leo brought Rafael to the Vatican. Leo emptied the papal coffers and to get out of debt he abused the practice of selling papal indulgences (the Roman Catholic equivalent of get out of hell cards), stirring up Martin Luther and bringing on the Reformation.
Some facts do get run over in all the shortcuts. Part 4, ''Power vs. Truth,'' pits the 16th-century Medici of Florence against the Roman Inquisition. In 1633 Galileo gives into the Church and recants, betrayed by his Medici patrons, who dare not confront the church, and cowed by the fate of Giordano Bruno, the friar and philosopher who was burned at the stake in Rome in 1600 for heresy. The documentary says that Bruno, like Galileo, was condemned for publishing his theory that the universe is infinite. Bruno was put to death for mocking church doctrine and arguing that Jesus was a magician. (On the 400th anniversary of his death, the Vatican issued a clarification, regretting the use of violence against him but explaining that Bruni's writings remained heretical.)
''The Medici, Godfathers of the Renaissance'' is not quite history, but it is not just entertainment. It is art history told in an entertaining way, and that is not heresy, even on public television.
THE MEDICI, GODFATHERS OF THE RENAISSANCE  On most PBS stations tonight  (check local listings)
Directed and produced by Justin Hardy; Susan Horth, writer and associate producer; Charles Davies, James Gold and Richard Cox, editors; Malcolm McClean, photography; David Toba, sound; Massimo Marinoni, narrator. Produced by Lion Television in association with PBS and Devillier Donegan Enterprises.
TELEVISION REVIEW
