Even by Hollywood standards Suzanne Vale, the heroine of Carrie Fisher's new novel, ''The Best Awful,'' is not your typical Hollywood divorcée.
Her ex-husband forgot to tell her that he was gay. Her tap-dancing mother is a 1950's movie star whose three failed marriages had, as Ms. Fisher writes, ''left her publicly humiliated, bankrupted, and bankrupted again.'' Her father, a onetime celebrity now on medication, once swallowed his hearing aid, requiring his family to yell into his stomach to be heard. Her personal life teeters on the brink until she falls overboard and winds up in a mental hospital.
''I was going to write this as a memoir,'' said Ms. Fisher, an actress and screenwriter as well as an author. (Her first novel, ''Postcards From the Edge,'' also depicts the travails of Suzanne Vale as she comes out of rehab to face her life.) ''But then I couldn't do a memoir. The truth is a very stern taskmistress, and I can't adhere to it. I have a very bad memory.''
''The Best Awful,'' published last month by Simon &amp; Schuster, has received mostly strong reviews and is, beneath its wit, more harrowing then ''Postcards From the Edge,'' published in 1987. The new book is, she said, a truthful depiction of her bipolar condition as it spun out of control because of an allergic reaction to drugs. (''Don't ask me their names,'' she said in an interview. ''They look like Russian words.'') Ms. Fisher said she had begun hallucinating: ''I became psychotic. I didn't sleep for six days. I felt I was getting secret messages from CNN.''
Ms. Fisher, who is 47, said she was still not entirely sure what happened next. She was hospitalized at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center here, she said, admitted to the ''total lockup'' for at least one week and then became an outpatient for six months. ''I was diagnosed with bipolar II; it's the strongest bipolar,'' she said. ''I wasn't O.K. for a year.''
The daughter of the showbiz duo Debbie Reynolds and Eddie Fisher, Ms. Fisher said she inherited the condition from her father. ''Here's my father: I'm 14 years old, and I go to my father's house and he says, 'Come and see what I got in Hong Kong.' We go to his closet, and he shows me 175 silk suits that are all in different colors, and I mean orange and lime green and magenta.''
Rather than admit to a mental illness, ''my father would rather cop to being a drug addict because it's sort of more romantic,'' she said. (Mr. Fisher discussed his drug problems in his 1999 autobiography, ''Been There, Done That.'') In a sensational episode when Carrie was a child, Mr. Fisher left Ms. Reynolds to marry Elizabeth Taylor. ''I've never had a big relationship with him,'' Ms. Fisher said of her father. She was seated on a sofa and eating a cookie in her sprawling Spanish-style home in the Beverly Hills area.
But she is close to Ms. Reynolds. ''My mother is a big character,'' Ms. Fisher said. ''She's really quick, really disciplined.'' (Her relationship with her mother is more or less mirrored in the 1990 film version of ''Postcards From the Edge,'' in which Meryl Streep played the Carrie Fisher role, just out of rehab, and her mother is a flamboyant 1950's movie star named Doris Mann, played by Shirley MacLaine.)
Growing up in her mother's shadow while trying to be an actress was difficult, Ms. Fisher said. ''She was this movie star, she had that inner light, she glowed from within. There was something in me that wasn't happening. I wasn't from that ilk.''
Her early life, though privileged, was troubled. ''It wasn't like 'Father Knows Best,' and I wanted that so much,'' she said. ''It was kind of like we grew up around each other, not with each other. Like trees.'' Ms. Fisher has a younger brother, Todd, who lives in San Luis Obispo, Calif., , and is a business associate of Ms. Reynolds.
''It was a big house,'' Ms. Fisher said. ''My mother worked most of the time, and it was sort of silent. There were no humans on the street. It was all perfect and lovely, but something underneath was not O.K.''
Ms. Fisher said she was never consumed with the idea of being an actress. She performed in her mother's Las Vegas act and in the chorus of the 1973 revival of the Broadway musical ''Irene,'' with Ms. Reynolds. At her mother's insistence, she attended the Central School of Speech and Drama in London (''She was going to cut off my credit cards if I didn't go''), appeared as the foul-mouthed daughter of Lee Grant's character in the 1975 film ''Shampoo'' and was then cast in her most famous role, Princess Leia,'' in ''Star Wars'' and its sequels, ''The Empire Strikes Back'' and ''Return of the Jedi.''
''I never really wanted to be an actress,'' Ms. Fisher said. ''The character became famous. I didn't. I don't think we were all known for our acting.'' Ms. Fisher still takes the occasional small role in films, but spends most of her time writing.
''The person I really wanted to be was Dorothy Parker,'' she said. ''I wanted to write. I did 'Star Wars' till I was 25, and then I got married to Paul Simon. And I was pretty crazy then, too. And I was having a good time in my craziness.'' (Ms. Fisher's second novel, ''Surrender the Pink'' from 1990, dealt fictionally with her 11-month marriage to Mr. Simon, the singer and songwriter, in 1983 and 1984.) Another Hollywood novel followed in 1994, ''Delusions of Grandma.''
In recent years she has earned substantial sums as a script doctor, a writer called in to fix troubled scenarios. ''It started with Spielberg,'' she said, referring to the director Steven Spielberg. ''He wanted me to rewrite the part of Tinkerbell for the movie 'Hook.' ''
Ms. Fisher's manic depression was diagnosed when she was in her 20's, she said, and she abused painkillers and alcohol for years. After abandoning drugs for a time, she said, she had a relapse in her 30's. Now, after her hospitalization five years ago, Ms. Fisher is off addictive drugs, she said, and attends Alcoholics Anonymous meetings.
In her novel, and in the interview, Ms. Fisher says her relationship with her 11-year-old daughter, Billie (named Honey in the book), forced her to take control of her life. Ms. Fisher and her former husband, Bryan Lourd, a partner at the Creative Artists Agency, are jointly rearing the child, and the book is dedicated to them.
Ms. Fisher said that, while using her life as a source for her novels, she would never print anything hurtful to the people around her. ''I go to them, and say, 'If this is going to be a problem for you, I'll change it,' '' she said.
Had anyone ever objected?
''No,'' she said.
Currently she is the host of ''Conversations From the Edge With Carrie Fisher'' on the Oxygen cable channel, and is considering writing a one-woman show, to be performed by someone else.
''I have stage fright. I'm not a natural performer,'' she said. ''I mean, I was raised by extroverts. It was imprinted on me. I had to do it to survive. But I'm a very unwilling extrovert.''
