Buoyed by the recovery in world stock markets, Switzerland's largest bank, UBS, reported a better-than-expected fourth-quarter profit, despite losses incurred in the unexpected default of the Erb Group, a Swiss conglomerate.
UBS, which has its corporate headquarters in Zurich, said it had a fourth-quarter profit of 1.86 billion Swiss francs, or $1.5 billion, recovering from a loss of 101 million Swiss francs in the quarter a year earlier on one-time factors. Full-year profit increased 81 percent, to 6.4 billion Swiss francs, beating analysts' expectations and making 2003 its most profitable year since 2000 when the bank's net profit peaked at 8.13 billion Swiss francs.
The chief executive of UBS, Peter Wuffli, said in a statement that all of the group's businesses reported profit increases, helped by tight cost controls and disciplined capital management. Operating expenses fell 13 percent in 2003.
Mr. Wuffli said that 2003 ''turned out to be a surprisingly good year for financial markets, and a terrific year for UBS.''
''Our businesses have made sustainable competitive gains across the globe,'' he said. UBS shares, which had hit a two-year high on Monday in anticipation of strong results, jumped 2.4 percent on the Zurich bourse to 95.15 Swiss francs after UBS directors proposed raising the yearly dividend to 2.60 Swiss francs -- a 30 percent rise from last year.
UBS's flagship wealth management, asset management and private client businesses -- the Swiss group includes the world's largest private bank -- netted new money of 61.6 billion Swiss francs in 2003 compared with 36.9 billion francs in 2002, bringing total client assets managed by the UBS group to 2.2 trillion Swiss francs.
UBS said that its wealth management and business banking units suffered net losses of 108 million Swiss francs on nonperforming loans in the fourth quarter, a figure that was exacerbated by Erb's sudden default. Erb collapsed in December, citing bad real estate deals.
Mr. Wuffli said in a telephone interview that UBS planned to keep up the pace of mergers and acquisitions set last year, when the Swiss group acquired three wealth management businesses in Europe and one investment banking business in the United States.
The Swiss banking group also announced that it had acquired the British wealth manager, Laing &amp; Cruickshank Investment Management, from Crédit Lyonnais which itself is part of France's Crédit Agricole Group for £160 million ($297 million). UBS said the acquisition would increase UBS's assets under management by £5 billion in 2004.
Mr. Wuffli said that UBS had earmarked at least half a billion Swiss francs ($404 million) for acquisitions this year. He ruled out any multibillion-dollar transactions -- ''for financial, but more importantly strategic reasons'' -- and he made it clear that UBS had no ambition to attain the size of global banks like HSBC or Citigroup.
He said that UBS would continue to scour Europe this year for wealth management companies for possible acquisition as part of its strategy to tap into Europe's growing onshore wealth management market. Meanwhile in the United States, the Swiss bank would watch for opportunities to buy more investment banking businesses.
Mr. Wuffli said that UBS was not interested in acquiring companies like Commerzbank and HBV, two struggling German banks seen as possible merger targets. ''That would dilute our strategic focus,'' he said.
''We focus our efforts on wealth management and investment banking,'' Mr. Wuffli said, ''and have no branch-based retail or corporate business outside Switzerland. We don't see how that could add to our portfolio.''
UBS said that its share buyback programs had continued to be vital to maintaining value for shareholders and that under the 2003 plan, UBS had bought back 56.7 million shares for 4.3 billion Swiss francs.
UBS directors said in the statement that stock buybacks would continue this year, possibly as much as 6 billion Swiss francs, beginning March 8 and running to March 7, 2005.
Analysts said that the profit results for the full year and its last quarter were above expectations.
Peter Thorne, a banking analyst at Pictet &amp; Compagnie in Geneva, said in a note to investors that while investment banking and securities were the star performer, retail banking was in line with Pictet's forecasts while private banking and global asset management had been slightly disappointing, although profitable in 2003.
But Mr. Thorne praised the bank for getting a grip on costs.
''We had been worried,'' he said, ''about cost control here and the bank seems to have brought it under control.''
