THE new Michelin guide will award a third star to three restaurants in France and demote one restaurant to two stars.
Les Loges de l'Aubergade in Puymirol, in southwest France, a place of refined rusticity that specializes in the truffle-infused cooking of Michel Trama, its chef and owner, was elevated from two stars to three in the guide, which will be published on Feb. 27.
Ariane Daguin, an owner of D'Artagnan, the American game and foie gras company, said that when she phoned Mr. Trama and his wife, Maryse, two old friends, to congratulate them, ''they were drunk.'' ''They finished a magnum of Champagne,'' Ms. Daguin said.
L'Espérance, near Vézelay in Burgundy, recaptured the third star it lost a few years ago.
''Right now, I feel as though I dropped 20 years from my age,'' said Marc Meneau, 60, the chef and owner. ''It's much harder to regain than to earn a star in the first place. I cut out all the pleasures of life for the last five years, and with my team we just put our shoulders to the wheel and worked. I suppose there is a reason I called my place L'Espérance.'' The name means hope.
La Côte St.-Jacques in the village of Joigny in Burgundy also regained a third star, which had been dropped in 2001.
With the retirement of Gérard Boyer, Les Crayères in Reims was demoted to two stars from three.
Similarly, in the wake of Roger Vergé's retirement, Le Moulin de Mougins near Cannes lost one of its two stars. A change of chef led Chantecler in the Hôtel Négresco in Nice to go from two to one.
Four other restaurants were demoted from two stars to one, including Les Muses at the Hôtel Scribe in Paris. Last year, Yannick Alleno, 26, the chef of Les Muses, left for Le Meurice at the Hotel Meurice in Paris. Now, Le Meurice has earned a second star, making it the only new two-star restaurant in the guide. Certainly, Mr. Alleno is one to watch.
Last year, to avoid rumors, the guide, whose restaurant ratings are the most respected in Europe, began announcing the star ratings before publication of the book.
The suicide of Bernard Loiseau last year publicized the pressures chefs feel over the ratings. Mr. Loiseau's restaurant, the Hôtel de la Côte d'Or, was downgraded in the Gault-Millau guide, and there were suggestions that it would lose one of its three Michelin stars. It did not.
Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article last Wednesday about restaurant ratings in the latest Michelin guide misstated the age of Yannick Alleno, chef of Le Meurice at the Hotel Meurice in Paris, which was awarded a second star. He is 35, not 26.
