The chairman of the commission on the Sept. 11 attacks said Tuesday that there were ''no smoking guns'' in classified Oval Office intelligence reports to suggest that President Bush and senior White House aides fumbled intelligence warning of the possibility of a terrorist strike before the attacks.
The comments from the chairman of the panel, former Gov. Thomas H. Kean of New Jersey, are likely to be welcomed at the White House. Mr. Kean made them on the same day that the White House relented in the face of a subpoena threat and agreed to allow all 10 members of the independent panel to review a summary of the intelligence reports, the President's Daily Brief, that the Central Intelligence Agency prepares each morning for the Oval Office.
Citing executive privilege, White House lawyers had insisted that the information be limited to a four-member delegation from the commission, including Mr. Kean, that was allowed to review edited sections of the reports last year.
Until Tuesday, White House lawyers had blocked the commission from providing all 10 members of the panel with a report summarizing information in handwritten and computer-generated notes taken by the four-member group.
The White House has consistently said since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks that Mr. Bush had no credible specific intelligence information that would have let him pre-empt the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, and Mr. Kean suggested that his review of the daily briefings that reached Mr. Bush's desk supported the White House view.
''There were no smoking guns, nothing that would make you sit up and say, 'Wow,' '' said Mr. Kean, who read through parts of the daily briefings that reached Mr. Bush and President Bill Clinton.
The reports are among the most highly classified documents in the government, and the White House has previously acknowledged that a report to Mr. Bush in August 2001 mentioned intelligence that suggested the possibility of a strike by Al Qaeda using commercial aircraft.
''We very much got a flavor of what kind of information was coming to both President Clinton and President Bush,'' Mr. Kean said, adding that the reports ''raise questions that have to be answered that were not there before, and we are going to have to call back some witnesses. But is there a smoking gun? No.''
Told of Mr. Kean's comments and after they had been given a copy of the report summarizing what the four colleagues found in the daily intelligence briefings, other commission members did not contradict Mr. Kean.
They suggested that it was too early to make a judgment about whether Mr. Bush and his aides had ignored intelligence warnings before 9/11.
''I'm not going to characterize the report,' said Richard Ben-Veniste, the former Watergate prosecutor who is a Democratic member of the panel. Mr. Ben-Veniste said the report had ''important new information that will require us to reinterview a number of people.''
Another Democrat on the panel, Timothy J. Roemer, a former House member from Indiana, said that the report contained ''startlingly new information from some of the P.D.B.'s,'' referring to the President's Daily Brief. But Mr. Roemer, too, would not offer details of what was in the report.
Facing an earlier subpoena threat, the White House agreed last year to allow the commission to select the four-member group.
The panel, known formally as the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States, chose Mr. Kean; Lee H. Hamilton, the vice chairman who is a former House member from Indiana; Jamie S. Gorelick, deputy attorney general in the Clinton administration; and Philip D. Zelikow, the panel's Republican staff director.
They were allowed to take notes that, until this week, remained in the possession of the White House, with the White House permitted to block their distribution to the full commission.
The White House agreement on Tuesday to allow the notes to be shared with all 10 members was made after intensive negotiations with the commission and after several members suggested that they were willing to vote to subpoena the original intelligence briefings if the White House did not relent on the notes.
Despite the concession, some panel members said they still wanted to subpoena the original briefings, if only as a protest over what they considered the failure of the White House to cooperate with the commission.
Commission officials said that a vote on a subpoena was taken in a private meeting of the commission on Tuesday and that the motion failed, with a bipartisan majority opposed.
The Family Steering Committee, an umbrella group of victims' family organizations, said it was outraged by the decision not to seek a subpoena.
''President Bush stated that he is 'cooperating' with the 9/11 Independent Commission,'' the committee said in a statement. ''Yet the commission has been negotiating for access to these documents for over 10 months with no success. While the commission negotiates with the executive branch, this nation remains at risk.''
