Gisele Bundchen likes to play Tarzan. That's why she is all scuffed up and covered with dings.
''Do you have some moisturizer and concealer?'' Ms. Bundchen, the Brazilian model, inquired of a makeup artist backstage before Marc Jacobs's show on Monday night at the New York State Armory on Lexington Avenue. Rolling up the cuff of her jeans, Ms. Bundchen said, ''Look!''
Scattered across the model's million-dollar legs was the scabbed evidence of a recent outing in a dog park in Los Angeles with her mutts Willie, Hazel and Vida.
''I fell from a tree,'' said Ms. Bundchen, 24, who is based in California and who is popular at a kind of epic, ''Star Trek'' level among the model obsessives who troll the Web. Thanks to Ms. Bundchen's contracts with Victoria's Secret, among other companies, her participation in the seasonal runway cycle is anything but an economic necessity.
''I never think of myself as being different'' from other girls, Ms. Bundchen said. And while beauty is typically so densely aggregated backstage at a Marc Jacobs show that all the Darias blur into the Caitrionas and Carolinas, Ms. Bundchen's is manifestly of another order. ''These legs are terrible,'' she said on Monday, as a half-dozen photographers clustered around her excitedly waiting for the crucial moment for a shot.
''I was swinging from a rope in the dog park, and I went backwards and fell from, like, 10 feet, right on my head,'' Ms. Bundchen said. At that she made a photogenic ''baby's got a boo-boo'' face, and all of the photographers triggered their shutters at once.
Deciphering the utterances of the men running global corporate empires can sometimes leave an observer feeling like a cut-rate sibyl, reduced to poking for meaning through the entrails of birds.
What was Yves Carcelle, the chief executive of Louis Vuitton, getting at when he remarked yesterday morning that ''The world is getting richer and richer, and more brands are trying to have part of that pie, which is why it's important that Vuitton has executed its marketing strategy perfectly''?
Mr. Carcelle was sipping coffee on the main level of the enormous new Louis Vuitton flagship at Fifth Avenue and 57th Street, redesigned by the architect Jun Aoki, decorated by the architect Peter Marino and consecrated to the notion that one way to slake the appetites of global consumers is to bring them another vinyl-coated canvas tote bag adorned with the monograms of a dead Frenchman.
Fifteen years ago, when Bernard Arnault took over LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, he said that 75 percent of the brand's consumers in this country were Japanese. Now, Mr. Arnault suggested, Americans account for 90 percent of the company's sales in the United States, although that is not necessarily the impression one would take away from a Saturday afternoon spent in a Vuitton store. ''The reason why we're so successful in the United States is Marc Jacobs,'' Mr. Arnault said.
It is Mr. Jacobs who gets kudos for devising best-selling innovations on the logo bags like those by Stephen Sprouse and by the Japanese artist Takashi Murakami. It is also he who gets credited with seeking out Jennifer Lopez to be the face of Vuitton in last year's memorable ad campaign. Yesterday no one was taking responsibility for the decision to end Vuitton's affiliation with Ms. Lopez, for whom getting dumped is becoming a habit. Mr. Carcelle would say only that the company had decided not to renew her contract. ''The brand speaks for itself,'' he said.
Far, far from the luxury brand superhighway, there wander small bands of possibly delusional people who entered fashion because they felt they had a creative vision to put across. The designers of Arlequin might be among those people. Arlequin, an independent label based in San Francisco that has no manufacturing capacity and isn't sold in any stores, nevertheless accounted well for itself in a lively first show, held yesterday at the Mao space at Atlas. ''The clothes were fantastic,'' said the photographer Ellen von Unwerth. ''You really never can tell.''
The theme of the presentation, ''Mary Poppins goes vaudeville,'' made sense when one considered that the designers Marcelle Seelig, Alex Lugo and May Nogoy got their start on the West Coast circuit of performance art and neo-burlesque. Ms. Seelig once performed a dance involving nudity and flames, she said demurely. She also toured with a marching band.
''Fashion is tough,'' said Ms. Nogoy, a former contortionist, who explained that Arlequin's lace-and-leather confections have been sold mainly to private customers so far.
''That's all right,'' she added. ''We're really into staying intimate and keeping the art side of it, and not getting too far away from the creativity.''
FASHION DIARY
