Prosecutors in Milan investigating the collapse of the food conglomerate Parmalat have placed seven banks, including three in the United States, under investigation for price manipulation, Italian news agencies reported Tuesday.
The banks are Bank of America, Citigroup, Morgan Stanley, UBS, Deutsche Bank, Banca Popolare di Lodi and the fund management arm of Banca Intesa, the news agencies ANSA and AGI reported, without citing the source of the information.
Spokesmen for Citigroup, Deutsche Bank, Morgan Stanley and Banca Intesa declined to comment on the reports. Spokesmen at Bank of America, UBS and Banca Popolare di Lodi said the banks had not been notified of any investigation.
Prosecutors in Milan, Italy's financial capital, and Parma, where Parmalat is based, have arrested 11 people, including Parmalat's founder and two former chief financial officers. As part of the inquiry, Italy's tax police have searched the Milan offices of the seven banks or their units, but none of the institutions were known to have been put under investigation.
Prosecutors are seeking to establish how much the banks knew about Parmalat's financial condition in the months before its collapse in December. Parmalat's new auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, has said that the company's debt was eight times what Parmalat stated and that sales and profits were overstated. Analysts have said it is hard to believe that the banks that worked with Parmalat were unaware of its financial state.
Prosecutors also need to untangle the relationship between Parmalat and the many banks that assisted it in obtaining financing.
In late September, Deutsche Bank, which has been a close adviser to Parmalat over the years, placed 350 million euros worth of bonds for the company.
In June, Morgan Stanley bought 300 million euros of Parmalat bonds and sold them to Nextra, the fund management unit of Banca Intesa. A person close to the Italian bank said the decision to buy that bond was based on reports by its analysts and on Standard &amp; Poor's investment-grade rating of Parmalat. Nextra then sold the bond to Banca Popolare di Lodi and another unidentified bank, according to this person.
Citigroup helped Parmalat set up an offshore investment vehicle to shift loans among the company's units. And UBS bought 420 million euros in bonds from Parmalat last year, and in the past has helped the company sell debt.
At least 10 employees of the seven banks being investigated are also under investigation, the Italian daily La Repubblica reported on its Web site.
Calisto Tanzi, who founded Parmalat 40 years ago, has been in jail since Dec. 27 and has not been charged even though transcripts of his interrogations show that he admitted to having diverted at least 500 million euros from Parmalat to a company owned by his family.
With questioning by Milan prosecutors finished, Mr. Tanzi was move on Tuesday to a prison in Parma for questioning there. In Italy, suspects can be detained for long periods before being charged with a crime. The length of incarceration depends on the suspected crime.
The seven banks would join Parmalat's former auditors, Grant Thornton's former Italian unit and Deloitte &amp; Touche as subjects of investigation.
