The Goldman Sachs Group laid off 50 traders and sales executives in its equities division yesterday, as it continues to concentrate its resources in more profitable areas.
The move underscores the growing influence of a cadre of top-level Goldman executives who have risen to prominence because of their performance in the firm's thriving bond and commodities trading division and who have now taken a knife to Goldman's equity unit.
Chief among them has been Lloyd C. Blankfein, who was named president of the firm late last year, making him the heir apparent to Henry M. Paulson Jr., Goldman's chief executive.
Mr. Blankfein, a former bond and commodities trader, has presided over the explosive growth of profits in Goldman's fixed income, currency and commodities division by promoting a trading approach that emphasizes electronic trading.
The equity division at Goldman has been under pressure since the bubble in technology stocks burst, squeezed by the combination of shrinking commission rates and a cost base that remains high.
While Mr. Blankfein's star has ascended, the star of Robert K. Steel, who was a co-head of Goldman's equity division throughout the years of stock market boom, went on the decline.
Mr. Blankfein became a co-head of the equities division with Mr. Steel in April 2002, and a year later, was awarded a seat on Goldman's board.
Mr. Steel, a onetime institutional salesman, retired earlier this year.
Under Mr. Blankfein, the bond and commodities trading that Goldman does for itself and its clients now makes up as much as three-quarters of the firm's overall trading revenue, with equity trading comprising the rest.
Three years ago, revenue from Mr. Blankfein's division produced 48 percent of the firm's trading profits.
Consequently, it has been easier to make the case that the firm's equities division, with its ranks of highly paid stock salesmen and traders, needs to be pared.
''Trying to make money to cover the costs of expensive Goldman people on equity side is harder these days,'' said John Hewitt, a former top executive in the Goldman Sachs electronic trading group. ''I suspect Goldman will be using more technology and proprietary trading to make money.''
The 50 people who were laid off were concentrated in the firm's offices in New York, where the equity division is based.
They included sales traders, members of the support staff and equity sales representatives, charged with servicing the accounts of large institutional investors.
A Goldman Sachs spokesman said, ''The equities business is a vital part of our franchise and we are actively hiring people for it.''
Analysts said that with the advent of electronic trading and the increased restrictions on research analysts, the role had diminished for the equity sales agent, whose primary duty has been to market the firm's research to institutional investors.
Such a trend was mirrored 10 years ago in the firm's bond division, when the increased efficiencies gained from technological innovation decreased the influence of the fixed-income salesman.
Mr. Blankfein, who has worked at Goldman for 22 years, has witnessed these trends and is moving to put his stamp on the firm's equity division by making a number of high-level personnel changes.
Last September, for example, he appointed Gary D. Cohn, a former colleague from the trading desk at J. Aron, the commodities trading firm that Goldman bought in 1981, to be a co-head of the equity unit with J. Michael Evans.
