One mission of the Brooklyn producing organization known as 651 ARTS is to gain a wider audience for arts grounded in the culture of the African diaspora. It has presented important programs of modern dance tinged with traditional African forms, created by influential African and American companies. And so it must have seemed a sure bet to open 651's 15th anniversary season, on Friday night at the BAM Harvey Theater, with a program by three award winners from a competition in Madagascar.
But the evening, called ''Movement (R)evolution: New African Dance,'' was a profound disappointment, suggesting that the judges in Madagascar might have seen too many performances by the wrong downtown or experimental dance companies in New York. The two-hour evening was long on arty program notes and short on individuality. The live musical accompaniment for two pieces was clear, direct and fresh. But the choreography failed to reveal anything about the companies' styles and worlds. All three pieces could have been the work of any mediocre and derivative New York dance ensemble.
The program opened with ''Vin Nem'' (''The Light''), a trio performed by the Compagnie Konga Ba Téria of Burkina Faso. Choreographed by Lacina Coulibaly, a founder of the troupe, the piece focused at the start on a seated man who repeatedly blew on and crumpled a gleaming plastic water bottle. Two other men entered and engaged in random-seeming activity, for the most part speaking, clinches and patty-cake sequences for the hands and feet.
The three dancers (Mr. Coulibaly, Souleymane Badolo and Bienvenue Fernand Bazie) were lithe and moved easily, but they had little chance to display that in the interrupted flow of non sequiturs. Upended wooden bowls figured promisingly in the dance, which was set to music for the kora, a harp lute, and the flute, composed and performed by Timbiri Winsei, with percussion accompaniment by Oumaru Kienou.
''Mpirahalahy Mianla'' (''Several Make One''), choreographed by Ariry Andriamoratsiresy and performed by the Compagnie Rary of Madagascar, was charming but as unspecific and random-seeming as ''Vin Nem.'' Four dancers (Harimalala Angela Rakotoarisoa, Lovatiana Erica Rakotobe, Rijamalala Harivony Rakotoarimanana and Zoë J. Randrianjanaka Dinampitia), interacted with one another and two wooden structures, but so unsuggestively that no themes were evident to counteract the gently arbitrary choreography. The best moment came when Linda Angelica Volahasiniaina, who composed and performed the delicate musical accompaniment, pushed through the dancers' midst and reactivated them like a breeze playing on a mobile. (The company also included Alain Michel Randriamiasa, part of the rotating cast.)
The Madagascar dancers looked as if they believed in what they were performing. The dancers did not in ''Same but Different,'' a trio choreographed by Sello Pesa of South Africa, which looked almost cynically appropriated. Pools and rectangles of light figured here, as they did in ''Vin Nem.'' The performers (Mr. Pesa, Mandla Bebeza and Jean Renat Anamah) danced inside and moved from one light area to another on a darkened stage in bland choreography that appeared to have been sampled in large part from work by imitators of Merce Cunningham and Laura Dean. But Mr. Pesa has been choreographing for only three years, and he may yet find a voice of his own.
DANCE REVIEW
