IT was business as usual last Thursday afternoon at the Williams-Sonoma store in the Time Warner Center -- even though its grand opening was only at noon. In the test kitchen, where employees fried potato latkes, topped them with smoked salmon and gave them away -- free -- to the crowd pressed against the counter, a woman asked the chef to write down the recipe. Right that minute. When he nicely offered to e-mail it later, she left.
The tiny paper cups of brownies -- also free -- were snatched up at an alarming rate; one man clutched five of them, looking furtively over his shoulder as he all but ran.
And in the corner, in the cookbook section, sat an 88-year-old man who had been very politely signing books for the past two hours and was quite ready to stop.
''Could you do just one more, for my mom?'' a young woman pleaded, her angelic expression belying the fact that she had cut the line for his autograph.
Chuck Williams, the founder of Williams-Sonoma Inc., signed her book, and the books of the other women who were ready to kill her. He smiled and shook hands. He surveyed the brownie thieves and smiled some more. He went up to the lounge in the Mandarin Oriental hotel and sat and talked for 90 minutes without a server approaching even once, to ask if he'd like some lunch, or maybe a cup of tea.
He seemed to take it in stride. ''I have never been inclined to live here,'' Mr. Williams, a San Francisco resident, said evenly. ''I guess I like a smaller place. I'm still a country boy at heart.''
That might actually be true. An unlikely mogul if ever there was one, Mr. Williams -- or more specifically, his life's passion for French cookware -- is nonetheless the basis of a corporate empire. Williams-Sonoma Inc., a publicly held company since 1983, also owns Pottery Barn and Hold Everything among other stores; in 2002 it had $2.3 billion in revenue.
When Mr. Williams, a building contractor who fell in love with anything he had ever seen in a French kitchen, opened his first store in Sonoma, Calif., in 1956, most American home cooks could not buy garlic presses, lemon zesters, grapefruit knives or pepper mills. Or copper pots, sauté pans, gratin or soufflé dishes.
''I had the idea of developing a little business that sold French cookware and tools and so forth to people who liked to cook,'' he said, ''and hopefully make a living at it.''
The new store is the 239th Williams-Sonoma to open in North America; at almost 22,000 square feet, this one is now the flagship. Although some New Yorkers are dismayed that it is located in a mall, Mr. Williams is unconcerned.
''I think it's going to work because there's no reason why it shouldn't,'' he said. ''You see something interesting as you walk by and you will come back and look.''
Those who prefer a smaller, free-standing store can visit 20 East 60th Street at Lexington Avenue, 1175 Madison Avenue at 86th Street and 110 Seventh Avenue at 17th Street.
To think that it all started with a trip to Paris! Well, certainly, the circumstances that preceded that trip can't be discounted, starting with a childhood that would qualify as Dickensian were it not so quintessentially American.
Born in 1915 in northern Florida, Mr. Williams learned to cook from his maternal grandmother, who had owned a restaurant in Lima, Ohio. When the Depression hit, the senior Mr. Williams's auto repair business failed, and the family moved to southern California. His father fared no better there; he abandoned his wife, son and daughter.
Eventually, Mr. Williams found work on a date farm near Palm Springs. The couple who owned it took him in and sent him to high school in the mornings while he spent afternoons working in its gift shop, packaging dates and grapefruit and waiting on customers. His sister died in 1933, from a brain injury, after being hit in the head with a baseball. His mother returned to Florida, and Mr. Williams finished school and moved to Los Angeles, where he worked at I. Magnin, in shipping and receiving.
During World War II, he spent four years overseas as an airplane mechanic for Lockheed International, repairing aircraft in India and East Africa.
After the war, he returned to Los Angeles and one weekend, joined friends for golf in Sonoma. He fell in love with the town and moved there in 1947, starting a successful business as a building contractor.
''Sonoma in those days was the type of place that encouraged you to become part of the community and participate,'' Mr. Williams said. ''I found myself in a group that liked to cook. One person was French and taught us all about soufflés.''
He traveled to Paris in 1953 and started craving kitchenware the way some people crave whiskey. ''I started the store because I wanted to create something that nobody else had done,'' he said, ''bring over things people in America hadn't been exposed to. The average person going to France wouldn't have seen them readily, either.''
He opened his store in Sonoma right before Christmas, 1956. (Note to late bloomers: he was 41.) ''I didn't just pile merchandise on the tables the way hardware stores did with those tin and aluminum pots and pans,'' he said. ''I lined up a set of copper pans, every size in order, just out of reach, so the customer would have to get together with the person in the store. It was the beginnings of a conversation, a way of shopping that disappeared during the war, unfortunately.''
The wealthy San Franciscans who had weekend and vacation homes in Sonoma embraced the store, and encouraged him to relocate to town. In 1958 he opened on Sutter Street, one block off Union Square. ''It was across the street from the Franciscan Club, the best women's club in town,'' he said. ''There was also Elizabeth Arden. I discovered that 350 people worked there, taking care of the customer. So they all became our customer.'' He smiled. ''The women would bring their dogs into the store, because they knew they'd be safe with Bill.''
Bill, Mr. Williams's German shepherd, was the extent of his family; he likes to say he was married to the store. And indeed, that's just where he would stay when Bill went to tea at the Franciscan Club with its manager. She would drink tea and Bill would eat filet mignon. ''He was very much a part of the shop until he died,'' Mr. Williams said fondly.
Ever the perfectionist, Mr. Williams did much of the work there himself, sweeping the sidewalks and spending each Sunday cleaning the shelves. Not to mention honing his own brand of customer service; when a woman throwing a dinner party called in a panic because she didn't have a cake mold, he got on a bus and took one to her.
But that kind of pace was hard to sustain. By 1972, he sought the advice of Edward Marcus, who with his brother Stanley had made Neiman Marcus, and its catalog, a retailing success. ''Ed encouraged me to incorporate and expand the business,'' he said. ''I was never interested in finances. I had never thought about growing.''
Mr. Marcus bought into the business with a few other investors and with Mr. Williams remaining the chief buyer, opened three more stores in California and one in Dallas; the company also started publishing the catalog. But Mr. Marcus died, and in 1978, Mr. Williams sold the company to Howard Lester and Jay McMahan. The expansion began in earnest.
''From the catalog business, we knew where our customers were so we put retail stores there,'' Mr. Williams said. ''We followed the ZIP codes.''
Mr. Williams continued to buy for the company until the early 1990's. In the years since, he has been general editor of the 160 Williams-Sonoma cookbooks; the series has proved wildly successful, selling 18 million copies. And he continues to counsel employees on customer service. ''I always connected with the customers, that's true,'' he said. ''At some point, many of them became my friends.''
Among them is Marion Cunningham, who revised ''The Fannie Farmer Cookbook'' and has written six cookbooks of her own. ''Chuck and I used to travel with James Beard and help him with his classes,'' Mrs. Cunningham said by phone. ''Many of us had never seen the equipment Chuck carried in a store before, and it was captivating. I don't think people realize what he did, how much he contributed to the idea of home cooking in America.''
Figuring he had a better chance of finding a cup of tea in the store, Mr. Williams left the Mandarin and went downstairs. He walked over to a display of sauté pans and turned all the handles in the same direction.
''Right from the beginning I always bought what I liked,'' he said. ''I was curious about quality, how something was made. I looked for a good quality and design, and I had reasonably good taste.''
A group of people pushed past him.
''Basically,'' he said, ''I think I was right.''
Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article last Wednesday about Chuck Williams, founder of the Williams-Sonoma kitchenware chain, misstated the location of a Manhattan branch. It is at 121 East 59th Street. (A store formerly existed at 20 East 60th Street.)
