Halfway through the Marc Jacobs show on Monday night, around 10:30, it probably hit some of the older men in the audience at the New York State Armory on Lexington Avenue that they were witnessing a frightening vision of their mothers. Years of waking up in a cold bath of sweat, of running from the old ball and chain, and here she was, amid the cool kids at Marc Jacobs, a vision in crepey Wheatena lace with a lynx cape thrown over her shoulders and a red velvet ribbon sagging gloriously at her bosom. Well, for those men, there is no other way to look at Mr. Jacobs's collection of matron tweeds and scoop-back dresses in jolly turquoise lace except as a limited-interest category.
Yet, because Mr. Jacobs was inspired in part by the surrealist paintings of John Currin and the eclectic fashion sense of his wife, the artist Rachel Feinstein, and in part by the revelation in Helmut Newton's memoir that even a woman of Margaret Thatcher's girth and rectitude could be a turn-on, the clothes and the ideas embodied in them might merit a second look.
It is no secret that in the old days of Seventh Avenue, women were referred to as broads, and many a model's fanny got pinched on the way to the dressing room. Fast forward through Hefner's bunny mansions, through the ''Belle de Jour'' years, when Saint Laurent made hay of bourgeois heat, through feminism, postfeminism, through ''Friends'' and Friendster, and you arrive at the point where there is no distinction, morally or philosophically, between Lady Thatcher and Pamela Anderson. Or, between a country mouse and a Chanel-clad suburban missus.
Each is a muse, and each is, in a sense, fair game for the artist or designer. As Peter Schjeldahl of The New Yorker wrote in his review of Mr. Currin's retrospective at the Whitney Museum, ''He demonstrates the power of the aesthetic to overrule our normal taste, morality and intellectual convictions.''
The same disturbance can happen in fashion. Mr. Jacobs is loath to make too much of the connection between art and fashion, calling it (despite his profitable collaboration with the artist Takashi Murakami) ''a cliché.'' Still, before his show he said: ''John is 41 and I am 40. There is definitely a set of references that we share.''
Mr. Currin presents women as vile bodies, but no matter how gross, we can't stop looking. Newton, as we know from his Teutonic nudes, had a well-distributed appetite for female flesh. It's not hard to imagine him sensing a subversive treat lurking in the Iron Lady's silk blouses -- or, as Mr. Jacobs said, ''It's that uptight blouse with a healthy bosom.''
Certainly in Mr. Jacobs's fur-collared coats and amber mink jackets -- with their three-quarter-length sleeves and big buttons -- one sensed a lot of Ms. Feinstein, and his friend, Sofia Coppola, both of whom have a style that rigorously plays against type.
Taken literally, the collection would look dowdy (and some of the prints screamed airline counter agent). But when you consider the subversive quality of Mr. Jacobs's own eye, and the times we live in, a tweed skirt worn with a caramel-colored lace top, or a scoop-neck pink dress sashed with a dotty ribbon begins to look sexy. And you can't beat the disarming simplicity of a wrap dress in mushroom-brown jersey with floppy mink hat and soft ringlet curls.
