Instead of the usual Harvard student's account of the period, with an uninspiring recitation of classes, chapel and walks about Cambridge, the diary contained a lock of chestnut brown hair, a cluster of pressed flowers and a handwritten poem of worshipful love and inconsolable loss.
Brian A. Sullivan was working as Harvard's senior reference archivist when he randomly pulled down a box of 19th-century student journals and was left spellbound by an extraordinarily vivid love story.
The inscription beneath the lock of hair read: ''Katie Loring's hair. Jan. 22, 1857.'' The poem, which began with a verse about ''a lovely girlish head, with falling tresses fair,'' and ended with ''a mother's dying head/ alone with a lock of hair,'' was dated March 13, 1894. Who was Katie Loring? Who was this Harvard student who had loved and lost her? What had happened between 1857 and 1894?
Leafing through the pages, Mr. Sullivan learned that the student diarist was Francis Ellingwood Abbot, class of 1859. Katie Loring was the soulful 17-year-old girl he had met at a party in Concord on Jan. 7, 1857 (''I thought of her all night instead of going to sleep. If there ever was a fool, his name was Frank Abbot''), and married three years later. Mr. Abbot had pasted the lock of young Katie Loring's hair in his journal, with his poem, after her death.
Standing in the vast underground archives, just across Harvard Yard from Hollis Hall, where Mr. Abbot had begun his journal as a freshman on Aug. 30, 1855 (''today I begin the first term of my freshman year, and at the same time, a new era in my life''), Mr. Sullivan could not put the journal down. While the entry from Dec. 25, 1856, concerned Mr. Abbot's lively conversation in Concord about poetry with one Henry David Thoreau, ''somewhat known for his writings,'' the journal Mr. Sullivan held was, more than anything, a record of a pure and all-consuming love.
''It was like a novel,'' Mr. Sullivan said, recalling that first glimpse, in the spring of 1996, of the story that he would spend the next several years plumbing. ''I was just stunned by the quality of the writing. He used dialogue, quoting his own words and those around him. That's an unusual component of any diary from any era.''
Last week Regan Books published the Victorian love story, ''If Ever Two Were One,'' that is Mr. Sullivan's compilation of those diaries, and of the hundreds of letters the lovers exchanged, from their courtship through 34 years of married life.
This is a love story with a tragic ending: on Oct. 22, 1903, 10 years to the day after Katie died, at 54, Frank Abbot, still heartbroken, committed suicide by swallowing poison on her grave, in Beverly, Mass.
A compulsive diarist to the end, he left his suicide note pasted in his final journal. ''I do not fall out of this world by accident as a lunatic,'' he wrote. ''I do not sneak out of it as a coward. I go out of it as a free and proud soul, with open eyes, at the command of honor and love.''
Frank Abbot, a teacher, minor philosopher and Unitarian minister, left three children. One of his two sons, Edward Stanley Abbot, a psychiatrist, donated the student journal to the archives here in 1941. Later, other family members donated 34 more journals, and the love letters.
While earlier readers of the journals were primarily interested in Mr. Abbot's philosophy, which has been described as second generation Transcendentalism, or ''free religion,'' it fell to Mr. Sullivan, 37, a self-professed hopeless romantic, to appreciate Frank and Katie's love story. ''For Frank, Katie's love was confirmation that God existed,'' Mr. Sullivan said, adding that as an archivist he deeply appreciated Mr. Abbot's ''drive to document the workings of his heart.''
Mr. Abbot, the Boston-born son of an educator, was the author of several books of philosophy, but they were not well received, according to Mr. Sullivan, and he struggled, as a minister and as a teacher, to provide for his family. In the end, Mr. Sullivan said, Frank Abbot's greatest achievements -- and greatest joys -- were his diaries and his marriage to Katie.
In his student journal, nine days after meeting the pale, hazel-eyed Katie Loring, he wrote, ''Katie is in my head the whole while, and I cannot bear to think of never seeing her again. ''
Courting at the house in Concord, Mass., where Katie's family were lodgers, the young lovers sat by the fire reading Milton and Byron aloud to each other. On Jan. 25, 1857, three weeks after they met, they became engaged, and on Aug. 3, 1859, shortly after Frank graduated from Harvard, they were secretly married by a minister in Nashua, N.H.
Not long afterward, Katie moved with her parents to Winona, Minn., and in May 1860, she gave birth to the couple's first child, Ethel, who died two months later of cholera.
''Our little one is no more,'' Katie wrote to Frank on July 30. ''Weep, Frank, weep!''
''My noble, darling wife,'' he wrote on Aug. 3 from Cambridge, where he was in his first year at Harvard Divinity School. ''Oh, how my soul is rent with fear and anguish for you, poor childless mother!''
Over the years, four other children would die, two at birth and two in infancy. Katie was often bedridden, and they never had much money, but the love between Frank and Katie remained steadfast.
''Today is the 20th anniversary of our marriage,'' Frank wrote in his journal on Aug. 3, 1879. ''Katie covered me with kisses and smiles this morning.''
''While she rested upstairs after dinner, I wrote her a letter in the garden, as a memento,'' he went on. ''She read it (I was my own postman!), and said, with her eyes full of tears, 'You have made my whole life very happy!'''
By the fall of 1893, Katie was dying. ''Tonight after tea, kneeling before her in her own arm-chair, I asked Katie if she loved me as well as she did in our first days of engagement,'' Frank wrote in his journal on Oct. 21, ''and, throwing her arms around my back, she kissed me and said, 'Yes, better, far better.'''
''So I love you; and you have been just the best wife that ever was.''
''And you,'' she replied with tears in her eyes, ''have been as good and true as any mortal could be.''
Two days later, Frank wrote: ''My darling dies.''
