THE WINEMAKER'S DAUGHTER  By Timothy Egan  305 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
Timothy Egan is one of life's right-thinking optimists, well aware of the warping power of greed, pride and the whole array of deadly sins but pulled by lodestone force to tales of ultimate ethical triumph. He is also a skilled correspondent for The New York Times with a deeply informed understanding of how people inhabit place, and he has shown his talents in documentary works like ''Lasso the Wind: Away to the New West'' and ''The Good Rain: Across Time and Terrain in the Pacific Northwest.''
Now in ''The Winemaker's Daughter'' Mr. Egan has channeled his energies and preoccupations into the form of the novel, creating an elaborate skein of situations that allow him to approach his subject using character and the contrivances of plot. The shift to invention is not entirely smooth, alas. The voice of his intentions -- which are compellingly cautionary but also at times didactic -- is a bit louder than the conversation of his people. This is a more abstract way of saying that his characters are not quite real enough yet. They are strong templates, interesting possibilities, but the strong hand of premise holds them back.
Mr. Egan's narrative scheme does double duty. On one hand it creates the armature of event, the complicated play of cause and effect that drives the characters and links them to a layered social and political reality. On the other it makes overt the philosophical-ecological understanding that is, in a sense, the message of the novel, that the world is a living web.
At the center of the web we find the Cartolano family, winegrowers living in eastern Washington State on land made fruitful by the public works triumph of the Grand Coulee Dam. Angelo, the paterfamilias, immigrated to America as a boy and after long years of hard work made his reputation growing a fine nebbiolo grape. He is the rough-hewn lover of the land now looking to hand his legacy along.
As the novel opens, family and friends are gathered on the estate for a seasonal celebration. The daughter, Brunella, has driven in from Seattle, where she works for an elusive billionaire developer, drawing up the impact statements he needs to speed his projects along. Passionate, idealistic, outspoken, she will be the focus of the story.
But there are others at table. Angelo's son Niccolo and his friend Teddy have stopped in before heading off to work as firefighting smoke jumpers; his old cronies are there to offer crusty jibes. Guests eat and drink, and when Niccolo gets up to announce that he wants to return home to take the helm with Angelo, the old man is overjoyed. ''Wine is,'' he declares, ''a living thing, a companion. With Niccolo's promise just now, we will not be without our companion for another 60 years.'' If readers find themselves casting Anthony Quinn for the part, they may be forgiven.
Mr. Egan's opening conveys a communal relishing of what has been as well a tremor of anxious expectation. For of course we know that the fates must intervene. In the festive chatter comes word of spreading wildfires in the vicinity, and there are inklings of unrest about the water supply. But as Angelo might say, Domani.
As ''The Winemaker's Daughter'' sets up a narrative ecology of interconnectedness, economical summary is impossible. Suffice it to say that crisis and tragedy quickly crowd out everything else. Soon after a deadly firefighting disaster, Leon Treadtoofar, a forest service investigator, starts tracing suspicious leads and finds that local Indians have been buying up much of the area's available water for a casino project. Could they also be diverting other supplies illegally from local aquifers?
As in Roman Polanski's film ''Chinatown,'' which also turns on the mysterious whereabouts of water, everything starts to connect. What Brunella discovers when the veils are yanked away is a conspiracy that ties together ancient feuds among fishing families, spawning habits of salmon, big city development schemes and complex tribal subterfuge. Behind everything is the familiar specter of human greed.
But if Mr. Polanski pushed into darkness and left us with a vision of the ultimate obscurity of human motivation, Mr. Egan goes quite the other way. For this author the villainy is identifiable, explicable and correctable. Once the dramas are played out, reparations are made, and the balance swings right again. Here, in the tying up of threads and the scrupulous meting out of deserved fates, a certain credibility gets lost.
But maybe I am imposing a demanding literary expectation on a work that has other aspirations. Certainly ''The Winemaker's Daughter'' is a good read, showcasing Mr. Egan's lived-in sense of place as well as his knowledge of wine culture. The prose is often evocative, though he is more at ease with topographies than with psychology. His simplified characterizations, the intensifications of coincidence and the neatness of the denouement leave us entertained and morally instructed, but if the novel were a wine, I would have to say it lacks a lingering finish.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES Sven Birkerts is the author of ''My Sky Blue Trades: Growing Up Counter in a Contrary Time.''
