SOMEWHERE around 9:40 p.m., our waiter at Union Pacific presented us with a large piece of steak covered in the ashes of burnt hay. It was nestled in a bed of hay in a copper casserole.
We were all excited. It signaled the arrival of our main courses, one hour and 40 minutes after we had been seated. Unfortunately, the steak was returned to the kitchen to await the other main courses, which finally made their way to the table at 10.
At 11:15, we dragged ourselves out of Union Pacific, wondering who was minding the kitchen.
The unevenness of the cooking I sampled over four visits brought up the same question. Is Rocco DiSpirito, the chef, spending more time at Rocco's on 22nd Street, his television-created spaghetti parlor, than at his premier restaurant, which opened in 1997?
To Mr. DiSpirito's credit, he has completed a pleasing remodeling job, making what was a cold, uninviting space into something warm and welcoming, with lighting that makes everyone look good.
Shades of red are everywhere: plum walls, raspberry upholstery on the chairs, a wonderfully glittery red wall hanging.
The room looks cheerful during the day and romantic at night. The waterfall up front, which used to annoy, now seems soothing.
There is ample room between tables. (But when you book a table, ask for the main dining room. Upstairs is definitely Siberia.)
Plenty of thought has gone into the experience of eating at Union Pacific. Some touches are nice, others pretentious. If you ask for the label from a wine bottle, it comes laminated in a folded card. Silver cloches cover main dishes (sadly, many are dented).
And while the notion of a prix fixe meal is sometimes interesting, it can be oppressive. (In two weeks, Mr. DiSpirito said, he plans to offer a regular menu in addition to the prix fixe one.)
The upper third of the kitchen is enclosed in glass, some of it wavy and some clear, so that only the cooks' heads are clearly visible. This arrangement adds an air of mystery to the proceedings inside.
With good reason, it turns out. Some of the food is spectacular, a sophisticated blend of ingredients in unexpected ways, like fluke carpaccio drizzled with sweet cashew purée and a coriander vinaigrette. This dish is the work of a creative chef with a finely honed palate. But some seem poorly thought out, like turkey schnitzel, and even seem as if no one had tasted them before putting them on the menu.
When Mr. DiSpirito is on, he turns out little triumphs -- for instance, succulently sweet scallops with sea urchin, a touch of heat from mustard oil and a touch of acid from tomato water. It is one of his simplest dishes. Crispy eel, the eel smoked and then breaded and fried, its richness set off by the acidity of grapefruit and a black sesame vinaigrette, was nearly perfect.
I liked, too, a chicken terrine with the deep flavor of roasted wing meat, served with a buttermilk sauce infused with lemon grass and chives.
The point-counterpoint effectiveness of these dishes was carried through in many of the menu offerings, as in sautéed sweetbreads with green cauliflower, Meyer lemon and pickled onions. Poached lobster, served at an additional charge, was sublimely sweet and tender and paired with puréed purple cauliflower, collard greens and a pork belly, coated in cornmeal and fried. A Thai basil oil added a marvelous anise flavor to duck. Short ribs of beef braised in a Cognac- and date-flavored liquid were raised to new heights.
And all the fish are cooked sous vide (in a vacuum-packed bag), which makes them exquisitely tender and sweet. Their sauces were keen, too, save for one with black cod -- a mango, rice-wine vinegar and chili number cooked so long it tasted like barbecue sauce.
But that showstopper rib-eye steak, with all its bells and whistles, did not rise above decent. Rabbit served three ways was in all ways cold. A flatiron steak, which at one meal was perfectly fine, arrived at another oversalted to a point that rendered it inedible. And that turkey schnitzel proved to be two paillards of turkey breast with anchovies and capers slathered between them and then fried. It might as well have been a fried-fish fillet. A potato pancake with crab meat and reconstituted dried shrimp sounded good and looked it, too, but the gorgeous crust belied an uncooked interior.
There were problems with the soups, too. One was carrot and tasted like hot carrot juice. Another, a ginger-turnip creation, seemed to have lost track of its turnips, tasting only of ginger.
Of the 11 desserts I tasted, only three were worthy of attention and the calories. Tangerine crème brûlée was the perfect blending of silkiness and flavor, the crust just the right thickness for a burnt-sugar topping. (The clementine sorbet accompanying it was a gilding of no consequence and little flavor.) Partners for life, chocolate and hazelnut combine delightfully in a frozen hazelnut parfait, sitting on a toffee meringue. Delicious.
And molten chocolate cake arrived unbidden, as it is apparently supposed to at every table but doesn't always. Now relegated to the unenviable position once held by tiramisù -- been there, done that -- it is still wanted by diners at Union Pacific, so it comes as a freebie. It is nonetheless one of the better desserts.
The dessert menu is the reason restaurants that charge $68 for a prix fixe meal should have a pastry chef.
Union Pacific  ** [rating: two stars]  111 East 22nd Street; (212) 995-8500.
ATMOSPHERE -- Warm and inviting.  SOUND LEVEL -- When crowded, the music becomes overbearing.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Bay scallops; fluke carpaccio; crispy eel; roasted-beet salad; chicken terrine; foie gras cru; baby-lettuce salad; hot and sour beef soup; mushroom bouillon; pappardelle; chicken terrine; crispy sweetbreads; sautéed skate; hake; wild striped bass; duck; braised short ribs; slow-poached lobster; sauteéd baby spinach; potato soufflé; tangerine crème brûlée; chocolate hazelnut parfait; molten chocolate cake.  SERVICE -- Professional, with slips.  WINE LIST -- Well-priced and expansive.  HOURS -- Lunch, Monday to Friday, 12 p.m. to 2:30 p.m.; dinner, Monday to Friday, 5:30 p.m. to 10:30 p.m.; Saturday, 5:15 p.m. to 11:30 p.m.  PRICE RANGE -- Three-course prix fixe menu, $68; five-course prix fixe menu, $75. Appetizers, $14 to $24; entrees, $24 to $39; desserts, $11. Pretheater three-course dinner until 6 p.m. and all night Monday, $30.04. Three-course lunch, $20.04.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Everything on one floor.
RESTAURANTS
