It is the question everyone in swimming is asking:
What is the number?
Not a lottery or a Powerball number, but the number of gold medals the American wunderkind Michael Phelps will win, or try to win, at the Athens Olympics in August.
Phelps, 18, and his coach, Bob Bowman, know what they want to do. They are not broadcasting it, but they have always been ambitious and always successful. So if all goes right for Phelps, he could match or surpass Mark Spitz's 1972 achievement of seven gold medals in seven Olympic finals.
In last summer's world championships in Barcelona, Spain, Phelps won four gold medals and two silvers. A week later, in the United States summer championships in College Park, Md., he won 5 of the 14 individual gold medals, the first man to achieve that in one nationals.
He is here for the ConocoPhillips United States spring championships, which started Tuesday in the Y.M.C.A. 50-meter pool. He plans to swim the trials and finals in five races: the 100 freestyle and the 200 backstroke Wednesday, the 200 freestyle Thursday, the 100 butterfly Friday and the 200 individual medley Saturday. He is favored in all but the 100 freestyle.
He is passing up the 200 butterfly and the 400 individual medley. He holds the world record in each.
His races here will help him prepare for the meet that will define his future: not the Olympics, but the United States Olympic trials, July 7 to 14 in Long Beach, Calif. That is when Phelps and Bowman have to declare their Olympic goals.
Bowman, 38, coaches Phelps, a Baltimore native, and the 17 other elite senior swimmers of the North Baltimore Aquatic Club.
''We have a very good idea of our Olympic program,'' Bowman said. ''We have a Plan A, a Plan B and a Plan C. Plan A is pretty strong and fairly ambitious, in line with his top level of capabilities. I think Plan A makes sense. Something has to go wrong for us to go to Plan B or C.''
What can go wrong?
''He's got to stay healthy,'' Bowman said. ''He's got to stay in the right frame of mind. He needs breaks. If he swims in Olympic relays, the relay team has to win. If he's injured, we might have to throw out an event.''
That is as far as Bowman will go.
''I won't say what each plan is,'' he said, ''because we want to avoid further pressure on him. I'm not sure he thinks about it too much.''
In a separate interview after a workout Tuesday morning, Phelps agreed.
''If you get caught up in it, your mind will take over and control you,'' he said. ''I have to make sure I'm in control.
''I have a lot of options, and that makes it more exciting. I think it's good to have so many options so I can keep everything open and play it by ear.''
Phelps figures to try to win gold medals in 8 of the 16 Olympic events for men: the 100 and 200 butterfly, the 200 and 400 individual medley, the 200 freestyle and all three relays. In the United States Olympic trials, he would have to swim those five individual events and the 100 freestyle (to qualify for one relay).
Bowman has coached Phelps for seven years. Both are easygoing.
Bowman said: ''On most days, he's easy to coach, but maybe once every six weeks or six months he isn't. I think fatigue causes it. When he was young, fatigue was caused by a growth spurt. He'd be difficult for a week or two. Then I'd look and he's two inches taller. He's still growing. Between May and September last year, he grew an inch.''
The 6-foot-4 1/2 Phelps has an ideal build for a swimmer: wide shoulders, big chest, narrow waist and big feet (size 14). He said his weight, 190 to 195 pounds, was just right because ''you need muscle.''
He has been putting that muscle to good use. For the last six weeks, Bowman said, ''I've been working the daylight out of him.''
That's fine with Phelps.
''I'm happy with the way things are going,'' he said. ''I'm excited just to get in the water and race again.''
SPLASHES
The five-day championships began Tuesday with finals in the 800-meter freestyle. LARSEN JENSEN, 18, the defending champion, won the men's race by eight meters in 7 minutes 53.29 seconds, and SACHIKO YAMADA, 21, took the women's race by 17 meters in 8:25.62, a Japanese record. Both train in Mission Viejo, Calif. . . . Most of the nation's best noncollegiate swimmers are here, including AMANDA BEARD, LINDSAY BENKO, DIANA MUNZ, LENNY KRAYZELBURG, TOM MALCHOW, CHAD CARVIN and JASON LEZAK. Collegians like NATALIE COUGHLIN, AARON PEIRSOL and IAN CROCKER, all world gold medalists, are preparing for the N.C.A.A. championships next month.
SWIMMING
