The worst by far would seem to have been the Internet cannibal, though the beating and murder of a three-year old child whose father intended to crucify her, the videotaped torture of a high school student, the bludgeoning to death of a youth because he was wearing clothes that, his murderers felt, made him look like a Jew -- these incidents too have lately made Germany appear to be a sort of European center for gothic crime, or at least a place of concentrated tabloid sensationalism.
The lurid quality of a few recent crimes in Germany might even make you wonder if the country really deserves its reputation as a well-ordered and low-crime sort of place, though, in truth, Germany is well-ordered and low-crime. Could it be that a kind of horror-film virus has been breeding in the country's thick forests, or someplace in the culture, and has given rise to an especially gruesome series of crimes?
To many Germans today, something clearly is amiss, but it has nothing to do with cannibalism, even though a recent case, in which a man killed and ate an eagerly assenting victim, attracted a great deal of notice. Whatever the morbid fascination generated by that story, it hasn't been taken here as a sign of anything in particular about Germany. One cannibal every hundred years or so might be a particularly vivid illustration of the Freudian death wish, but it implies nothing about the national character six decades after World War II.
But some of the other episodes of sadistic violence and murder do seem to mix elements -- ethnic alienation, youthful hopelessness, violent, technology-inspired fantasy lives -- that suggest, if not a national pathology, certainly a national problem. The police in the state of Lower Saxony suspect a connection between the cannibal case and an instance of high school violence that has aroused a great deal of concern in Germany.
A group of mostly immigrant teenagers in the city of Hildesheim brutally tortured a fellow student over a period of some 17 weeks and, like the cannibal, a computer technician named Armin Meiwes, videotaped their actions, which included forcing their victim to lick their shoes and to brush his teeth with household cleanser. The police believe that the idea of videotaping the torture sessions was inspired by an offer to Mr. Meiwes, made by an unidentified American, of a million dollars for his cannibalism film.
''They thought, 'Maybe if we make a film, we can make some money, too,' '' Christian Pfeiffer, a former state justice minister who is now director of the Criminology Institute of Lower Saxony, said in a telephone interview.
Mr. Pfeiffer, who has researched violence and crime among school-age people in Germany, argues that, in contrast to the cannibalism incident, the Hildesheim torture case reflects something all too common in German society. It is the existence of despairing young people, many of them immigrants or the children of immigrants, who are not doing well in school, feel alienated and unwanted in Germany and are resentful of their German classmates. Mr. Pfeiffer emphasized that this school-age subculture feeds on a steady diet of horror films and extremely violent video games that encourages them to be hard and pitiless themselves.
Here, perhaps, is the hidden secret of prosperous, smoothly functioning, highly pacifist, even moralistic Germany -- a sadistic youth subculture born out of a wider failure to provide opportunities for young immigrants. All but 2 of the 11 boys who tortured their classmate in Hildesheim came from Turkey or from the republics of the former Soviet Union. The boys implicated in the Hildesheim case were all students at a hauptschule, or vocational school, the lower tier of the German secondary school systemthat channels young people into the working class.
According to Mr. Pfeiffer's research, nearly two-thirds of school violence in Germany is committed by boys like the ones at Hildesheim, immigrant children who feel they have no future in Germany and take their anger out on nonimmigrant Germans. And then there is the connection with violent videos and games. To be sure, not all experts agree that violence in entertainment leads to violence in life, but Mr. Pfeiffer is convinced of a connection.
''All they do after school is go home and watch films, or play those video games that are supposedly forbidden to children under 18,'' Mr. Pfeiffer said, referring to a German rating system that bans minors from having access to especially violent films or games. Students at the vocational school level like those from Hildesheim commonly finish school at noon and return to homes where there is no adult supervision.
''And watching these kinds of horror and action films every day develops a macho image as a winner image,'' Mr. Pfeiffer said. ''You identify yourself with the kind of man who feels no emotions, shows no remorse.''
What makes the recent, extraordinary violence particularly disturbing is the seemingly irrational cause: not money or revenge or a barroom quarrel run amok, but a sort of free-floating cruelty, an unmodulated will to inflict suffering. Disturbing too is a possible copycat quality to some of the crimes. The killers in two recent murder cases seemed to imitate a scene in the movie ''American History X,'' starring Ed Norton, in which a racist bigot kills a victim by putting his face against a curb and stomping on his head.
This was the nature of the attack in the small town of Burg two weeks ago, when a group of five young men killed a 46-year-old man who had served an 18-month sentence after molesting his own daughter. A similar attack took place last year in the town of Potzlow, in the former East Germany, where three neo-Nazis murdered a 17-year-old, after forcing him to confess that the clothing he wore made him look like a Jew.
The odd thing is that, over all, violent crime, always much less than in the United States, has gone down substantially in recent years, including crime committed by immigrants. The difference is that some of the crime that is committed is so psychologically extreme.
Mr. Pfeiffer gives the example of another case of school torture in Lower Saxony a couple of years ago in which mostly German-born boys were beaten up on their birthdays by mostly immigrant classmates.
''The beatings went on for four months,'' Mr. Pfeiffer said, ''and nobody said a thing.''
LETTER FROM EUROPE
