In two weeks, the HBO series ''Sex and the City'' will become part of television's past, and with it will go a certain fantasy of what it means to get dressed in New York. The fantasy had little do with the clothes actually worn in the show, which often must have seemed as ludicrous to viewers on West 94th Street as they did to those in Tallahassee. For every time Carrie Bradshaw hailed a taxi in a perfect Oscar de la Renta cocktail dress, there were occasions on which she left home looking like a World War I nurse or an inverted potted plant or a lamentable collision between Fidel Castro and the Hindu goddess Lakshmi.
But she tried, with love and credit cards, and so did her three best friends, in a city where trying, sartorially speaking, is not much demanded. You don't have to look whimsical to eat a hamburger in Greenwich Village or put on a full-length satin skirt for your very first dinner at your new boyfriend's apartment, but what would happen if you did? The fashion in ''Sex and the City'' rooted the show in a sense of optimism about romance at near middle age, but more than that, it paid homage to New York as a city rife with quotidian pleasures. Every time one of the show's heroines went out in something breathtakingly pretty, recherché or both, she seemed to be honoring her good fortune in living here.
It is just that spirit that should animate New York designers, both fledgling and established, and yet it so infrequently does. Yesterday morning, Michael Vollbracht showed his second collection for Bill Blass, a label once synonymous with the joys of Manhattan but now resonating with a mood of somewhere very far away. Mr. Vollbracht interprets New York through the eyes of someone who comes to visit, bringing with him preconceived notions of the city as a sort of Las Vegas East. Mr. Blass delivered highflying clothes but always with corrective doses of sobriety that inoculated them against accusations of glitziness. Yesterday, Mr. Vollbracht delivered leopard prints on a dancing Pat Cleveland and brocade, not in a solo performance, but accompanied by fox trim. A black lace dress was forced to bear the weight, soap-opera heavy, of an ostrich feather stole.
Like Mr. Vollbracht, Douglas Hannant dresses social figures, though in a way that seems to pander to the worst stereotypes of the terribly well-to-do. The clothes drip with the vast expense of their own creation. Beaded pants come with beaded coats and, again, ostrich feathers. Fur (specifically lipicat -- what is that?), napa leather and tulle were commingled in single look. Here was the image of a woman who did little but spend her money -- or someone's.
There was a lifelessness also in the clothes that Badgley Mischka showed on Monday. A study in cold silvery gray and blue, the clothes were endlessly bejeweled, but how was anyone to have a moment's fun in them? Again, the point in wearing the dresses was to show the world that you could afford to buy them.
Donna Karan's show for DKNY did pay tribute to New York in the form of a backdrop depicting a dusky Central Park. Ms. Karan's heart was in the right place in that she was trying to cater to the way real young women dress, mixing heavy tights with flimsy handkerchief skirts, throwing shearling over something in silk or satin. Sometimes her colors were off, as in an acid-green evening dress, and things seemed too much a hodgepodge, but no one on the runway looked as if she was aiming to work for or marry Donald Trump.
Luella Bartley's clothes yesterday betrayed an unusual cheerfulness. Her sensibility is a girlish one, yet she keeps from getting cute. She showed slim jeans and pretty, above-the-knee dresses that could trace their lineage, but not egregiously so, to Ossie Clark. Wingtips were a pleasure to see.
Lunchtime yesterday marked the runway debut of Cindy Greene and Johnson Hartig, who have attracted the attention of Barneys and Mick Jagger with a line called Libertine. When Ms. Greene is not designing clothes -- plaids printed with maple leafs, short skirts with unfinished hems, jackets with dangling neckties -- she is part of the aggressively pretentious art-world band Fischerspooner. The team's clothes are not all that original in their sense of the alternative -- cropped pants and argyle socks with silver stilettos (very Carrie Bradshaw) -- but their devotion to quirkiness seemed exactly what has been missing from the New York shows so far. The finale? Bagpipes.
