So 'Barbarella the Sequel' Is Out?
JANE FONDA received an award from V-Day, an organization fighting to end violence against women and girls, at a fund-raising event at Barneys the other night.
We do not wish to focus on the superficial, but we must say that Ms. Fonda, who is 66 and was being honored for her work in support of the group, looked fit enough to star in one of her videos: Glowing and energetic, with just a touch of crow's-foot.
(We say this not in criticism or ageism, but rather in acceptance of the aging process, which comes to us all, followed by a lack of professional and romantic opportunities. So it's probably better if you've got some kind of settlement from a mogul like TED TURNER.)
''This is the center of everything, this issue,'' Ms. Fonda told the audience, which included EVE ENSLER, the playwright and founder of V-Day, and the singer TONI CHILDS.
''This is as old as agriculture. This goes back to the time when men saw women as property and saw themselves as above somebody else. And it was usually women. It's a paradigm that's as toxic for men as it is for women.''
There is an unspoken contract when a celebrity wants to discuss a big issue. (And when you hear ''paradigm,'' it's gonna be a big issue.) The celebrity, who has been used to draw reporters to the event, must still be asked first about the issue, though both parties know what the reporter wants to know about is the celebrity's love life. The celebrity then coughs up a few personal tidbits.
Living up to our responsibilities, we asked Ms. Fonda if there had been a personal reason she had become involved with the cause.
Ms. Fonda took some time to think about it.
''I'm writing my memoirs,'' she said. ''And, in the course of that, I realize that my life has been determined by issues of sexuality and gender and the pressure that's put on women to please. And that is what draws me to this movement. Why women are objectified and told they have to be perfect. And then there's the physical violence.''
The coat is over her arm. We have to get to it fast. After 14 years, Ms. Fonda has returned to making movies and will be shooting ''Monster-In-Law'' with JENNIFER LOPEZ, we begin. ''Oh, I'm not talking about that,'' Ms. Fonda says, and she's off.
Thanks, Mom
The Drama League honored ANTONIO BANDERAS and MELANIE GRIFFITH at a dinner at the Pierre Hotel on Monday night. The couple, who left their respective Broadway shows, ''Nine'' and ''Chicago,'' on the same day this fall, came in from their home in L.A. for the event.
Ms. Griffith, looking blond and glamorous, wore a black gown and had a sprinkling of glitter on her shoulders. And, of course, there was the heart-shaped tattoo that says ''Antonio.'' Mr. Banderas wore a black turtleneck and jacket. Both wore heels, though Ms. Griffith's were considerably higher.
Among the performers were CHRISTINE EBERSOLE, KAREN ZIEMBA, DAPHNE RUBIN-VEGA, TONYA PINKINS, CHITA RIVERA and HOWARD McGILLIN.
When the cast of ''Nine'' sang the overture, Mr. Banderas wiped away tears with a handkerchief. Addressing the crowd later, Mr. Banderas, sniffling audibly, repeatedly used the word love: love of the theater, love of the cast, love of ''the woman across the street in 'Chicago.' ''
''The first time I came to your city was 20 years ago,'' Mr. Banderas said, of his shyness about his English. ''I was so scared. I used to go to a little market around the corner from the hotel to buy some salami and cheese and finally I decided in an act of superhuman courage to go into the streets and very soon I realized that half these people speak my language.''
He was followed by the teary Ms. Griffith.
''All my life I have dreamed of being on Broadway but at 45 I figured I had pretty much blown it,'' Ms. Griffith said, in her little girl voice. ''I never thought that I could sing, because even my kids, once they could actually speak, they would cover their ears and say, 'No, please, Mommy, don't sing.' And then BEN BRANTLEY wrote that I was sensational.''
The audience roared. Ms. Griffith followed it with a statement you don't hear from a mother very often. ''As a matter of fact, they didn't like my cooking either,'' she said. ''Maybe I should open a restaurant.''
with Joe Brescia
Boldface Names
