As Siddiq Barmak describes it, his first face-to-face encounter with the Taliban in 1996 was almost more farcical than frightening, like something out of ''Dr. Strangelove'' or the Three Stooges.
Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, had just fallen to the Taliban, and a group of Islamic fundamentalist soldiers ransacking Mr. Barmak's house came across one of his most treasured possessions, a battered 8-millimeter movie projector.
One soldier, he recalled, cried out: ''We've found it! The radio he is using to send messages to the enemy.'' Mr. Barmak protested vehemently, telling the soldiers that it was not a radio, just an old movie projector.
''So another of them, he thinks about this,'' Mr. Barmak remembered.
''And he says, 'Even worse.'
''And then he took his rifle, and he shot the projector.''
Recounting this one recent morning, bleary from too little sleep and walking barefoot around a half-darkened Upper East Side hotel room, he smiled a sad smile and shook his head. He was in New York for the opening of his first feature-length film, ''Osama,'' which opened Friday in New York and Los Angeles.
The story of his confrontation with the Taliban could almost serve as the paradigm for his life. Since he saw his first film, ''Lawrence of Arabia,'' at a Kabul theater in 1967, when he was 5, his obsession was to make movies. He collected and spliced together scraps of 35-millimeter film thrown out by movie houses. He built a miniature movie theater from cardboard boxes to entertain his friends. He even wrote, edited and designed his own film magazine, a kind of Central Asian version of Cahiers du Cinema, though its only reader, really, was Siddiq Barmak.
But all of his adult life he has lived in, or had to flee from, a country in a perpetual state of war, where day-to-day existence was hard enough. Making something as extravagant as a movie -- finding the money, the actors, decent cameras and lights -- was next to impossible. So it is particularly gratifying for Mr. Barmak, at 41, to be receiving so much attention for ''Osama,'' the first movie to be shot in Afghanistan since the fall of the Taliban in November 2001. The film, which tells the story of a girl in Kabul who passes herself off as a boy in order to work, won a Golden Globe award last month for best foreign-language film and also earned a special mention at Cannes last year.
While the awards have been unexpected gifts, Mr. Barmak said he was happier and more amazed that the movie was being shown in Kabul theaters, including the one where he saw his first movie, and that the country's interim government had embraced it. ''We are not only happy,'' Sayed Mahkdoom Raheen, Afghanistan's information and culture minister, said recently, ''but this is a source of pride for us.''
The words stand in stark contrast to Mr. Barmak's previous experiences with his country's officials. A short documentary and a short film he made were banned by the Soviet-supported government of the 1980's. The documentary, about a maimed soldier, so angered officials, he was ordered into the army and sent to the front, where he promptly defected and joined the mujahedeen, or holy warriors, who later forced the Soviet withdrawal.
''All my life I had the madness of this cinema, but I could never make a real film,'' said Mr. Barmak, who began studying English only two years ago, mostly by watching American movies and television, and is remarkably adept at speaking it. ''Finally I was able to make my dream.''
Filmed over the course of a year on a budget of $21,000, provided mostly by the Iranian director Mohsen Makhmalbaf, the movie used only amateur actors, including Marina Golbahari, a striking 12-year-old whom Mr. Barmak first saw begging near the theater where he had seen ''Lawrence of Arabia.'' (''This theater, it is very important to me obviously,'' he said, smiling.)
Throughout the movie Marina's face manages to convey rage, sadness and fear almost simultaneously, an ability Mr. Barmak said he recognized in her immediately and strongly identified with.
As the only son of a police officer, he said, his early life was middle class and relatively comfortable, but that changed when the Soviet Union invaded in 1979. His father was forced to flee, and it was 12 years before the family saw him again. Though Mr. Barmak hated the Soviet occupation, he accepted a scholarship to attend film school in Moscow because he knew it was the only way he would ever learn to make movies.
After returning to Kabul in 1987 and joining the anti-Soviet guerrillas, he began an itinerant existence that lasted for years, serving as an aide to Ahmed Shah Massoud, the legendary mujahedeen commander who was killed by Al Qaeda operatives two days before Sept. 11, 2001.
''My gun was my camera,'' Mr. Barmak said, explaining that he had helped form a documentary film unit for the guerrillas at Mr. Massoud's request. Though he was often in danger, witnessing ferocious fighting, and was constantly on the move, he said he was still able to pursue his passion for movies, in large part because Mr. Massoud himself was a film buff. Mr. Massoud, known as the Lion of the Panjshir, told Mr. Barmak that he had written a screenplay that he hoped to see filmed one day, and he also kept a huge library of videotapes of classic American, French, Italian and Iranian movies in a house in Takhar Province in northeastern Afghanistan.
''I saw for the first time 'Casablanca' there and also Oliver Stone film 'Platoon' and 'Spartacus,' '' Mr. Barmak said, adding that besides watching soccer matches, one of Mr. Massoud's favorite pastimes was watching ''Spartacus.''
''It was his favorite film,'' he said. ''He loved this film actually.''
In 1990 Mr. Massoud gave Mr. Barmak's filmmaking team permission to go to Pakistan to try to find financing for a feature film. The trip was harrowing, and while crossing a mountain pass in a snowstorm the group almost froze to death, Mr. Barmak said. In the end, despite all their effort and risk, they came up empty, and Mr. Barmak had to wait another 12 years before he made his first feature film.
After fleeing the Taliban in 1996 he knew he wanted to make a movie about the devastating effect of its takeover. In the two weeks in which he remained in Kabul after the Taliban took control, he witnessed the city's rapid retreat into a kind of premodernity and the oppression that immediately descended on women. His feelings about the Taliban's rule are also intensely personal: with an attack imminent he, his wife, his young daughter and his newborn son were forced to flee on foot from an anti-Taliban stronghold and walk more than 50 miles before finding help.
''My son was near to die,'' he said, his face flashing anger even now. ''It was very, very hot.''
He added: ''I remember that the first word my son said in his life was not 'father' or 'mother' but 'bomb' because we were always talking about bombing. Even now he is afraid of noise from airplanes.''
Mr. Barmak said he found himself in a strange position as he promoted his movie recently in Los Angeles and New York. ''Osama,'' which is being distributed by United Artists, has received a warm critical reception in the United States.
But Mr. Barmak said he felt strongly that the United States was pursuing a misguided policy in Afghanistan, attacking terrorism with military force but not committing nearly enough resources to rebuilding the country and relieving the abject poverty.
''Who are these terrorists?'' he asked. ''They are poor people, and they are getting poorer.''
''I'm angry with you,'' he added, referring to the United States.
In many ways a sense of anger suffuses ''Osama.'' But the film also has moving scenes in which its characters momentarily escape from their desperation and anger into a kind of surrealism. Marina is shown dreaming of jumping rope, and in one scene she takes a braid that has just been lopped off and plants it like a sprig in a flower pot.
''My belief is that when your pain is becoming more deep and deep, you can only tell it by poetry,'' Mr. Barmak said. ''Because there are no words to explain that, no color, no images. Just poetry.''
He said that as he watched audiences in Kabul weep while watching the movie, he came to a conclusion about his next project: it will be a comedy.
''I thought that maybe next time it's time to make something to see how they can laugh,'' Mr. Barmak said of his fellow Afghans. ''Of course not complete comedy. Maybe dark comedy.''
