AFTER serving one last Valentine's Day dinner Saturday night, Lutèce, the renowned landmark French restaurant on the East Side, will close its doors, ending a 43-year run as a pillar of French dining in the United States.
''Since 9/11 we have not had enough business to meet expenses,'' said Michael Weinstein, president of Ark Restaurants, which has owned Lutèce since 1994. ''This is probably a decision that should have been made a year ago.''
Mr. Weinstein said that Lutèce had lost much of the expense-account business that had sustained it for years, especially at lunch. He also suggested that an attempt to modernize the classic French cuisine that customers had long worshiped at the Lutèce temple had been misguided.
''We probably made a wrong turn a couple of years ago when we decided to make this menu edgy and more modern,'' he said.
Though it has been more than a decade since Lutèce was in its glory days, the restaurant played a crucial role in the culinary development of the United States almost from the moment it opened its doors in 1961. André Soltner, who was the chef for 34 years and the owner for most of that time, was one of the first chefs in America to emphasize the freshest possible ingredients. While his nightly specials often included rustic dishes from his native Alsace, like a puffy onion tart, Mr. Soltner's cuisine evoked the classic elegance of the Old World.
The closing of Lutèce, along with the announcement that La Côte Basque, another old-line Manhattan French restaurant, will close in March and with the opening of the glossy new high-end restaurants in the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, cements the changing of the guard in New York restaurants that has been taking place since the early 1990's. Long gone are the days when the city's best restaurants were indisputably French, some tracing their lineage back to the restaurant at the French Pavilion at the 1939 World's Fair in New York. Now the big excitement is reserved for chefs at the Time Warner Center like Thomas Keller and Gray Kunz, who, though they are masters of French methods and techniques, offer thoroughly personal styles of cooking.
Mr. Soltner and his wife, Simone, who ran the dining room, emanated unpretentious warmth and maman-et-papa charm, a stark departure from the austere atmosphere of French restaurants that so many Americans found so intimidating. The Soltners lived above the store, on the fourth floor of the town house that housed Lutèce.
''You can imagine how I feel,'' said Mr. Soltner, who is now a dean at the French Culinary Institute in SoHo and who still lives upstairs from the restaurant. ''It was my baby for 34 years. But I was not so surprised, because they have been talking about this for a while.''
Mr. Soltner's presence as well as his braised baby lamb with garlic had a magnetic effect on the legions of regular customers. ''There was something so genuine about it when Soltner was there,'' said Judith Jones, the longtime editor at Knopf, who recalled dining at Lutèce in the 1960's with James Beard. ''He was always present and came out to greet you and knew people's tastes. And yet it was extremely refined; it wasn't a bistro.''
Mr. Soltner was arguably America's first superstar chef, paving the way for a generation of famous names and faces who stepped out from the kitchen and in front of the bright lights. Yet he himself hardly missed a night in the restaurant -- five in 34 years, he said. When he sold the restaurant in 1994, citing fatigue with the endless grind, it came as a shock to people who were unable to separate the restaurant and the man.
''I was with André in the kitchen after the announcement, and I can tell you he got phone calls from every corner of the planet,'' said Eberhard Müller, who succeeded Mr. Soltner as chef. ''From Argentina to Thailand to Sweden to Spain, not to mention all the people who called from this country. It was absolutely phenomenal.''
Lutèce received four stars in The New York Times for the first time in 1980, when Mimi Sheraton called it the French restaurant in New York with the greatest range. It maintained its four-star status throughout the 1980's, until after it was sold to Ark.
But as with any institution so closely linked to one man, Lutèce found it difficult to find a new identity once Mr. Soltner left. In December 1995, Ruth Reichl gave it three stars, noting that it was slightly jarring to begin the evening with Mr. Soltner's signature Alsatian tart. ''Isn't it time for Mr. Müller to send us something of his own?'' she asked. ''He is a talented chef, at his best when he slips out of the Soltner mode to work in his own pared-down fashion.''
The current chef, David Féau, indeed tried to step out on his own. The dinner menu now offers contemporary dishes like seared fluke in a shallot cilantro sauce with avocado purée and crisp rice, as well as Mr. Féau's signature dish, seared foie gras with dark chocolate sauce and bitter orange marmalade. When Lutèce was last reviewed in The Times, in June 2001, William Grimes gave it just two stars, though he noted Mr. Féau's flair and respectful innovations.
Mr. Féau sounded shaken in a telephone interview yesterday. ''I think it's like if tomorrow La Tour d'Argent or Taillevent in Paris closed,'' he said. ''I think now something different is happening in New York, and maybe we're not what people want now.''
As to the future of Lutèce, Mr. Soltner, who owns the building, said he had two choices. One is to find another tenant for the space. The other is to sell the building and find a new place to live. Mr. Soltner said he was leaning toward the latter. ''I'm almost 72 now, and I don't want to go through the hassle again,'' he said. ''I'm very upset, but not against Ark. They were gentlemen. I'm really sorry that it failed.''
Whatever becomes of the space at 249 East 50th Street, the name will live on. In 1999, Ark opened a second Lutèce, in the Venetian Hotel in Las Vegas.
''It does very well there,'' Mr. Weinstein said.
Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  An article last Wednesday about the closing of Lutèce referred incorrectly to the first restaurant review in which it received four stars in The New York Times. Before Mimi Sheraton's rating in 1980, it had received four stars from Raymond Sokolov, in 1972.
