ON a trip to Burgundy several years ago, a friend and I bought some black truffles in the time-honored fashion -- from a fellow selling them out of the trunk of his Citroën. We paid in cash, naturally, and then buried the truffles among a dozen eggs in an airtight plastic container. At least we thought it was airtight. Within several hours, the entire car was suffused with a lavish, earthy scent that I wanted to pull tight around me like a robe.
This peculiar, pungent reek -- let others demystify it -- is what gives the truffle its allure. As with Cognac or fine Burgundy, the aroma grabs you by the nose and engulfs your face in it. Without its scent, the truffle is just a mushroom.
I examined, sniffed and tasted three types of raw black truffles last week, all available in New York. One was a French truffle from Périgord. One was from China, and one from North Carolina. Though the tasting was blind, the French truffle stood out. Though reticent, it was the only one with any perfume, rich and blooming against the other two muffled specimens. After slicing the truffles, it was even easier to pick out the French one. It alone had the network of fine white lines that look like capillaries against the black interior. The Chinese truffle was dense, dry and very dark inside, with a yeasty aroma that was detectable if you put your nose right into it. The Carolina truffle was even whiter inside than the French specimen, but with an off-putting metallic scent.
None of the truffles added much shaved over risotto. Aside from the fact that risotto is the province of white truffles, both the Chinese and the Carolina truffles contributed muted mushroomy flavors that were offset by their dry textures and overwhelmed by the risotto. Only the French truffle could compete, adding a sweet, almost chicken-broth-like flavor that complemented the risotto.
Even allowing for the fact that none of the truffles were at the peak of freshness and that it was not a good year for truffles in France, the French specimen alone would have the power to evoke romance. It's the equivalent of comparing processed cheese spread with a fine Époisses or Parmigiano. Leave the Chinese and North Carolina specimens for the truffle pigs. Take the French one home, slice thinly, sauté gently in butter and serve over a baked potato. Inhale deeply and eat.
