WHEN Alias, the offbeat bistro on the Lower East Side, closed its doors in November, it came as a surprise. No words are more dreaded in the restaurant business than the phrase ''closed for renovation.'' It is the soaped-window, papered-over sign of death. But Alias was the rare restaurant that closed with no intention of staying closed. Instead, a new chef and manager were installed, the menu was overhauled and the interior softened and simplified, and when Alias reopened after a mere four days, it was better than ever.
The truth is, nothing much was wrong with the old Alias. It opened just a couple of years ago, the bistro third of three restaurants that dominated Clinton Street until Wylie Dufresne opened WD-50. Along with 71 Clinton Fresh Food on the high end and aKa Cafe on the low, Alias extended Mr. Dufresne's quirky vision across all price ranges. Mr. Dufresne was, after all, the original chef at 71 Clinton, and though he left before the other two places opened, his legacy was intact. Scott Ehrlich, who headed the kitchen at Alias, was trained by Mr. Dufresne at 71 Clinton.
In some ways, though, Mr. Ehrlich was too true to Mr. Dufresne's spirit. Dishes like fluke ceviche, with an accent of chili-spiked pumpkin seed oil, and smoked shrimp with mango and wild rice pancakes were perhaps too distinctive for what was meant to be a neighborhood hangout. What is more, with WD-50's opening last spring and 71 Clinton still going strong, Alias seemed to be a small-scale imitation, lacking an assertive identity of its own. But Mr. Ehrlich left in October and was replaced by Anthony Rose.
Rather than playing with unusual pairings, Mr. Rose, who cooked most recently at Washington Park, finds and exalts the big, warm flavors of classic combinations. I can't remember a plate of food in the last year that I enjoyed so much as a special of pork shoulder ($18), which was first braised and then grilled, leaving crisp skin over a layer of rich, moistening fat and delicious meat. The pork went beautifully with a wedge of fabulous corn bread, soft, light and high-risen, tasting mildly of smoke and duck fat, and vinegary, bright collard greens with diced pork. With the plate came a slender bottle of clear vinegar infused with hot peppers. A few drops on the pork brought everything together.
Other dishes, if not quite so perfectly executed, are lively and enticing, familiar yet distinctive. A simple green salad ($6) gains a special touch with soft chestnuts and a black pepper caramel dressing, which is not at all sweet. Grilled escarole ($8), dressed with pungent bagna cauda, and tender spinach salad with pickled egg and smoked trout ($8) are superb salads. Warm cabbage, big, earthy gigante beans and salty pancetta ($8) are unorthodox yet perfectly matched components, while firm yet soft flatbread ($10) is just right for raising braised bacon, onion and sliced potatoes in a sort of Lower East Side pissaladière.
In Mr. Rose's hands, simple roast chicken ($17) is renewed, full of flavor, and served with mashed potatoes enlivened with a purée of porcini mushrooms. Homey, hearty dishes shine, like two big rounds of roasted oxtail ($18), delicious with tiny cornmeal dumplings, little white turnips and cremini mushrooms. An equally pleasing variation on this theme was a stew of braised short ribs ($18), served over grits full of corn flavor (and just different enough from polenta) and spiked with charred chili.
And yet, Mr. Rose has his misses. Seared Alaskan king salmon ($20) is without flavor and unpleasantly textured, while overfirm bucatini with steamed cockles ($17) is dominated by chili and hot sausage. Worst of all, that pork dish I loved on my first visit never reappeared on the menu. On my last visit, Mr. Rose was serving a far less interesting dry, overcooked grilled pork loin ($19).
Still, conceptually, Alias is much improved. That applies especially to the desserts, which at one time seemed intent on challenging you by putting avocado in everything. Now, Alias aims to please, with offerings like Canadian butter tart ($7), a petite, rustic tart with currants and whipped cream; banana bread pudding ($7), rich with caramel; and a dessert called Heather's bittersweet chocolate goodness ($6), essentially light chocolate mousse with walnut toffee embedded in it.
It would be a mistake to think that by tempering its ambition, Alias is playing it safe. If anything, it is a bold move to fiddle with a winning formula. Alias is now hewing more closely to the traditional bistro role of offering predictably satisfying food, but it does so creatively. It is hard to imagine Alias's closing its doors again anytime soon.
Alias  76 Clinton Street (Rivington Street), Lower East Side; (212) 505-5011.
BEST DISHES -- Braised and grilled pork shoulder; greens with chestnuts and a black pepper caramel dressing; grilled escarole with bagna cauda; spinach salad with smoked trout; warm cabbage with gigante beans and pancetta; flatbread with braised bacon; roast chicken; butter tart; banana bread pudding; bittersweet chocolate goodness.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $6 to $10; main courses, $17 to $20.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- Monday to Thursday, 6 to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 6 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Sunday, 5 to 9 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Step at entrance. Dining room and restroom on one level.
$25 AND UNDER
