It is as if someone took a broomstick to a hornet's nest under the eaves, as far as Colorado College Coach Scott Owens is concerned.
High-flying North Dakota was taken down twice, 4-3 and 5-2, at Wisconsin last weekend and was knocked out of the top spot in the U.S. College Hockey Online poll. And now Owens's Tigers have to venture into Grand Forks, N.D., and face the Fighting Sioux on their home ice in a weekend series.
''Oh yes, the second we saw the scores come across, we figured we couldn't have picked a worse time,'' Owens said in a telephone interview from Denver. ''And I'm not just talking weather. But that's the way things worked out.''
Owens had not seen a tape of Wisconsin's victories over North Dakota (19-5-3, 13-4-3 Western Collegiate Hockey Association), but he had looked at footage of North Dakota's games at Denver in late November.
''You know what?'' he said. ''They just kind of come at you in waves and they skate well and their transition game is just unbelievable.
''The only thing good I can say is at least we were able to win four of our last five games.''
Colorado College (15-10-3, 8-10-2) had been hit by injuries and illnesses early in the season and had been without a couple of important players who competed in the world junior championships in Finland. A five-game losing streak in mid-January is, Owens hopes, the last of the team's troubles.
''We haven't been cohesive,'' he said. ''We've had trouble putting the puck in the net. Some of that is youth and inexperience, and some of that is everybody getting their roles redefined.''
The Tigers finish the regular season with series against Minnesota-Duluth, St. Cloud State and Denver, which all have better overall records than the Tigers.
''The good side is they are teams that will help our strength of schedule, and if we can win some of them, it will definitely help us in the PairWise,'' said Owens, referring to the power-ranking formula used to determine the at-large selections among the 16 teams for the N.C.A.A. tournament in March.
C.C.H.A.  Meeting at the Top
The crowd at Michigan's Yost Arena should be at its boisterous and intimidating best Friday and Saturday as the conference's leader, Miami of Ohio (18-9-3, 15-5-2), visits for a showdown between teams that have hit their late-season stride.
The RedHawks swept Notre Dame and are unbeaten in seven games. The second-place Wolverines (19-8-1, 14-5-1) had won eight straight before a 5-3 loss at Alaska-Fairbanks last Saturday.
Michigan enters the weekend ranked higher (No. 5) in the national poll than Miami (No. 8), perhaps because the Wolverines have won seven Central Collegiate Hockey Association regular-season titles and six conference tournament championships while Miami has won one league title (1993) in the last 10 seasons.
Miami goaltender Brandon Crawford-West was named the C.C.H.A. defensive player of the week. A freshman from San Diego, he earned the first shutout of his college career Saturday in the RedHawks' 2-0 victory over Notre Dame. Miami defeated the Irish, 5-2, on Friday, and Crawford-West stopped 54 of 56 shots in the two games.
Michigan's Milan Gajic has a nine-game point-scoring streak, the team's best this season. A junior forward, he has five goals and nine assists since Dec. 28.
WOMEN  Tough Schedule for Elite Teams
After splitting a weekend series in Minneapolis, the top two women's teams, Dartmouth and Minnesota, each face challenging opponents.
Top-ranked Dartmouth (17-2-2, 9-0-1 Eastern College Athletic Conference) plays host to No. 5 St. Lawrence (18-5-1, 9-1-0) for two games.
No. 2 Minnesota (20-3-1, 13-2-1 W.C.H.A.) plays host to fourth-ranked Wisconsin (17-4-3, 13-4-1) on Saturday and Sunday.
No. 3 Harvard (17-2-1, 8-2 E.C.A.C.) will play two games against Brown (12-5-2, 8-1-1 E.C.A.C), which was ranked No. 10 after victories against Colgate and Cornell.
Dartmouth's Tiffany Hagge, who grew up in Coon Rapids, Minn., scored a third-period goal Saturday that proved to be the game-winner in the Big Green's 3-2 victory in Minneapolis. On Sunday, Minnesota scored the first six goals of the rematch and glided to a 7-3 triumph, breaking Dartmouth's 12-game unbeaten streak.
Slap Shots
BOSTON COLLEGE -- Until Monday night, Boston College had lost 14 of its last 15 games against Boston University in the Beanpot tournament. In their 2-1 overtime victory in the championship game, the top-ranked Eagles (21-3-4, 12-1-3 Hockey East) outshot the Terriers, 52-13. By turning aside 50 B.C. scoring attempts, B.U. goaltender Sean Fields became the first player from the losing team to win the Most Valuable Player award in the 52-year history of the tournament.
KAZMAIER AWARD NOMINEES -- Ten players have been nominated for the Patty Kazmaier Memorial Award, given each year to the outstanding player in women's college hockey. They are: Gretchen Anderson (Princeton), Nicole Corriero (Harvard), Natalie Darwitz (Minnesota), Chanda Gunn (Northeastern), Kelli Halcisak (Providence), Caroline Ouellette (Minnesota-Duluth), Jenny Potter (Minnesota-Duluth), Angela Ruggiero (Harvard), Shari Vogt (Minnesota State) and Krissy Wendell (Minnesota).
HOCKEY: COLLEGE REPORT
