''AT home, I like to work with hands,'' said Cesare Casella, the chef and an owner of the Manhattan restaurant Beppe, as he used a chubby index finger to stab a mix of chopped sage, rosemary and garlic deep into the joints of a five-pound duck. ''It's more sensual, makes the food taste better. You make better food at home.''
Never mind that he was in a utilitarian test kitchen at Beppe, two flights above the dining room. For Mr. Casella, home and kitchen have been one and the same since he was 3. He grew up in the kitchen of Il Vipore, the tiny restaurant his parents opened in 1964 in Pieve Santo Stefano, Italy. And indeed, his family -- well, his mother, primarily -- seem ever present when he cooks.
Stocky and effervescent, Mr. Casella, 44, is a proud but playful Italian revivalist, mining the early history of Tuscan cookery for recipe ideas but equally likely to kick tradition out the window in dishes like his mortadella muffuletta, inspired by a trip to New Orleans.
On a wintry afternoon, as Mr. Casella prepared an orange roasted duck, he turned away for a moment to spark up a burner on the stove.
''My mama and my grandma, they do this,'' he said as he rested the back of a long-handle serving spoon over the open flame. The spoon gradually turned a dull, ominous gray, and after nearly a minute, he took it from the flame, turned back to the stainless preparation table and -- in a move best left to a professional chef -- plunged the spoon into the cavity of the duck, sizzling the inside on contact and sending an eruption of curling smoke and vapor into the kitchen. ''You cook the fat inside,'' he said, ''it's going to give nice flavor.'' It also keeps excess water and fat from soaking the stuffing, he explained.
He turned to a small bowl heaped with sweet and spicy Italian pork sausage and a quarter-cup of diced pancetta, the beginnings of the duck's stuffing. These he dumped into a medium-size mixing bowl. He then scraped small piles of diced celery and carrot into it from a hand-painted serving plate. He added a cup of Tuscan bread -- crust off, cut into cubes.
''Use dry Tuscan bread,'' he said, ''Something that keeps its consistency. A baguette is not strong enough.''
He picked up a tiny dish of a ground terra-cotta-color spice. ''This is spezie forti, Tuscan spice'' he said, proffering the dish, which smelled strongly of clove and mace. ''There are 17 spices in here. In Italy, each butcher has his own spice mix for making sausage -- some more nutmeg, some more cinnamon.'' If you can't find a commercial blend, he suggested an Indian touch: ''Use garam masala.''
''In Italy, after you clean duck, you pass on top of a flame to take out the small things about the feather'' -- the quills. He held the naked bird by both wings, then by a wing and a leg, rolling and flopping it about in the flame, and set it back on the counter.
''We add a little bit of the orange,'' he said, putting diced orange sections into the mixing bowl, along with some freshly chopped rosemary and sage, and finally poured about a quarter of a cup of orange juice over the mound of stuffing.
Then, with a hand that seemed the size of a catcher's mitt, he mixed the contents of the bowl until they looked as smooth as meatloaf. He sprinkled pinches of salt and pepper into the cavity of the duck, then packed it tightly with handfuls of the fragrant stuffing.
''When my mama cooks the duck, she ties it nice and tight,'' he said, tracing arcs in the air with an imaginary trussing needle. ''If I'm doing it, I leave it open.'' But this time he pulled the skin on each side of the cavity together into a seam and neatly stabbed a wooden toothpick twice through it, holding it fast.
''If you have time, you close,'' he said. ''If no, you leave open.''
Mr. Casella poured some olive oil into the bottom of a roasting pan. He patted his fingers in the oil and rubbed some over the surface of the duck.
''There's going to be a lot of fat,'' he said as he put it in the oven, which he had already heated to 375 degrees.
After 40 minutes, Mr. Casella pulled the pan from the oven and turned to the sink. He tilted the pan and poured off nearly all the fat, then set the pan on the stove top. From a small glass bowl, he drizzled fresh orange juice, about a quarter of a cup, over the breast, followed by half a juice glass of Grand Marnier. He seasoned the duck with pinches of salt and pepper.
He lifted the duck, added handfuls of chopped carrots, celery and onion to the pan, stirred them around in the fat and set the duck back in on top of the vegetables. He carefully patted eight orange slices onto the duck, layering them in two neat rows along the breast.
''You do this for two reasons,'' he said. ''One is to keep it more moist, the breast. And two: they are going to be caramelized, the oranges. They give flavor.''
After 20 minutes, Mr. Casella removed the duck from the oven. The skin had a deep golden hue, and the orange slices had tanned softly at the edges.
''We baste,'' Mr. Casella said and reached for the closest vessel, a stainless steel half-cup measure. He dipped it in the pan juices, drizzled them over the breast and returned the duck to the oven.
When 20 minutes more had passed, he again pulled the duck from the oven. The skin was darkly burnished, appearing to tip perilously toward black in some places. The orange slices over the breast had browned, and Mr. Casella moved them to the pan. He poured more orange juice over the bird and added fresh orange slices.
''I want to keep moist the breast,'' he said. He basted the duck with pan juices and added a small amount of water to the pan.
''The oven's too strong,'' he said. He basted the bird again, covered the pan with foil, crimping it tightly around the edge of the pan and put it back in the oven.
Before Catherine de' Medici arrived in France, Mr. Casella told us, the French had never heard of duck cooked with oranges. He spun a tale about Lorenzo de' Medici tucking into anatra all'arancia in the 15th century with friends at the Osteria delle Bertucce as though it had happened last week.
''Duck à l'orange was stolen from the Tuscans,'' he said.
How? we asked.
''The French are better marketers!''
After two more bastings and an hour more of cooking, Mr. Casella removed the duck from the oven. He basted it once again and then cut into the skin between the leg and the breast with a paring knife, to remove the leg. When it resisted, he dropped the knife and pulled it free with his hands. The leg emerged ruddy and steaming, the joint flecked with the herb mixture he had stuffed beneath the skin.
''I think it needs 20 minutes more,'' he said, and put it back in the oven.
When the duck emerged, it was not blackened but very well browned, and Mr. Casella transferred it to a plate to carve. The test kitchen had no blender, so he dispatched a kitchen assistant to purée the vegetables and pan juices with a few slices of the orange.
When his assistant returned with the sauce, Mr. Casella spooned it over the slices of breast he had carved, and we tasted it. The sauce's mellow orange flavor and its unmistakably Tuscan herbal punch perfectly balanced the gamy richness of the duck. The breast was cooked completely through but still juicy, protected by a layer of fatty skin, now rendered crisp, caramelized and addictively delicious.
Mr. Casella looked at a piece before he ate it. ''I like duck well done, no more blood,'' he said. ''The French, they like it rare, but in Italy, the only thing we don't overcook is steak and pasta.''
ORANGE ROASTED DUCK (ANATRA ALL'ARANCIA)  Adapted from Cesare Casella  Time: About 3 hours
1 6-pound duck  2 teaspoons finely chopped rosemary  1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon finely chopped sage  2 cloves garlic, chopped  1 1/4 teaspoons salt  1 1/4 teaspoons pepper
1/4 pound spicy Italian sausage, cut from casing
1/4 pound sweet Italian sausage, cut from casing
1/4 cup (1 ounce) pancetta, cut into small dice  1 cup diced day-old Italian bread, crust removed  2 1/2 cups diced celery ( 1/2 cup small dice, 2 cups large dice)  2 1/2 cups diced carrots ( 1/2 cup small dice, 2 cups large dice)  2 1/2 cups chopped red onion  6 oranges (1 peeled, seeded and diced, 3 juiced, 2 sliced  1/4 inch thick)  2 teaspoons spezie forti (Tuscan spice) or garam masala  3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
1/4 cup Grand Marnier.
1. Heat oven to 375. With paring knife, make four incisions in skin of duck: one between leg and breast on each side of duck, and one between wing and back on each side. Make a spice mixture with 1 teaspoon rosemary, 2 teaspoons sage, 1 chopped garlic clove,  1/4 teaspoon salt and  1/4 teaspoon pepper. Stuff incisions with pinches of mixture.
2. In a medium-size bowl, combine sausages, pancetta, bread, celery in small dice, carrots in small dice,  1/2 cup chopped onion, diced orange, remaining chopped garlic, remaining rosemary and sage, 1 1/2 teaspoons Tuscan spice, a half-teaspoon salt and a half-teaspoon pepper. Drizzle juice of one orange over ingredients, and mix well. Season cavity of duck with  1/4 teaspoon salt and  1/4 teaspoon pepper, stuff with mixture, and truss with a toothpick, a skewer or butcher's thread.
3. Pour olive oil into a 9-by-13-inch roasting pan. Place duck in pan, breast side up. Rub surface of duck with oil from pan, and roast 40 minutes. Remove pan from oven, transfer duck to a cutting board, and pour off all but 1 tablespoon fat. Add remaining celery, carrots and onion to pan in an even layer, and place duck on vegetables, breast side up. Drizzle juice of one orange and Grand Marnier over duck, season duck with remaining Tuscan spice,  1/4 teaspoon salt and  1/4 teaspoon pepper, and layer slices of one orange over breast.
4. Return to oven, and roast 2 hours, basting with pan juices every 20 minutes. Once orange slices on breast have browned, add them to pan, pour juice of remaining orange over duck, and layer slices of second orange over breast. Raise oven to 400 degrees for final 20 minutes of cooking.
5. Remove duck from oven, and transfer to a cutting board. Remove all but 4 orange slices from pan, and discard. Spoon off any excess fat, and discard. Purée contents of pan in a food processor, and heat in a small saucepan over medium-high heat to reduce while you carve duck. Adjust seasonings, and pour sauce over carved duck. Serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
