Thematic programs have been the American Symphony Orchestra's drawing card since Leon Botstein took over in 1992, but if there is one thing Mr. Botstein likes better than a handful of works that can be linked, it's a concert that can also be part of something bigger. In that regard he was in his element on Sunday afternoon at Avery Fisher Hall when he conducted ''Jews and Vienna, City of Music,'' a program associated with exhibitions at the Jewish Museum of Vienna and at the Yeshiva University Museum at the Center for Jewish History in New York.
The obvious approach was to explore music by Jewish composers who lived and worked in Vienna, and to a degree that's what Mr. Botstein did. Vienna's two most famous Jewish composers, Mahler and Schoenberg, were not heard, presumably because they are played all the time. It could be argued of course that both those composers had converted to Christianity, although Schoenberg returned to Judaism in the 1930's. But Mr. Botstein included music by Franz Schreker, who considered himself a Catholic, and by Anton Rubinstein, whose parents converted to Christianity the year after his birth.
Inevitably the program raised the question of whether Jewish music is Jewish simply because it was written by a composer with at least Jewish roots, or whether it need actually deal with Jewish liturgy, history or issues to qualify. The latter would seem more to the point, but of the five composers Mr. Botstein presented, only Salomon Sulzer identified so thoroughly with his religion that he devoted his artistry substantially to serving it. (That quotient could have been raised by performing some of Schoenberg's later works.)
Sulzer, who flourished in the mid-19th century, was an architect of modern synagogue music, and he was afforded a tiny spotlight here. His lush setting of Psalm 111 (1865) offered a solo cantorial line (sung by Eliot Vogel) in alternation with a choral response (performed by the Zamir Chorale and Friends) and rolled a slightly modal melody into a thoroughly European cloak.
Mr. Botstein also led a single verse of Sulzer's beautiful choral harmonization of Psalm 21. The melody, though, was not actually Sulzer's: it was a Haydn theme, known in Sulzer's time as ''God Preserve the Emperor,'' and later as ''Deutschland Über Alles.'' It was the kind of historical parlor trick that Mr. Botstein enjoys, but probably not the most felicitous example he could have chosen from Sulzer's huge output.
Along with the question of what music can legitimately be called Jewish, a listener had to wonder about Mr. Botstein's criteria for calling composers Viennese. Anton Rubinstein spent a couple of years in Vienna -- that is, he passed through -- but by most lights is regarded as thoroughly Russian. Perhaps even Mr. Botstein was not convinced that his ''Ivan the Terrible'' belonged here. He and the orchestra walked through it without a trace of passion or drama.
The other works fared better. Both Karl Goldmark's 1889 ''Gefesselten Prometheus des Aeschylos'' (Op. 38) and a symphonic interlude from Franz Schreker's ''Schatzgräber'' (1918) showed off the warmth of this orchestra's strings and winds, the solidity of its brass and the degree to which it can create electricity when it's driven properly. And if there were murky moments in Mr. Botstein's reading of Alexander Zemlinsky's broad-boned ''Lyric Symphony'' (Op. 18, from 1923), there were also some thrilling moments. Both soloists -- Elizabeth Byrne, soprano, and John Hancock, baritone -- sang Zemlinsky's richly chromatic settings of poems by Rabindranath Tagore with a captivating intensity.
MUSIC REVIEW
