A study by a group of scientific experts called into question Tuesday the reliability of a process the F.B.I. has used in some 2,500 investigations to trace bullets from crime scenes, and government officials said they would review the findings to determine whether past convictions should be re-examined.
After a yearlong study, a scientific panel of the National Research Council found that the Federal Bureau of Investigation's scientific method for comparing bullets was generally sound but that its examiners had sometimes overstated its reliability in court testimony and had played down the likelihood of false matches.
The F.B.I. asked the research council to conduct the independent study after a metallurgist who had worked at the bureau publicly challenged the process used for comparing and ''matching'' bullet fragments at crime scenes to bullets found in the possession of suspects. The study cost the bureau $300,000.
It found that although expert witnesses for the bureau had sometimes asserted in court that chemical analysis could trace a bullet fragment to a factory batch or even a single box of bullets, the data did not appear to support such a specific conclusion. In fact, millions of bullets could have similar or nearly indistinguishable characteristics, panel members said.
''It would be like a Nike shoe print, size 10, found at a crime scene,'' said Paul C. Giannelli, a Case Western Reserve University law professor who served on the advisory panel. If a suspect was found with the same type of sneakers, Professor Giannelli said, ''it would be relevant evidence, it would be admissible in court, although there would be a large number of people who might have that type of shoe.''
The panel recommended a number of ways the bureau could refine its process for analyzing and interpreting the bullet testing. Dwight E. Adams, director of the bureau's laboratory, said the agency was likely to enact all of the changes.
''I think this report is an affirmation that the technology we use is currently the best available technology,'' Dr. Adams said.
At the same time, however, he said that officials at the bureau and the Justice Department would review the panel's concerns to determine the impact on past convictions. The F.B.I. has used the bullet-tracing process in about 2,500 criminal investigations since the early 1980's, offering testimony in about 500 of those cases. As a result of the latest review, the Justice Department may decide to notify local prosecutors in some cases that the process has come under scrutiny, Dr. Adams said.
Leading defense lawyers used the findings to attack the reliability of the bureau's forensic methods.
''The bottom line,'' said Barry C. Scheck, president-elect of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, ''is that F.B.I. experts have been going into courts for years and definitively saying that particular bullets found at a crime scene came from a certain box of ammunition or were manufactured on a certain date, and the researchers are now saying that is wrong. These cases have to be re-examined.''
The study brought rebukes from members of Congress as well. Senator Charles E. Grassley, an Iowa Republican who has been a frequent critic of the F.B.I., said the findings demonstrated that the bureau had to be more careful about how its scientists testified in court, to avoid confusing or misleading jurors.
The study, Mr. Grassley said, ''raises serious questions about testimony given over the last 40 years. The F.B.I. reached farther than the science supported.''
