Cultures on the verge of disappearing often stage a last stand for their music and language, and Oki, who led his band at Merkin Hall on Sunday afternoon as part of the Music from Japan Festival, is doing just that. He wants to preserve the culture of the Ainu, Japan's indigenous inhabitants, who are now largely found on the northern islands of Hokkaido and Sakhalin. ''We lost our land,'' he sang in Ainu, ''but soul and spirit never fade away.'' The musicians were barefoot, wearing robes with elaborate geometric patterns.
Old Ainu songs described lives eked out close to nature: a fisherman trying to entice his catch, a ceremony to thank the spirits for the bear meat just eaten, gratitude for a piece of cotton fabric. A backup singer, Futoshi Ikabe, danced with a bow and arrow in a song about a hungry hunter who can't bring himself to shoot a bird because it's so beautiful. Some songs, Oki said onstage, have survived, but their literal meanings have been lost.
Oki has taken up (and plugged in) an ancient instrument from Sakhalin, the tonkori, a ski-shaped lyre with five or six strings plucked with the fingers of both hands. The melodies are permutations of those five or six notes, circling and changing with a measured lilt that suggests rippling waters and natural cycles.
Some unaccompanied songs implied a kinship between aboriginal music in Japan and elsewhere, including American Indian music. They used a basic, steady beat -- clapped or drummed -- and a mixture of chantlike speech and short melodic lines, punctuated with yips and glottal stops. For another type of Ainu song, two women and a man sang rounds: short, overlapping lines that rotated through a handful of notes like the tonkori melodies. And Emi Toko opened the concert with a solo on mukkuri, a bamboo jaw harp, setting up a brisk beat and shaping overtones to twang and swoop, building and then buzzing away.
The band sometimes joined Oki with electric bass vamps and percussion, and in one song the beat picked up behind Oki's fingerpicking to sound like West African pop built around a different harp, the kora. Fusions like that risk cultural loss by assimilation, but the dignified clarity of the tonkori came through even in modern trappings.
WORLD MUSIC REVIEW
