MARIO is a full-figured man, but notice how his ensemble provides a slimming effect. He is wearing a puffy black jacket, baggy jeans and a pair of Air Force 1 sneakers that he bought in Brooklyn for $85. What draws the eye, though, is his Cleveland Cavaliers jersey, a LeBron James model.
The jersey would normally cost about $60, he confides, but this one ran him $150. ''I'm a big boy,'' he says, ''so I pay more.''
Mario earns $200 a week, plus commission, as a newspaper peddler. At the moment, his post is at Sixth Avenue and 41st Street, just outside the doors of the Fashion Week show that is taking place within a huge white tent in Bryant Park. This means that he will spend his day thrusting newspapers at fashionably dressed men and women who brush past as though he were tendering day-old mackerel.
Beyond those doors, women named Flavia and Nadia and Larissa are earning a living by contorting themselves within tulle and chiffon. Each one has perfected a certain strut, in which the pelvis arrives about a half-hour before the shoulders. Each one accessorizes her outfit with a wrap of studied ennui.
Mario is 100 yards and eons removed from the Flavias and Nadias of the world. So is young Hugh, who is hawking free copies of a fashion magazine. He is wearing a Phat Farm coat that he bought two years ago for about $150, a seven-year-old pair of Tommy Hilfiger jeans and black gloves that he picked up at a flea market for $15. Topping off his look -- and it is a good look, a look that says ''keeping it real'' -- is a San Francisco Giants cap, worn backward.
A handsome S.U.V., one not intended for carting around kids with muddy cleats, pulls up, and out steps a tall woman in high-heeled boots and a vest that evokes poodle. Walking up to the door, she declines even to look at Hugh as he sings the virtues of his periodical.
''So bourgeois,'' Hugh mutters after her. ''So last year.''
This is the fashion show on the runway called Sixth Avenue: Here is Frantz, who installs telephone systems; he is wearing a blue construction helmet that matches the knit cap his girlfriend bought for him. Here is Shai, pushing a broom over Bryant Park slate and wearing decade-old Jordan sneakers; ''classics,'' he calls them. Here are Anna, Amber and Franka, handing out gossip magazines and wearing identical outfits, from the candy-pink parka down to the black designer gloves.
And here are five, no seven, no nine -- here are at least 13 officers of the New York Police Department. They are wearing blue pants, blue caps and blue duty jackets, possibly purchased from the equipment room at 1 Police Plaza. From their black belts hang loops of plastic handcuffs.
One of them also wears three blue chevrons high on his sleeve, creating a ''sergeant'' effect. He is conferring with a burly fashion show employee whose black suit is offset by a tag featuring the word ''security'' and a picture of a stiletto-heeled shoe. Next on the Sixth Avenue runway, it seems, is PETA, the animal rights group.
In the past, PETA routinely disrupted fashion shows that featured the works of designers they called ''fur pimps.'' A couple of years ago, though, the group reached an understanding with the organizers of Fashion Week that allowed the activists to deliver their anti-fur message while the fashion world was in town.
Here comes Michael, a PETA spokesman, in a long gray coat made of cotton, acrylic and polyester. He greets the security man in black, and ground rules for a 15-minute demonstration are finalized. A section of the steps leading to the tent are roped off.
Here come six women who have just stepped out of a black limousine. They are wearing long fur coats highlighted with fake blood, and, instead of purses, they are carrying skinned fake foxes in matching fake blood. This, too, is a look, a PETA look, and is part of a piece of street theater called, ''Imagine if You Were Killed for Your Fur.''
The women walk up the steps, carrying their foxes like firewood. A boom box plays the recorded sounds of six gunshots and, one after another, the women moan and collapse to the ground. They lie there for 15 minutes, until Michael tells them that it is time to go; show over.
The women in fake-blood fur disappear as other women, in blood-free fur, enter the fashion show.
Hugh, in his backward Giants cap, returns to hawking his magazine -- ''Get your Daily'' -- and the show along the Sixth Avenue runway continues.
About New York
