In his first day of testimony in his trial on criminal fraud charges, Mark H. Swartz, the former chief financial officer of Tyco International, told jurors on Tuesday that he had never broken the law while at Tyco.
Also Tuesday, lawyers for L. Dennis Kozlowski, Tyco's former chief executive and Mr. Swartz's co-defendant in the case, rested his defense without calling any witnesses. Mr. Swartz is the first witness for the defense to testify in the case.
Prosecutors have charged Mr. Swartz and Mr. Kozlowski with stealing $170 million from Tyco by hiding details of their pay packages from the company's board as well as making $430 million by selling the company's stock after artificially pumping up its price.
Now in its fifth month, the trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan has been a laborious affair, and its pace did not improve yesterday.
Most of the morning's testimony consisted of Mr. Swartz's recitation of his résumé along with his children's achievements. Mr. Swartz explained that he had been born in Boston but lived in several different cities while growing up. Jurors also learned that Mr. Swartz's oldest son attends the University of Rochester, and like Mr. Swartz himself, fell in love as a college student. All three of Mr. Swartz's children were present, as was his wife.
Later, Mr. Swartz, under gentle questioning from his lawyer, Charles Stillman, discussed a series of real estate deals.
As Tyco moved its executives from its headquarters in Exeter, N.H., to New York City in 1995 and then to Boca Raton, Fla., in 1997, the company created an elaborate relocation plan to cover their costs. Prosecutors have contended that Mr. Swartz and Mr. Kozlowski hid the details of the 1995 plan from the company's board in an effort to swell their pay packages. Mr. Swartz testified that the board had approved the plan, although he acknowledged that it might not have been advised of all of its details.
''Did you intend to mislead anybody about anything?'' Mr. Stillman asked.
''Absolutely not,'' Mr. Swartz replied.
Mr. Swartz also testified that the 1995 plan was intended for all 35 of Tyco's employees in Exeter but that only a small group of senior executives took advantage of its terms, which included zero percent interest loans from the company on up to three different homes and full private school tuition reimbursement for children.
As chief financial officer at Tyco, which by 2002 had 250,000 employees and $36 billion in sales, Mr. Swartz oversaw the company's financial, tax, information systems, administrative and human resources departments. He also regularly considered the merits of the hundreds of acquisitions Tyco made each year.
But if Tuesday's testimony is any guide, Mr. Swartz did not let those duties distract him from his true passion during the late 1990's: buying and selling Manhattan apartments. During the late afternoon, Mr. Swartz described his efforts to buy apartments for himself, and Tyco, at 1 Central Park West, 50 Central Park South and 30 East 85th Street. In some cases, he allowed the real estate agent or lawyer handling a transaction to believe that he was buying an apartment for himself when it was really being bought by Tyco in order to get a better deal for the company, he testified. A seller who knew that Tyco was buying the apartment for itself might try to take advantage of the company, he said.
Later, Mr. Swartz explained that Tyco -- which is technically based in Bermuda for tax purposes -- held a about a dozen informal board meetings in the United States each year, while holding about four in Bermuda. The meetings in the United States were called huddles, and no notes were taken at them, Mr. Swartz said.
