Wisconsin has a date with political destiny next Tuesday. Its multifaceted electorate will either confirm Senator John Kerry as the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee or keep the race going, at least until the Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses on March 2.
Pollsters and politicians are betting heavily on Mr. Kerry, especially after his sweeping victories in Tennessee and Virginia.
Wisconsin has been at this juncture before. In 1960, it gave a decisive lift to the candidacy of another senator from Massachusetts, John F. Kennedy, who surprised many by defeating his rival, Hubert H. Humphrey of neighboring Minnesota. Seen as the more liberal candidate in a liberal state, and so well known here that he was often called Wisconsin's third senator, Humphrey was the favorite. But Kennedy, better financed and organized, prevailed.
That election was a high point in a long, proud political tradition, but high points have been few and far between in recent years. So Wisconsin has welcomed its return to the national political spotlight in 2004, and Mr. Kerry's opponents are trying to capitalize on what they see as the eagerness of voters here to play a pivotal role.
Howard Dean, camped out in the state until the balloting next Tuesday, told a college audience in Madison on Monday: ''They expect you to rubber stamp the choice of others, but you don't have to listen to them. Wisconsin, you have the power to keep the debate alive.'' A television commercial echoing that theme went on the air here Tuesday.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has also described the primary in this state, a patchwork of small cities, farms and one big metropolitan area, centered on Milwaukee, as crucial to his prospects. He has not won a primary or caucus outside his native South.
Mr. Kerry has had the momentum since his victory in Iowa, the first contest of the year, and it has been enough to propel him into a commanding lead in a year when Democratic voters seem more focused on beating President Bush than on policy differences among their party's hopefuls. The question awaiting an answer as the candidates began arriving in Wisconsin this week was this: Why should this state prove any different?
''Our tradition of supporting mavericks,'' answered Linda Honold, the state party chairwoman. ''We're kind of quirky. We like people who stand up for what they believe in despite adversity, which could lead a lot of people to support one of the three underdogs.''
In a kind of honor roll of mavericks, Ms. Honold mentioned Robert M. LaFollette, the state's Progressive governor, a reformer who wrote the state's pioneering presidential primary law in 1905, as well as former Senator William Proxmire, a famously penny-pinching guardian of the public purse, and Russell D. Feingold, one of the state's two current senators, the co-author with Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, of the law limiting campaign contributions.
''We haven't had the presidential candidates here for a long time,'' Ms. Honold said. ''People may want to speak with a distinctive voice.''
But John McAdams, a professor of political science at Marquette University in Milwaukee, expressed skepticism about the idea that Wisconsin is unique. Professor McAdams said he had ''a lot of trouble'' with the idea that it would vote any differently than Iowa or New Hampshire.
''Frankly, in my view, this state is a lot less distinctive than people would like to think it is or than it once was,'' he said. ''It used to be much more ethnic than it is, and labor used to be more important than it is, and our politics used to be a lot cleaner. The bottom line this year is this: Unless something unexpected happens, Kerry is likely to sweep the board.''
Craig Gilbert, Washington bureau chief of The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, agreed, saying that ''this is more about the national dynamics than any local idiosyncracies.''
Past Wisconsin primaries, held in April until recent years and often influential, have been less consistent than political folklore suggests. Voters here have backed liberals and moderates, underdogs and front-runners.
Estes Kefauver, an insurgent from Tennessee, won in 1952, only to lose the nomination to Adlai E. Stevenson. President Lyndon B. Johnson withdrew at the 11th hour in 1968 in the face of certain defeat by the liberal, antiwar Eugene J. McCarthy. Jimmy Carter, a Southerner, defeated the liberal Morris K. Udall in 1976 to move close to winning the nomination. Gary Hart, another insurgent, defeated former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, of Minnesota, in 1984.
A poll taken for The Journal Sentinel, for which 666 likely primary voters were interviewed Wednesday through Saturday of last week, showed Mr. Kerry with a commanding lead. He had 45 percent; Gen. Wesley K. Clark, whose aides said Tuesday night that he would leave the race, had 13 percent; Dr. Dean had 12 percent; Mr. Edwards had 9 percent; others had 3 percent among them; and 17 percent were undecided. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points.
Voters here will have more time to make up their minds, or to change them, than they have had in most states in this year's hurried, shallow campaign, with the timetable so compressed that in some states candidates have appeared only once or not at all. Here, they will have a full week, with no other caucuses or primaries competing for time.
That could produce more emphasis on issues and less on the nebulous notion of ''electability,'' which has transformed the fortunes of Mr. Kerry. Mr. Edwards argued that this would help him. He said before flying here: ''Where we've had time to get this message through -- what my campaign is about, who I am as a candidate -- it works.''
In a state where tens of thousands of manufacturing jobs have been lost, a development many blame free-trade policies for, and where economic anxiety is widespread, Mr. Edwards is running television commercials built around his opposition to the North American Free Trade Agreement. But they do not make the point that Mr. Kerry supported it. Mr. Edwards has repeatedly promised not to ''go negative,'' the traditional tactic of catch-up politics, which has often proved very unpopular here.
But he pledged last weekend that he would ''talk about the things that make me different'' from his rivals, including his views on trade. He has yet to draw such contrasts.
The Wisconsin primary is open, meaning that Republicans and independents can participate in it as well as Democrats. That could affect the results, too, although there is little evidence that it has done so in past voting. What it will do is preview how well the eventual nominee will do this fall among the swing voters needed to win.
Mr. Kerry has not campaigned in Wisconsin since June, and is not expected here until Friday, when he will appear with Gov. James E. Doyle at the last of a series of ''Working for Wisconsin'' forums, this one in Madison. Alone among the candidates, he has yet to commit to participation in a 90-minute debate to be televised Sunday, although the sponsors said they expected him to do so.
Dr. Dean was long seen as the front-runner here, with strength on the many university campuses and a strong organization. His failure to win anywhere has hurt him, but his supporters have been phoning, e-mailing and leafleting with renewed zeal in the last 10 days. He had indicated he would withdraw if he lost here, but on Monday he said he would stay in, as some backers wanted, regardless of the outcome here. Still, many doubt his ability -- and that of the other candidates -- to finance an effective Super Tuesday campaign if Mr. Kerry is not stopped here by someone.
Mr. Edwards returned here tonight to watch the returns from the Virginia and Tennessee voting at Serb Hall on Milwaukee's South Side, a traditional stop on the Wisconsin campaign trail, along with Usinger's sausage shop and Lambeau Field in Green Bay, the home of the National Football League Packers.
John Kraus, a veteran Democratic operative here who is directing Mr. Edwards's campaign, compared the contest to the three-way race for the Democratic nomination for governor in 2002, when Mr. Doyle split the vote fairly evenly in Madison and Milwaukee and won by running powerfully in the rest of the state. ''You have to compete and win in the small cities,'' Mr. Kraus said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: WISCONSIN  Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  An article yesterday about the role Wisconsin has played in presidential primaries misstated the title held by Walter F. Mondale when he lost to Gary Hart there in 1984. He was the former vice president, not the vice president.
