Just a day after Newark officials sought to regain momentum in their drive for an arena for the New Jersey Devils, Gov. James E. McGreevey appeared to slam on the brakes Tuesday, saying that he supported keeping the Meadowlands Continental Arena open.
Most economic studies indicate that two such arenas in such close proximity to each other and competing for the same nonsporting events, would be doomed.
Speaking through a spokesman, Governor McGreevey took note of the efforts over the last year by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to transform the 25-year-old Meadowlands arena, where the Devils hockey team now plays, from a drain on the state treasury to a moneymaker. Those efforts included attracting a proposal for a $1.4 billion family entertainment, office and retail complex to an adjacent parcel.
''We have worked hard to turn a profit and provide a benefit for taxpayers, so of course it is going to remain open,'' said Micah Rasmussen, the governor's spokesman.
As for the proposed Newark arena, Mr. Rasmussen said all projects must be evaluated on their own merits. But, he added, as a matter of policy the McGreevey administration would not support any sports venture that used taxpayer dollars. He would not comment on whether the governor viewed Newark's planned source of financing for its arena, lease payments for Newark Liberty International Airport, as taxpayer dollars.
The governor's comments came barely a day after the city hurriedly unveiled a letter of intent with the New Jersey Devils to help build the arena and occupy it by 2007. The announcement by Mayor Sharpe James was seen by many business and civic leaders as his attempt to reassure local leaders that he was still pursuing the goal of revitalizing the city's downtown. They said it also served as a pointed signal to Governor McGreevey to honor longstanding commitments to support revitalization. And for a short time Tuesday, the announcement seemed to be boosting confidence in the city's chances.
The mayor's office did not return calls Tuesday seeking a response to the governor's late-afternoon statement.
Newark had originally envisioned its arena as home to both the Devils and the New Jersey Nets, who also play at Continental Arena. After last month's sale of the Nets to a developer who plans to move the basketball team to Brooklyn, Newark was confronted by an aggressive effort by the head of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, George R. Zoffinger, to keep open the Continental Arena, just 12 miles away in East Rutherford. At the same time, Mr. Zoffinger, a key economic adviser to the governor, loudly disparaged any thought of Newark's building an arena to house one sports team.
Until the governor weighed in Tuesday, the city's effort to rally its supporters seemed to be working.
Arthur Stern, the president of the Cogswell Real Estate Group, who supports revitalization efforts, said the letter of intent was ''a wonderful thing that will psychologically encourage other investors and capital markets'' interested in the city. It signaled the city's commitment, he said, noting the investment of $200 million of its own money into the project.
''It is my hope that the governor gets behind this,'' Mr. Stern said before the governor's statement supporting the Meadowlands. ''One of the things that got lost in the whole dialogue over a Newark arena was that it was to be an economic stimulus for the city. Some have tried to make it a debate over whether public money should benefit wealthy sports team owners.''
And even as the governor's spokesman was suggesting that that indeed was the issue, State Senator Leonard Lance, the Republican Senate leader, echoed that view when asked for his reaction to the Newark arena proposal.
''We at the level of state government in Trenton contribute greatly to the city of Newark and we do not favor subsidizing rich owners of sports teams,'' Mr. Lance said. ''We have to know a good deal more about these contractual arrangements.''
By contrast, the Democratic Senate president, Richard Codey, has said he supports the arena, saying the state should not try to block the city from spending its money the way it wants to.
The proposed $300 million, 18,000-seat arena is envisioned as the center of nearly $1 billion of commercial and residential development in aging downtown Newark, including the construction of a new headquarters for the city's 56,000-student school system.
The current proposal calls for the city to put up $200 million, while the Devils owners would contribute $100 million and get the right to operate and manage the arena. The proposed site, two long blocks from Pennsylvania Station, where PATH, New Jersey Transit and Amtrak trains stop, would also have parking decks to accommodate 3,500 cars.
The deal depends on many factors, including confirmation through engineering studies that an arena area deep below the surface could be accommodated without added construction costs. One city official close to the negotiations said the Devils wanted to make sure they could get a builder willing to sign a deal with ''a guaranteed maximum price,'' and to do that there had to be confirmation in advance of the engineering complexities.
Among the other issues to be worked out are how revenue from concessions and other booked events would be split between the city and the team, what annual lease payments the team would pay and whether or not the city's investment would be recouped.
