A former Chrysler chief financial officer, Gary Valade, testified Tuesday that he had not been ''snookered'' by the 1998 merger of Chrysler with Daimler-Benz.
''From the shareholders' standpoint, I think we negotiated the highest premium that was possible to negotiate,'' Mr. Valade said of the 28 percent adjustment that gave Chrysler shareholders a $57.50 share value used for the stock exchange ratio in the deal.
''I think the $57.50 was a home run,'' he said during questioning by his lawyer, Robert Saunders. Later, he acknowledged that during the negotiation period, the former Chrysler chairman, Robert Eaton, said he hoped to receive $80 a share and at least $65.
''I think it was the right strategic long-term move for the Chrysler Corporation as well as the Daimler-Benz Corporation,'' Mr. Valade said of the merger. ''So I think in terms of the company and its ability to survive going forward, it was a huge step as well as the right step.''
His testimony came 12 days into the trial brought by the billionaire investor Kirk Kerkorian, who sued DaimlerChrysler in 2000, asserting that he was defrauded by the company and its chairman, Jürgen Schrempp, of the $1.2 billion premium he would have demanded for his 89 million Chrysler shares had he known the deal was a takeover and not a ''merger of equals.''
Mr. Valade testified that both companies had to fashion a deal that would persuade 90 percent of their shareholders to vote for it. By using what is known as pooling accounting, he said, ''we could avoid basically an $800 million to $900 million write-off of amortization of good will,'' increasing profit earnings by 40 to 50 cents a share a year.
The 13.8 percent Chrysler stake held by the Tracinda Corporation, Mr. Kerkorian's investment company, could have been a blocking vote in that situation, a lawyer for Tracinda, Terry Christensen, said.
Mr. Christensen began his questioning of Mr. Valade by asking: ''You certainly as an individual were not snookered, were you? Didn't you get $22 million by virtue of the closing of the transaction?''
Mr. Valade acknowledged that other Chrysler executives received similar compensation, including $66 million for Mr. Eaton, who for two years was co-chairman of DaimlerChrysler.
In more than five hours of cross-examination, Mr. Valade stayed on message, saying that notwithstanding the term ''merger of equals,'' the transaction was driven more by generating shareholder value, building a global auto company and generating compatibilities than it was by the ratio of board members from Chrysler to those from Daimler-Benz.
