The five towns of eastern Suffolk County have long been the neglected stepchildren of the Long Island political scene, sparsely populated and easily ignored.
They grew grapes and potatoes while the county's five western towns cultivated county executives. In the west, fraud, corruption and suspicious land deals brought down county officials; in the east, the biggest recent scandal erupted after a Manhattan publicist backed her father's sport utility vehicle into a crowd of partygoers.
But after years of sitting at the political kids' table, there are signs that the East End is emerging as a social and political force on Long Island. Once a sunny expanse that shut down after Labor Day, the East End has become a year-round hive of development, and politicians are taking notice, county officials and Suffolk political observers said.
Debates over land preservation, illegal immigration and affordable housing in Suffolk County have all shifted east. The populations of the eastern towns of Riverhead, Southampton and East Hampton climbed by 20 percent over the last decade, census data show, while towns like Babylon or Huntington in western Suffolk only saw single-digit increases. The United States representative who represents much of Suffolk hails from Southampton, as opposed to his predecessor, a scion of Brookhaven.
And on Monday, Suffolk County Executive Steve Levy delivered his first state of the county address at Southampton College, the first time a Suffolk executive ventured into the Hamptons to deliver the address.
Some Republican legislators said the venue was Mr. Levy's attempt to court favor with skeptical East End voters or woo Representative Tim Bishop, the Democratic from Southampton. Mr. Levy simply said he was trying to show he cared about an area long overlooked by county politicians.
In many ways, the East End is Suffolk County's Staten Island. It is remote, less developed, and many parts of it feel less like Long Island than New England, with residents who root for the Red Sox and listen to Connecticut radio stations. From time to time, talk of secession flits up and down village sidewalks.
''It's always been tricky,'' said Patrick Halpin, a former Democratic Suffolk County executive. ''The East End always feels like a neglected middle child. It's cultural. It's different. It's still very rural compared to the rest of the county.''
To East Enders, life here is an antidote to the parade of tire stores, Burger Kings and mattress wholesalers that flank six-lane highways throughout other parts of Long Island. County Road 111, which runs north-south at Exit 70 off the Long Island Expressway, roughly divides east from west, villages from 'burbs.
Only about 10 percent of Suffolk's 1.2 million people live in the five eastern towns of Riverhead, East Hampton, Southold, Southampton and Shelter Island, and none of Suffolk's executives or most powerful county officials trace their roots here, county officials said. James Larocca, a former president of the Long Island Association, said the East End's dislocation from the rest of Suffolk goes back to its tiny population.
''Most politics is about the numbers, and most of the numbers are in western Suffolk County,'' Mr. Larocca said Tuesday afternoon as he discussed problems of vanishing farmlands and new development while driving past muddy cornfields that bordered newly built mansions. ''The question is, why is Suffolk getting more attention? As the population migration continues, it puts more of these issues before more and more people.''
For years, people living on the East End have clamored to secede from Suffolk County and form their own Peconic County. Mr. Larocca said many believe a Peconic government would be more receptive to concerns about clogged two-lane highways, vanishing farmlands, new housing developments and the plight of commercial fishermen.
Though 71 percent of East End voters supported a resolution on secession in 1997, Albany lawmakers have effectively barred the East End from fleeing Suffolk. ''I don't think there was a sense that the East End was as involved in Suffolk County political issues as it has become,'' said Dr. Chuck Hitchcock, dean of Southampton College. ''People on the East End now perceive that their immediate future is tied up with Suffolk County as a whole.''
Rapid development, soaring housing prices and demographic changes have fueled the East End's growing political prominence, Suffolk officials said. Most of the farmlands and pine-studded expanses Suffolk officials seek to preserve lie on the East End. All areas of Suffolk are grappling with housing prices, but Suffolk Legislator Jay Schneiderman, the former supervisor of East Hampton town, said only 2 percent of year-round residents can afford to buy a house on the East End, where average prices are $500,000 to $600,000.
And Isabel Sepulveda de Scanlon, an advocate for Hispanics in East Hampton, said the epicenter of debate on immigration has shifted from Farmingville in western Suffolk to the Hamptons. Hispanic immigrants make up 14 percent of the East End population, according to census estimates, and have been drawn here to work at wineries, paint houses and mow lawns, Ms. Scanlon said.
''The increase in the population in the last five years, it has been incredible,'' Ms. Scanlon said. ''It has been noticeable everywhere.''
The friction between Hispanics and Anglo residents has not turned violent, as it did in Farmingville, but this autumn, someone nailed toilet seats to telephone polls urging voters to ''flush'' East Hampton's only Hispanic town board member.
Mr. Levy touched on those issues during his speech Monday night, but he is not by any stretch the only politician to discover the East End.
There is more money out here than traffic on a Fourth of July weekend, and politicians ranging from former president Bill Clinton to New York Democratic Senators Charles Schumer and Hillary Clinton have held fund-raisers here, Suffolk political experts said. Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska and former Senator Robert Torricelli have also come to court East Enders, said Mr. Larocca, the former Long Island Association president.
Whether Suffolk is moving east or the East End is moving west, Howard Scarrow, a political science professor emeritus at Stony Brook University, said Mr. Levy's aim in his speech Monday night was clearly a gesture of unity.
''I thought that was good symbolism,'' Mr. Scarrow said. ''I expect they do feel sort of isolated out there.''
