THE appearance on camera of a sponsor's product in a recent segment of the ''American Morning'' news show on CNN was accidental and unintentional, CNN says. But the glimpse of a package of Total cereal opened the network to complaints about the blurring of the lines between advertising and editorial content.
The box of Total Corn Flakes turned up in a segment on Feb. 3 sponsored by Total and its maker, General Mills. The segment is part of a series called ''New You Resolution,'' intended to help viewers replace bad eating habits with healthier ones. Dr. Sanjay Gupta, the CNN health correspondent, is the host.
As a nutritionist was breading catfish filets with corn flakes that morning, the top portion of the Total Corn Flakes package was visible for two seconds as the bag containing the cereal was being removed from the box.
To some viewers, it seemed as if the box had been placed specifically in the segment, much as the products of sponsors are shown on camera in episodes of entertainment programming ranging from ''Survivor'' to ''24'' to ''The Real World.''
''The news should not be for sale to the highest bidder,'' said Gary Ruskin, executive director for Commercial Alert in Portland, Ore., an organization that fights what its members consider to be the creeping commercialization of American culture.
''The influence of General Mills upon a major news outlet like CNN is so worrisome,'' Mr. Ruskin said, because of the increasing coverage by CNN and other news media of issues like the role that food marketing plays in the growing obesity of the general public.
It was a reader, not Mr. Ruskin, who first raised the issue in an e-mail message that day after watching ''America Morning.'' The reader was aware of the Total sponsorship of the segments after reading a report about it last month on the Web site of the trade publication Advertising Age.
''I thought it was strange that CNN would let an advertiser underwrite a specific news segment on health,'' wrote the reader, who asked not to be identified because, he said, he was not seeking personal publicity. ''But I figured if CNN maintained a fire wall between editorial and advertising, no harm, no foul.''
The glimpse of the Total box was ''not as bad as NBC News's 'Camel News Caravan,''' the reader wrote, evoking the era when network newscasts proudly carried the names of sponsors in the titles. ''But I can't think of any contemporary examples of product placement on a newscast.''
CNN was subsequently asked whether the appearance of the Total Corn Flakes constituted a product placement as part of the sponsorship agreement between General Mills and the network, part of Time Warner. The parties described their agreement last month as an ''integrated marketing partnership.'' The promotion, which began Jan. 5, is to last eight weeks and include elements like commercials on CNN and its sibling network, Headline News; an area on the CNN Web site (cnn.com); newspaper advertisements; and ads on Total cereal boxes.
A spokeswoman for CNN in New York, Christa Robinson, said that the appearance was in no way meant to be a product placement.
''We always take measures to avoid even the appearance of a conflict,'' Ms. Robinson said. ''In this circumstance the script that had been vetted used generic corn flakes, but a guest unexpectedly brought in the Total box.''
A spokesman for the Big G cereals division of General Mills in Golden Valley, Minn., Tom Johnson, said product placement ''was never a part of this agreement'' and was never discussed at the meetings he attended about the sponsorship.
''We never asked for it; we never suggested it; we did not request this,'' he added. ''We never suggested the recipe they used'' on the segment.
Total is not a top-selling cereal brand, ranking 19th among all cereals sold in the United States, according to Information Resources Inc., a research company, but it was, Advertising Age reported, the third-most- advertised Big G brand through the first 10 months of 2003, behind only Cheerios and Honey Nut Cheerios.
The health-mindedness of General Mills when it comes to cereal marketing is underscored by plans reported this week by Advertising Age for the company to become the first mainstream cereal maker to bring out a low-carb product, with a version of Total to be called Total Protein.
CNN found itself involved in a debate over the location of the line between advertising and editorial content in 1997, when a print ad for Visa USA featuring Jonathan Karl, then a correspondent for CNN, ran in magazines like Spin, Vibe and Wired.
Mr. Karl said he received the approval of a superior at CNN to appear in the ad. But after a reporter asked CNN about the ad, the network's top executive said he disapproved, CNN revamped the way it reviewed outside activities of news employees and Visa agreed to a request from Mr. Karl to discontinue the ad.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
