Racing feverishly against a large clock on the wall, Thomas Ulitto and Daniel Sin, two high school seniors from Staten Island, chugged from water bottles and glanced at competing teams in adjacent lanes. They sealed their victory with a crucial relay and eventually won the right to represent New York State in a national competition this spring.
Thomas, 18, and Daniel, 17, were not competing on a track, but on a 2004 Pontiac Grand Am, with its hood open and its engine cover removed. They are not competitive athletes, but aspiring car mechanics who attend Tottenville High School. And the crucial relay was the faulty electronic relay in the car's starter.
After replacing it, they successfully started the car, and went on to win the New York finals of the National Automotive Technology Competition yesterday in Whitestone, Queens.
Each team was led to a new car provided by sponsoring dealerships. The cars would not start because of various malfunctions, or bugs, planted by tournament officials. In addition to getting the cars started and diagnosing the bugs, the contestants had to perform a long list of inspections.
Thomas and Daniel, who beat 11 other teams from the New York region that competed in the finals, will represent the state against 36 teams from across the United States and Canada at a competition to be held on April 13 and 14 at the New York International Automobile Show at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center in Manhattan. Among the prizes were scholarship offers from various schools and some tools. The finals in this annual troubleshooting competition, in a large heated tent at the headquarters of the Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association, attracted automotive students, mostly from vocational schools, who had won regional automotive skills competitions in their areas.
In addition to finding and repairing vehicle malfunctions, the teams were assessed at four workstations, which include emissions testing, electronic diagnosis, chassis alignment and the ability to write repair orders and reference manuals.
Nelson Hernandez and Salvador Dominguez, both 17, raised eyebrows early on by starting their Ford Taurus within about four minutes.
Nelson and Salvador, who live in the South Bronx and attend the Alfred E. Smith Vocational High School there, joked that their performance would impress even the best hot-wirers in their neighborhood. The two said they had honed their automotive skills by working on the souped-up Hondas, called Whoop-tees, that are popular with their friends.
Neither teenager owns a car. ''You can't really park a nice car in the street where we live,'' Nelson said. ''Even your headlights aren't safe. You got guys who can pop them out with one flick of a screwdriver.''
A small cheering section of friends and fellow students rooted for Ramiro Bermudez and Alex Martinez, both 18. After fixing a fuse and a relay, the students, who attend Thomas A. Edison Vocational and Technical High School in Jamaica, Queens, finally started up their Buick Century.
Officials at the association said there was a dearth of trained auto mechanics with the technological knowledge to work on new cars. They began organizing the competition to help lure young mechanics into automotive schools. The group has begun building a $25 million Center for Automotive Education and Training in Whitestone.
In addition to conventional tools, the contestants used laptops and computerized diagnostic tools, since most operations in modern cars are now computerized. ''The best two-man mechanic crew should have one grease monkey and one computer geek,'' said Sean Emerson, 17, a competitor representing Islip Technical Center in Oakdale, N.Y.
Neither Daniel nor Thomas is a computer whiz, but both said they remained after school, sometimes until 8 p.m., working on cars. ''It's the only subject that didn't make me fall asleep in class,'' said Daniel, who does not drive. ''My parents won't let me own a car or get my license because I only got a 1,180 on my SAT's. All three of my sisters are pharmacists and got, like, 1,400.''
