Staff lawyers at the Department of Justice are recommending that the agency seek to block the Oracle Corporation's $9.4 billion hostile takeover of PeopleSoft Inc. on the grounds that the deal would be anticompetitive, PeopleSoft said late Tuesday.
''The staff informed me this evening of three things,'' a PeopleSoft lawyer, Gary Reback, said. ''One, that the staff made a recommendation; two, that they recommended the deal be blocked; and three, that the Department of Justice will make its final decision by March 2.''
Mr. Reback, an antitrust lawyer with Carr &amp; Ferrell in Palo Alto, Calif., declined to elaborate on the reasons for the decision.
The matter now goes to R. Hewitt Pate, the assistant attorney general for antitrust in the Justice Department, who will make a decision on whether to block the deal.
Though a staff recommendation carries considerable weight, it does not necessarily mean that Mr. Pate will reach the same conclusion, antitrust lawyers said.
If Mr. Pate agrees with the recommendation and decides the deal is anticompetitive, the agency will file a lawsuit to block the deal. Most likely, antitrust lawyers said, such a suit would be filed in Washington.
James Rill, a lawyer with Howrey, Simon, Arnold &amp; White who is representing Oracle, said: ''In my experience, the assistant attorney general will take ample time to review the facts of this situation with an open mind and meet with Oracle before coming to a decision on the matter. This process simply is not complete.''
The decision by the Justice Department lawyers could be a significant blow to Oracle, which has been locked in an eight-month battle to acquire PeopleSoft, a competitor in the market for enterprise application software. Last week, Oracle raised its offer for the second time, to $26 a share, a 33 percent premium over its last offer, which PeopleSoft quickly rejected.
PeopleSoft has maintained that a takeover by Oracle undervalues PeopleSoft and would hurt PeopleSoft's customers.
The European Commission is also reviewing the deal and has said it will make a decision on whether to block it by March 30.
Oracle, based in Redwood Shores, Calif., recently filed a list of five candidates whom it planned to nominate to PeopleSoft's board in the hope of staging a proxy fight for control.
On Tuesday, Lawrence J. Ellison, Oracle's chief executive, filed a letter with the Securities and Exchange Commission that the company intended to send to PeopleSoft shareholders in hopes of winning their support.
