Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is once again slipping into the quicksand created by his citywide smoking ban -- not over its existence, but over perceived inconsistencies in enforcing it.
The troubles for the mayor began last week when The New York Times reported on a black-tie dinner on Jan. 15 at the St. Regis Hotel where Wall Street big shots puffed away on cigars within smelling distance of the mayor. Mr. Bloomberg, whose ban on smoking extends to every restaurant, bar and hotel in the city, has urged New Yorkers to tattle on those who break the law. The city has issued dozens of summonses.
Mr. Bloomberg has since said he did not see smoking -- or at least he did not remember seeing smoking -- at the St. Regis event, and yesterday he became annoyed during an interview on WLIB when he was asked about it again.
''It's somebody trying to make a story,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''The bottom line is, I don't really remember anybody smoking. Most people weren't, and if there were some people in the corner smoking, they were smoking. What do you want me to do, call the cops?''
Well, yes, many people indeed would have liked to see Mr. Bloomberg force the wealthy revelers at the St. Regis to put their cigars out, because that in fact is what the law dictates. The problem for Mr. Bloomberg is that he has more than once given the appearance of having a different standard for upper-class New Yorkers -- some of whom have taken to puffing in front of the mayor with the explicit goal of taunting him -- than he does for bar hoppers around the rest of the city.
''Bloomberg is a clear example of 'Do As I Say, Not As I Do,''' said Tricia Romano, who has a nightlife column in The Village Voice. ''The places he parties are high-society hangouts -- they aren't going to get complaints from the neighbors. And I'd be shocked if a gang of rich socialites were huddled outside smoking cigarettes and driving the neighbors crazy with the noise.''
This is not the first time this has happened to Mr. Bloomberg. Last summer, police officers gave tickets to people drinking beer in public at a July 4 party on the beach in the Rockaways, but allowed people to drink wine in Central Park during a free concert by the New York Philharmonic the following Monday.
When asked about the discrepancy at a news conference, Mr. Bloomberg said that the drinking near the beach led to drowning, adding: "I don't know of anybody that's drowned in a tuba recently."
