Up to 80 people were killed and at least 76 were injured in two car bombs that exploded within almost 24 hours of each other in central Baghdad and in a nearby town, officials said Wednesday. Most of the casualties were Iraqis applying for jobs with the new Iraqi Army and police forces.
The car bomb in Baghdad exploded at 7:40 a.m. on Wednesday outside the recruiting station of the Iraqi Army headquarters, killing at least 25 Iraqis, said Staff Sgt. Shane Slaughter, a spokesman for the American military. The station is next door to the volunteer center of a prominent Shiite political party and near the main railway station.
The bombing on Tuesday morning took place in the town of Iskandariya, 30 miles south of Baghdad. The explosion ripped through a police station where many Iraqis had lined up to apply for jobs with the police.
The local police chief said the attack was carried out by a suicide bomber, through the American military could not confirm that.
It was unclear whether a suicide bomber was responsible for the explosion in Baghdad. The recruiting station was in an area called the Muthana airport, long abandoned but recently taken over by the American military and the new Iraqi Army.
The adjacent volunteer center is run by the Dawa Islamic Party, a prominent Shiite party whose leaders recently returned from exile in London and Iran. Al Jazeera, the Arab-language television station, said at least 16 people were wounded in the Wednesday blast.
Both attacks appeared to be aimed at Iraqi civilians ready to aid occupation forces in securing the country against groups of criminals, terrorists and insurgents. In Iskandariya, the bomb exploded as a line of job applicants, mostly men, snaked out the door of the police station.
The car that detonated held about 500 pounds of explosives, an American military spokesman said. It was the third deadliest bombing since American-led forces ousted Saddam Hussein in April, and it continued a disturbing pattern of insurgents or terrorists killing Iraqis who are willing to work alongside occupation forces.
The attack came days after American officials released details of an intercepted document supposedly written by a suspected Jordanian terrorist, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, in which Mr. Zarqawi boasts of directing about 25 suicide bombings in Iraq and requests help from Al Qaeda in igniting a sectarian war.
As usual, no group claimed responsibility for the bombing. But a spokesman for the occupation forces, Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt of the United States Army, said Mr. Zarqawi was a suspect in all of the major bombings in Iraq, including the one in Iskandariya.
Body parts and debris rained over the area when the bomb went off at about 9:30 a.m., and flames engulfed nearby cars, witnesses said. The explosion sheared off parts of the police station's yellow brick front wall. Bits of charred metal from the car landed more than a hundred yards away, falling inside a children's playground and near a mosque.
Blackened bodies were taken to the main hospital and placed on a patch of dirt beneath palm trees outside the one-room building serving as a morgue. Hospital workers in white coats carried the bodies one-by-one into the cramped building and piled them like logs on the floor.
''What did they do, these people who were killed?'' Col. Abdul Rahim Salih, the local police chief, asked as he stood in the inner courtyard of the wrecked police station, tears welling up in his eyes. ''People were hungry, they were suffering. They came here to put food on their table, and they died.''
As Colonel Salih spoke, hours after the bombing, several police officers outside the station sprayed the air with their AK-47 rifles to disperse a crowd chanting anti-American slogans. That infuriated the men even more. They began hurling stones at a police pickup truck and rushed toward it as one officer jumped into the cab, started the engine and quickly backed the truck down the street.
Half an hour earlier, a mob had surrounded the chief of the Iraqi police, Brig. Gen. Ahmed Ibrahim, and shouted out that the police station had been destroyed by American fighter jets launching missiles. American soldiers who had set up a cordon leveled their M-16 rifles at the crowd. General Ibrahim leaped into his squad car and hurried off to Baghdad while the men in the crowd fled across the street.
Military officials have said they expect spectacular attacks in the months leading up to the scheduled transfer of sovereignty to an Iraqi government on June 30. This one certainly met that description. Only two other bombings in Iraq have killed more people. On Feb. 1, two suicide bombers walked into separate offices in Erbil of the main Kurdish political parties and detonated their explosives, killing 109 people. In late August, a car bomb exploded in the holy city of Najaf in southern Iraq, killing at least 80 people, including a respected Shiite cleric.
But the attack in Iskandariya most closely mirrors one last month at the northern entrance -- called the Assassin's Gate -- of the American headquarters in Baghdad. There, a suicide bomber detonated 1,000 pounds of plastic explosive in a pickup truck while Iraqis were waiting in line to go to work inside the compound, killing at least 25 people.
The bombing here took place on a Shiite holiday and on the second day of an open-door police job fair. More than 100 people had turned up in the morning to fill out forms, said Colonel Salih, the local police chief. The line stretched out the station past dirt-filled barriers.
One job applicant, Kadum Hamid Kanoosh, lay with a singed face and broken ribs in another hospital bed.
''I felt a fireball, then I fainted,'' said Mr. Kanoosh, 37. He smiled weakly. ''I'm still determined to apply to be a policeman,'' he said. ''I came to protect my country and my society.''
Mr. Kanoosh, who said one of his brothers was executed under Saddam Hussein, has another working as a police officer in Baghdad. He and two other brothers were taking the first steps on that same path when they got in line at the police station on Tuesday. Neither of his brothers was wounded in the blast.
The hospital's general surgeon, Muhammad Gumar, said doctors had counted 51 bodies. The hospital also took in 60 of the wounded, nine of them police officers. About 20 critically wounded victims were sent to hospitals in Baghdad and the nearby town of Hilla, where three died, Dr. Gumar said.
Occupation officials say Iraq is in desperate need of police officers as the American military tries to lower its profile on the streets. Baghdad alone needs 10,000 more police officers, because the 9,000 in the city now are not enough, said Brig. Gen. Mark Hertling, a commander with the First Armored Division. At least 300 police officers have died in attacks since last April, according to the Iraqi Interior Ministry.
In Iskandariya, the bombing showed that the Americans still have not won the Iraqis' full trust. Rumors of an American missile attack spread quickly, and dozens of Iraqi men stormed the ruined police station after American soldiers left in the late afternoon. ''No, no to America!'' they chanted while swarming past the charred hulks of cars.
''This is not a matter of jihad,'' said the tearful police chief, Colonel Salih, as his men began firing above the crowd. ''What kind of jihad is this?''  THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: COMBAT
