The Devils had been routed a few times this season, but this loss seemed different. Even when they lose, they are so disciplined that it is hard to tell they are losing. But they lost their cool Tuesday night, then fell apart.
The Philadelphia Flyers pounced. They grabbed the lead with two power-play goals in the first two periods, then pounded the Devils' faltering defense for two third-period goals to win, 4-1, before a delighted sellout crowd of 19,714 at Wachovia Center.
''We tried to do things that aren't us,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
As a result, the Devils (28-15-10-1) fell 7 points behind Philadelphia (29-12-11-5), the Atlantic Division leader. The Flyers have played three more games than the Devils, who must regroup quickly before playing the Rangers at home Wednesday.
''I don't think it's the end of the world, Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur said.
Although Philadelphia acquired the veteran goaltender Sean Burke in a trade with Phoenix late Monday, 23-year-old Antero Niittymaki started against the Devils and was brilliant, and occasionally lucky, stopping 35 of 36 shots.
Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer scored a power-play goal against Niittymaki with 16 minutes 57 seconds remaining, but that only served to end the Devils 109-minute-16-second stretch without a goal. The Flyers scored again seven minutes later for the final margin.
''They've got to make the goals bigger,'' Devils forward Patrik Elias said. ''I'm just kidding.''
The Devils, who entered the game as the least penalized team in the N.H.L., did not help themselves by taking six penalties in the first 21:24 of the game. The Flyers scored on two of the six power plays.
''When you play well, you dont take penalties,'' Niedermayer said.
Devils defenseman Scott Stevens missed his 15th straight game with what he said may be postconcussion syndrome, and it is apparent that the Devils miss him, especially as a crease-clearing penalty killer.
They allowed only two power-play goals in 30 chances in the first 10 games Stevens missed, but they have given up two power-play goals in three of their last five games. They lost those three. The Devils have killed 8 of 14 penalties in those five games.
''Right now, he's not in the room, and we've got to be at our best,'' Niedermayer said. ''For a full game, we weren't tonight.''
Philadelphia scored within 45 seconds on its second power play. With Colin White serving an interference penalty, Joni Pitkanen flipped a shot from the face-off circle that Brodeur stopped, but the puck bounced off him.
Jeremy Roenick gathered it in and slipped the puck to the other side of the goal. Simon Gagne beat defenseman Tommy Albelin to the spot, and Gagne shoved in his 13th goal of the season, at 14:45.
Devils center Scott Gomez gave the Flyers yet another chance with a slashing penalty early in the second period. Seconds after Keith Primeau flattened Gomez with a clean check, Gomez whacked Primeau across the wrists.
''It was stupid on my part,'' Gomez said.
Philadelphia padded its lead with a goal by the recently acquired defenseman Danny Markov at 2:52 of the second period. Markov took a shot from just inside the blue line, and it sailed past Brodeur's glove.
''I saw it late, and it was coming pretty hard,'' Brodeur said.
Although the Flyers had created a commotion to Brodeur's right, he did not appear to be screened before Markov took the shot. Markov, picked up from Carolina for Justin Williams, scored his fifth goal of the season and his first as a Flyer.
''We shouldn't have given up two power-play goals, whether the penalties were good or bad,'' Devils center John Madden said.
The Devils took 12 shots against Niittymaki in the final 15:30 of the second period but did not score.
''I don't know how many posts we hit,'' Gomez said, ''but it's just not going in for us right now.''
HOCKEY
