For several weeks, speculation has been rampant on Wall Street and in the industry about which of the global telecommunications giants might make a move for AT&amp;T Wireless when the company is put up for auction on Friday. It now appears unlikely that more than two will make bids for the nation's third-largest mobile phone company, according to people close to the auction.
Cingular is expected to submit a cash bid, and Vodafone may do so as well. Nextel is a long shot but could submit an offer to buy AT&amp;T Wireless for stock. NTT DoCoMo is not expected to participate, those people said.
They also said that Cingular may be considering a bid significantly higher than the $30 billion, or $11 a share, nonbinding offer it made to AT&amp;T Wireless in January. The reason for the increased offer, they said, is in part because Cingular could obtain $10 billion to $15 billion in operational savings over several years by merging with AT&amp;T Wireless.
AT&amp;T Wireless stock closed yesterday at $11.25, down 5 cents. But the stock has climbed steadily since early December, when it was around $7.
Cingular, which is owned 60 percent by SBC Communications and 40 percent by Bell South, declined to comment. An SBC executive, who requested anonymity, said, ''This is the most strategic acquisition for Cingular with compelling synergies and we are determined to be successful.''
Cingular could potentially save $2.5 billion to $3 billion a year initially, people close to the deal said. The savings would come from merging operations, like network deployment and maintenance, and in paring down redundancies in marketing, publicity, billing and other back-office functions.
It is unclear whether the information circulating is reliable or part of the strategies used by the rivals to gain an advantage in the run-up to the auction. In the last few weeks since AT&amp;T Wireless said it would put itself up for sale, each of the telecommunications suitors has sought to put itself in the best possible light for the acquisition while casting doubt on the positions of its competitors. And it has been in AT&amp;T Wireless's interest to promote the idea that there are numerous bidders, potentially leading to higher bids.
The prospective bidders have sought to rationalize their interest to their shareholders while raising questions about the ability of competitors to buy AT&amp;T Wireless. The competition reflects the deep tensions in the cellphone market, which analysts have said is poised for consolidation.
The six major players -- Verizon Wireless, Cingular, T-Mobile USA, Nextel, Sprint and AT&amp;T Wireless -- have been in a bruising battle to win a greater share of the turbulent, growing mobile market in the United States. Verizon is the current leader with 37.5 million customers, followed by Cingular with 24 million, and AT&amp;T Wireless, with around 22 million.
The sale of AT&amp;T Wireless also has global implications. NTT DoCoMo, which owns 16 percent of AT&amp;T Wireless, has been said to want to keep a foothold in the United States. Likewise, Vodafone, the world's largest mobile phone provider and owner of 45 percent of Verizon Wireless (the other 55 percent is owned by Verizon), may be eager to expand its holdings in this market.
Vodafone, a British company, does not have operational control of Verizon Wireless, but acquisition of AT&amp;T Wireless would give it control of a mobile company in the United States. In addition, Vodafone and AT&amp;T Wireless use similar underlying technologies, which provide significant savings on equipment purchases and operations.
Cingular is also hoping to achieve $5 billion in ''strategic benefits,'' in part from acquiring AT&amp;T Wireless's radio spectrum. Cingular has relatively little spectrum compared with its chief competitors, and it would have to spend $2.5 billion in the next several years to license new spectrum if it does not win the AT&amp;T Wireless auction, according to people close to the dealings.
