HIGHLIGHTS
SHANGHAI: NO 'VAGINA MONOLOGUES' -- A Chinese-language production of ''The Vagina Monologues'' by Eve Ensler, scheduled to open last night in Shanghai for a monthlong run, has been canceled, The Associated Press reported. An unidentified theater employee told the news agency that the Shanghai Cultural Bureau gave no reason for the ban, but that the Shanghai Drama Arts Theater, where the performance was to have played, was informing callers that the time was ''not ripe'' in China for this production. The play addresses female sexuality and domestic violence. The BBC reported, however, that a spokesman for the theater denied that the government intervened because of objections to the play's sexually explicit content. ''It's our own problem, not the government's,'' the spokesman said.
DIANA ROSS, JAIL BOUND -- The pop diva Diana Ross, 59, was ordered by an Arizona judge to spend two days in jail after pleading no contest on Monday to driving under the influence of alcohol, Reuters reported. According to her lawyer, Stephen Paul Barnard, Ms. Ross entered her plea by telephone and will probably serve her time in a jail near her home in Los Angeles. ''I think she is very pleased to have this behind her,'' Mr. Barnard said. Ms. Ross was picked up early in the morning of Dec. 30, 2002, by Tucson police officers responding to a call about a motorist driving the wrong way through traffic.
FAREWELL TO FABERGÉ -- Beginning tomorrow, Sotheby's will offer the New York public a last chance to see the most expensive dozen eggs in the world: the Fabergé treasures from the Forbes collection, valued at more than $90 million and bought last week by a Russian billionaire for return to Russia. The nine imperial Fabergé eggs and three others that from the collection of the family of Malcolm Forbes will be on view daily, from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., through Sunday in Sotheby's 10th-floor galleries at 1334 York Avenue, at 72nd Street in Manhattan. Admission is free. The eggs, like the one above, and more than 165 other pieces in the collection were bought by the Russian industrialist Viktor Vekselberg two months before they were to be auctioned.
LINCOLN PRIZE WINNERS -- The Rhodes professor of American History at Oxford University has become the first British scholar to win the Lincoln Prize. He is Richard J. Carwardine, chosen to receive the $30,000 first prize and a bronze replica of Augustus Saint-Gaudens's lifesize bust ''Lincoln the Man'' for ''his highly original, tour de force analytical biography,'' ''Lincoln'' (Pearson Education Limited). In addition, Prof. John Y. Simon of Southern Illinois University at Carbondale is to receive a special Lincoln Prize of $20,000 for his achievement in editing 26 volumes to date of ''The Papers of Ulysses S. Grant'' (Southern Illinois University Press). The 14th annual Lincoln Prizes, announced today, are administered by the Lincoln and Soldiers Institute at Gettysburg College in Gettysburg, Pa.
RODDY DOYLE VS. JAMES JOYCE -- James Joyce's birthday present from the Irish writer Roddy Doyle was a figurative slap in the face. '' 'Ulysses' could have done with a good editor,'' Mr. Doyle told a gathering in New York to commemorate the birthday of Joyce (1882-1941), the BBC reported. ''People are always putting 'Ulysses' in the Top 10 books, but I doubt any of those people were really moved by it.'' As for ''Finnegans Wake,'' Joyce's successor to ''Ulysses,'' Mr. Doyle called it ''a complete waste of time,'' though he said he had read only three pages. This year Dublin plans to observe the centenary of Bloomsday, June 16, 1904, the date ''Ulysses'' unfolds. The planned events include a breakfast for 10,000 people on O'Connell Street in Dublin.
FOOTNOTES
What goes around comes around. Just as a revival of ''Fiddler on the Roof'' is scheduled to open on Feb. 26 at the Minskoff Theater, ''Rent,'' at the Nederlander Theater, played its 3,243rd performance last night, passing the original production of ''Fiddler'' to occupy 10th place on the list of Broadway's longest-running shows. . . . It's official. On May 4 Michael McKean will replace Harvey Fierstein as the ample Edna Turnblad in the hit production of ''Hairspray'' at the Neil Simon Theater. Mr. McKean, 56, most recently made news on Sunday night as a Grammy Award-winning writer of the song ''A Mighty Wind.'' As an actor he is probably best known as Lenny Kosnowski in ''Laverne and Shirley'' on television.
