Kurt Thomas spent more time in the locker room before the game, sorting tickets, than he would on the court. Thomas, the Knicks' power forward, was back in his hometown, where he had purchased 100 tickets, including 50 for the children from his family's church.
They saw him for all of 14 minutes.
Thomas, upset about an offensive foul and irritated by the trash-talking, elbow-throwing play of the rookie Josh Howard, head-butted Howard midway through the second quarter after he had been called for the foul. Thomas got a technical, but that was not all.
Referee Bennie Adams tossed him from the game as Thomas -- who had temper issues earlier in his career -- was ejected for the first time since January 2002 in Houston. Thomas left his teammates out of sync and his fans in the lurch.
Undermanned but not undaunted, the Knicks kept answering high-scoring Dallas, hoping to extend their winning streak to six games. They trailed by only 3 points with a little less than five minutes left. But with Thomas out, the Mavericks picked apart the Knicks and rolled over them, 105-90, at the American Airlines Center.
Thomas and his teammates all felt Adams overreacted, but it was too late to change the outcome. ''I didn't feel I should have been thrown out of the game,'' Thomas said. ''I felt it was a bad call. I barely touched him.''
Thomas leaned his head in sideways to make contact with Howard, who, Thomas said, had been ''using his hands a little too much.''
''It was a mistake I made by head-butting,'' Thomas said. ''It was disappointing. I let my teammates and coaches down by getting thrown out of the game.''
The loss ensures that the Knicks (25-28) will not be able to reach .500 before the All-Star Game break. They head to New Orleans to play the Hornets on Wednesday hoping to regain the momentum they lost without Thomas.
Had Thomas played, it would have been a different outcome, Coach Lenny Wilkens said.
''The game would have been right down to the wire because we had a good flow going; we were right there the whole time, and I think it would have made a difference,'' he said.
The Knicks' pick-and-pop fizzled without Thomas working in rhythm with Stephon Marbury. As a result, Keith Van Horn played out of position at power forward, scoring 18 points in the first half but just 2 in the second.
Wilkens elected to go with a small lineup to match up man to man against the perimeter-shooting Mavs, who are led by the 7-foot Dirk Nowitzki. Wilkens kept Dikembe Mutombo on the bench for the first time all season, which was surprising to Mutombo, considering Thomas was out of the game. Othella Harrington started in his place, finishing with 11 points and 13 rebounds.
''He's one of our top players, he's a big part to our team,'' Marbury said. ''When you lose a big part to our team, rebounding, mental toughness, shooting, you lose him, it makes it extremely tough.''
Thomas has been ejected six times in his Knicks career and had been known for having a short temper. But he had been controlled this season, without incident.
Two years ago in Houston, Thomas was ejected. The next day the team traveled to Dallas and Thomas got an earful from his mother, Angela. Asked what he expected her to say, Thomas shook his head. ''I'll find out in a few minutes,'' he said.
Marbury led the Knicks with 24 points, and it was his fast-break layup that cut the Dallas lead to 87-84 with 5 minutes 8 seconds to play. Dallas called a timeout.
Out of the timeout, Nowitzki scored on a 3-point play, igniting an 18-6 run to finish the game. He led all scorers with 27 points.
With 2:28 left, the Knicks were trailing by 9 when Marbury was launching a 12-footer. Wilkens had already signaled for a timeout. The ball fell through the net but did not count.
After the timeout, Marbury missed a 9-foot floater, lost a jump ball and Steve Nash sank a dagger 3-pointer, leading the Mavs on a 7-0 run that spoiled the Knicks' streak.
In the second quarter, the Knicks still fought despite Thomas's ejection when the score was tied, 33-33 with 6:07 left in the half. He was called for an offensive foul setting a hard pick on Antawn Jamison. Walking away he became entangled with Howard and head-butted him. The players from both teams came together at halfcourt, but there was no incident.
Thomas left having scored 6 points and grabbed 4 rebounds. Mutombo, from the bench saw it all. ''I thought the ref would give him a technical foul because he was very far away and he could not really see the action,'' Mutombo said of Adams. ''Joey and Luis was there, they saw everything and they didn't blow the whistle. He blew it from out there.''
So did the Knicks. Without Thomas, Van Horn said the game ''really changed.''
''We had guys playing out of position,'' Van Horn said. ''It was difficult. You have to do best with what you have.''
REBOUNDS
DIKEMBE MUTOMBO said he was surprised that LENNY WILKENS did not play him. ''He never put me on the bench before,'' said Mutombo, who played for Wilkens in Atlanta. ''I thought when Kurt was out, I might be able to play. I know we're going to go back to normal tomorrow.'' A night before DERMARR JOHNSON's 10-day contract was to expire, he learned right before the game that the Knicks signed him to a second 10-day contract Johnson played nine minutes, missed four shots, grabbed four rebounds and had two assists. . . . A Western Conference executive confirmed reports that ISIAH THOMAS was having ''on-going dialogue'' with Denver general manager KIKI VANDEWEGHE about forward RODNEY WHITE. The Nuggets, however, are not likely to give up White, the team's sixth leading scorer averaging 8 points, for Michael Doleac, the executive said two league executives confirmed that the Golden State Warriors were actively shopping center ERICK DAMPIER and that Thomas was interested as well.
PRO BASKETBALL
