Iraq is an odd place for a photo op. Staggering numbers of citizens are out of work, bandits roam the highways and terrorists continue to blow up buildings and people at a frightening rate.
But it is precisely because the popular image of the war-torn nation is so negative that the Bush administration helped arrange for Gov. George E. Pataki and five other governors to make a surprise visit there yesterday.
''The president, and I agree with him, thought it would be very helpful to have an understanding, to actually be here, to be able to talk to the people in Baghdad, to be able to see the troops in action,'' Mr. Pataki said in a telephone interview from Iraq. ''It has been invaluable.''
On a day when a car bomb killed more than 50 people at a police station outside Baghdad, Governor Pataki's trip was meant in part to highlight another side of what was happening in the country: the ways he said life has improved for Iraqis.
Mr. Pataki said his main goal on the trip -- which was kept so secret that reporters in Albany were not told until he arrived -- was to thank the troops from New York and to show his support by traveling thousands of miles to see them. But the political uses of the two-day trip were underscored when the Bush-Cheney campaign alerted reporters, even before Mr. Pataki's staff did, to the governor's planned appearances on three cable news networks last night to discuss his observations.
Kevin Madden, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said that the trip had been arranged by the administration and that the campaign staff had played no part. He said the e-mail message was not meant to be an official notification. Claire Buchan, a White House spokeswoman, said the trip was coordinated by the Department of Defense, with some help from the White House.
For Mr. Pataki, who has not said whether he intends to run for a fourth term or seek national office, the trip served to bolster his reputation as a loyal Bush Republican. He also raised his national profile by involving himself in an international issue. In his interview and appearances on television, he hewed closely to the administration line in describing Iraq, as he has been doing.
He linked what he saw in Iraq to the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks, saying it was good that ''this war on terror is being waged on the streets of Baghdad instead of by the firefighters on the streets of Brooklyn.''
Mr. Pataki is the latest of many politicians and celebrities who have gone to Iraq in recent months, including President Bush, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Prince Charles and the actor Sean Penn. All of them have had legitimate reasons for paying a visit, but there also seems to be an element of political chic in taking the roller-coaster airplane ride into Baghdad airport and standing next to strapping young soldiers.
Each visitor has viewed the complicated situation in Iraq through a personal prism. For Senator Clinton, the trip showed her how badly the Bush administration had bungled the peace. For Mr. Pataki, it highlighted the truth that Iraq was now free.
''I was talking with a factory worker in Baghdad, and he was complaining,'' Mr. Pataki said of an encounter just a few hours earlier. ''He was saying that the lights aren't on enough, the street had potholes, and I just had to chuckle. It reminded me of when I was the mayor of Peekskill. He felt like any New York constituent, except in Baghdad.
''And I said to him, 'Could you have said this when Saddam was here?' And his demeanor completely changed. He said no, there was no freedom.''
Mr. Pataki sounded excited and moved by what he saw, describing his meeting with L. Paul Bremer III, the chief American civilian administrator, Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, commander of the occupation forces, and other Iraqi leaders. But he said the most important reason for going was the troops.
''I have been meeting New Yorkers all over,'' Mr. Pataki said. ''It really makes you proud of them.''
It is the first time any governors have visited Iraq since the war. Mr. Pataki was joined on the trip by three fellow Republicans -- Linda Lingle of Hawaii, Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota and Dirk Kempthorne of Idaho -- as well as two Democrats, Kathleen Blanco of Louisiana and Ted Kulongoski of Oregon.
While the trip had been in the works for a month, administration officials said that for security reasons it had to be planned in utmost secrecy. In addition to meeting with Iraqi leaders, the governors visited a furniture store and traveled to factories, including a yogurt plant where they ate ice cream cones.
But highlighting the dangers still present in Iraq, the group traveled back to Amman, Jordan, to spend the night.
