With a month remaining before the trading deadline on March 11, the Rangers begin what may be their toughest six-game stretch of the season Wednesday night when they face the Devils at Continental Arena.
The Rangers have defeated the Devils only twice in the last 36 regular-season meetings. The Devils are 21-1-13-1 against the Rangers since Feb. 17, 1997, and are 15-1-3-0 at Continental Arena during that span.
Entering Tuesday night's action, the Rangers trailed the Islanders by 8 points for the final Eastern Conference playoff berth. Over the next 11 days, the Rangers will play the Eastern Conference-leading Philadelphia Flyers twice, the Ottawa Senators, the Islanders and the Devils again.
If the Rangers, who are 2-8-2-0 in their last 12 games, are still swooning by Feb. 21, when they play host to the Devils, Coach Glen Sather might have to finally give in to the inevitable and become a seller and not a buyer at the trading deadline. Sather admitted last week that he was considering rebuilding.
The two Rangers who figure to bring the biggest returns would be defenseman Brian Leetch, who turns 36 on March 3, and right wing Aleksei Kovalev.
''It's not really a concern,'' Leetch said Tuesday. ''This is a place I want to play. This is where I would like to be. It's not really in my control.''
Leetch does not have a no-trade clause in the two-year, $12 million deal he signed in the off-season.
Leetch, who has played all of his 1,118 games with the Rangers since he broke into the N.H.L. after the 1988 Winter Olympics, is the most accomplished defenseman in the 78-year history of the franchise. He is the team's career leader among defensemen in goals (237), assists (734) and points (971). When healthy, Leetch was the Rangers' most valuable player last season.
While many would argue that Leetch deserves another shot with a Stanley Cup contender, he would rather stay in New York.
''The organization has been too good to me,'' Leetch said. ''There is no better place to play, to win, to be successful. And I wouldn't ask for a trade.''
Nor would Kovalev, who turns 31 on Feb. 24. But Kovalev, who blossomed in Pittsburgh after being traded by the Rangers in November 1998, has again failed to fulfill his immense promise since the Rangers reacquired him last Feb. 10.
A 37-goal scorer last season, Kovalev has scored 11 times in 55 games. His contract expires after this season, which could make him more attractive to teams making a run at the Stanley Cup.
''That's nothing I can control right now,'' Kovalev said when asked about the possibility of being traded. ''I'd love to stay here. I love it here. It's the place I started out. I won a Stanley Cup here. But everything else is not up to me. If they decide to do something with me, that's their thing.
''I've been traded before. I don't care. It's not like I've got one year left to play hockey. But I want to be here. I want to help this team. I still think I can make a difference.''
SLAP SHOTS
As expected, the Rangers sent their top prospect, the 20-year-old defenseman FEDOR TYUTIN, back to Hartford of the American Hockey League after practice on Tuesday.
HOCKEY
