When the Nets retreated to the bench at the end of the first quarter Tuesday night, they were not greeted by the exuberant head coach who had happily guided them to seven consecutive one-sided victories. Instead, Coach Lawrence Frank sat in front of them and seethed.
The Nets had just been burned for 11 consecutive points by the Detroit Pistons, they had already been called for two technical fouls and they had played the sort of sloppy basketball that cost Byron Scott, the team's previous coach, his job.
Perhaps it says something about Frank's ability to intimidate that his players promptly came out of the huddle and turned the ball over again.
But the message seeped in. As they have in every game since Frank took over, the Nets responded and won, this time beating the Pistons, 89-78, at Continental Arena.
''He said, 'Don't worry about the officials,' '' forward Richard Jefferson said of Frank. ''We were missing a lot of easy shots that we normally make. He just said, 'Stay confident.' ''
And what about the different color that Frank seemed to turn?
''That's just him,'' Jefferson said. ''He's pale. That's the only color for him to turn.''
When all had settled, Frank improved to 8-0 as coach of the Nets. The victory came against Larry Brown, who has 31 years of coaching experience and 1,141 victories in pro basketball. It tied Frank with Brown for the second-longest victory streak to start an N.B.A. coaching career.
Frank can tie the record, nine straight, shared by Kurt Rambis of the 1998-99 Los Angeles Lakers and Buddy Jeannette of the 1947-48 Baltimore Bullets, on Wednesday night in Cleveland.
Frank dismissed the opportunity for the record, brusquely saying, ''It means nothing.''
Frank has said the team's current nine-game winning streak has little to do with him, and Tuesday's game was the first time he faced adversity. The Nets' 14-point deficit in the first quarter was their largest since he took over, and it was the worst the team had looked.
Coach and team responded.
''I thought it was an extremely gritty performance on the part of our guys,'' Frank said. ''Detroit got off to a great start in the first quarter. Things didn't look like they were going our way. We had some problems with the officials. Our guys, they threw out the distractions and for the remaining three quarters played their hearts out and did a tremendous job.
''I think we were just frustrated. At times it seems like you get a tough whistle, but at the end of the day you can't let that affect the way you play. Our guys understand that.''
The Nets (30-20) beat the Pistons (33-20) at their game, applying a stifling defense and, with Aaron Williams starting at center in place of the injured Jason Collins, dominating the backboards. Williams had a game-high 13 rebounds. After a 1-for-7 first quarter, Jefferson led the Nets with 27 points.
The Nets took charge in the second quarter and never trailed in the second half.
They allowed the Pistons to close to 5 early in the fourth, but a follow-up dunk by Kenyon Martin put the Nets up by 7 with 6 minutes 6 seconds left.
The Nets approached this game by refusing to consider the postseason implications. The Nets swept the Pistons in the Eastern Conference finals a year ago.
Point guard Jason Kidd said the team had not been on a run this good since rolling through 10 straight victories in the playoffs last season.
He added: ''Right now, this is dress rehearsal. We're trying to get better. But this does count because you can't just turn it on like a switch. You'll find yourself out in the first round.''
REBOUNDS
The Nets played without JASON COLLINS, who sat out his second straight game with a sprained left big toe. LAWRENCE FRANK said Collins would probably sit out Wednesday night's game and receive the extended rest of the All-Star Game break.
PRO BASKETBALL
