Seeking to counteract last week's court decision allowing gay couples to marry in Massachusetts, state lawmakers on Tuesday fashioned what they called a compromise: a proposed amendment to the state's Constitution that would define marriage as a heterosexual institution but allow same-sex couples to join in civil unions.
The compromise was developed as legislators prepared for what is likely to be a divisive constitutional convention that begins on Wednesday and is expected to be dominated by the gay-marriage question.
Lawmakers had been scheduled to consider a different amendment, one that defined marriage solely as a relationship between a man and a woman and made no mention of same-sex couples. But some legislators worried that such a measure would be interpreted to preclude civil unions.
''There were many members of the Senate who felt that amendment was punitive as opposed to being inclusive,'' said Ann Dufresne, a spokeswoman for Robert E. Travaglini, the Senate president.
Mr. Travaglini, a Democrat who is the presiding officer of the convention, supports civil unions. ''We think the new amendment is a great bipartisan alternative that really seeks consensus,'' Ms. Dufresne said.
The convention has been on the calendar for months, but the push for a marriage amendment received new momentum last week with a ruling by the Supreme Judicial Court, the state's highest court, essentially ordering that Massachusetts begin granting marriage licenses to gay couples on May 17.
The gay-marriage issue could figure prominently in the presidential election, especially since the Democratic front-runner, Senator John Kerry, who supports civil unions, is from Massachusetts. President Bush has condemned the court ruling, and conservative groups said the White House had informed them that he will soon endorse a federal constitutional amendment limiting marriage to unions joining a man and a woman.
The convention may also stimulate activity across the nation, as advocates on each side elsewhere seek to use the Massachusetts example. Already, 38 states have laws defining marriage as a heterosexual institution, and 16 states are considering constitutional amendments that would ban same-sex marriages.
No matter what happens during the Massachusetts convention, an amendment could not take effect until the end of 2006 at the earliest, because it would have to pass a second session of the legislature two years from now and then be approved in a public referendum.
Several lawmakers said the compromise amendment had the best shot at passage because some legislators who had been undecided on the matter would vote for it, as would at least a few supporters of gay marriage. One of the amendment's writers was Senator Robert A. Havern III, a Democrat and supporter of gay marriage.
But the new amendment is also likely to lose some supporters of the original proposal. The House speaker, Thomas M. Finneran, a Democrat and opponent of same-sex marriage, called it inappropriate, suggesting that the matter of civil unions belonged not before a constitutional convention but at a normal legislative session.
As a result, the proposal only heightened the frenzied atmosphere in the Statehouse as advocates on all sides inundated lawmakers. Opponents of gay marriage wheeled in more than 18,000 petitions signed by people across the country, while supporters brought in children of same-sex couples to ask Mr. Travaglini not to support any amendment that did not allow for same-sex marriage.
''I've heard from people on the left that it's totally unacceptable and preposterous, and I've heard from people on the right that it's totally unacceptable and preposterous,'' Senator Brian P. Lees, a Republican who is the Senate minority leader, said of the compromise.
Mr. Lees helped to write the compromise measure as a way to guarantee that same-sex couples have the same rights and benefits as married heterosexual couples.
''It very rarely happens that you get both the left and the right saying the same thing,'' he said. ''When that has happened in my career, I know that I'm on the right track.''
Many lawmakers were also trying to figure out how to deal with the court's deadline of May 17.
Because the earliest any amendment could take effect is November 2006, the time lag raises the question of what would happen to same-sex couples who married, only to have their marriages outlawed by amendment two years later.
The proposal drafted on Tuesday seeks to address that by saying that any same-sex couples who marry would be considered joined under civil unions if the amendment was ultimately approved. Mr. Finneran and others were considering alternatives, like a bill to block the issuance of marriage licenses on May 17, but legal experts said the courts would probably strike down such a bill.
It remained uncertain whether any marriage measure would even come to a vote at the convention. Although gay marriage is on the agenda, it is the eighth item on a list of 10. Two-thirds of the 199 legislators would have to vote to move it earlier in the schedule, and several lawmakers said opponents of both amendments might try a filibuster.
One proposed amendment ahead of gay marriage would require that judges be elected, not appointed -- including those on the Supreme Judicial Court. Some lawmakers were apparently angered enough by the court's ruling to consider trying to persuade their colleagues to vote for judicial elections.
Lawmakers anticipate a freewheeling convention that could last several days. In 2002, when the legislature had a gay-marriage amendment before its constitutional convention, the convention closed before a vote could be held.
Wednesday's convention was expected to draw several thousand spectators, though only a few would be able to be in the chamber during the proceedings.
In the days since the court ruling, the 160 House members and 39 Senate members -- there is one vacancy in the Senate -- have been buffeted by lobbying from many corners. The Roman Catholic archbishop, Sean O'Malley, has lobbied the legislators, most of whom at Catholic, attending rallies and issuing statements to try to persuade them to define marriage as a heterosexual institution.
Lawmakers like Mr. Lees, who oppose gay marriage but said they wanted to achieve some measure of equality for gays, were trying to persuade both sides that the compromise amendment was the best option, that each side risked a far more one-sided loss without it.
''We should not engage in a divisive, all-or-nothing debate that may end by eliminating all rights for same-sex couples,'' said a letter to senators signed by Mr. Lees and Mr. Travaglini. ''The proposed amendment would put the definition of marriage on the ballot in 2006 and give the people the opportunity to vote on the issue, while ensuring that we treat same-sex couples with respect and fairness.''
Several legislators said they would accept the compromise. Representative Paul J. Donato, a Democrat who co-sponsored the original amendment, said he had not ruled out voting for it.
Others, like Senator Jarrett Barrios, a Democrat who supports gay marriage, said they would not vote for the compromise. So did some opponents of gay marriage who favored the original amendment.
In addition, many advocates on both sides objected to the compromise.
''We couldn't support putting into the Constitution a constitutional right for homosexual couples to have civil unions,'' said Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council, a conservative group in Washington. ''To put it alongside the definition of marriage, I think, is troubling. Placing that into the Constitution is going to be problematic for a lot of people.''
Arline Isaacson of the Massachusetts Lesbian and Gay Political Caucus said an amendment that included civil unions would ''enshrine in the Constitution permanent second-class citizenship for gay people, and quite frankly, it's reprehensible.''
Other states and the federal government might eventually be forced by lawsuits to recognize same-sex marriages, Ms. Isaacson said, but would be unlikely to be forced to give equal benefits to couples in civil unions. She acknowledged that in the event of a referendum, a compromise amendment would be much harder for advocates of gay marriage to oppose than an amendment that made no mention of same-sex couples.
