Viacom said yesterday that its board had approved a tax-free spinoff of its stake in Blockbuster and that the company would take a one-time $1.3 billion charge related to the unit.
The charge resulted in a $56 million fourth-quarter loss for Viacom, which owns the CBS and UPN television networks, MTV and other cable channels, the Paramount film and television studios, and the Infinity Broadcasting radio chain.
Without the charge, Viacom's results met analysts' expectations, posting operating income of $1.25 billion, compared with $1.27 billion in last year's fourth quarter.
In announcing the quarter's results, Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, and its president, Mel Karmazin, said they expected revenue increases next year of 5 percent to 7 percent and operating profit increases of 12 percent to 14 percent.
The Class A shares rose 96 cents, to close at $41.35.
The board's decision to let the company explore a spinoff, in which Viacom investors would swap Viacom shares for Blockbuster stock, came after months of trying to find a buyer for its 81 percent stake in Blockbuster.
The company did not say when it would make a final decision on whether or when to spin off Blockbuster.
For the fourth quarter, Viacom reported that the company's overall revenue was up 11 percent, to $7.5 billion. The charge resulted in a loss of 22 cents a share, compared with a profit of 37 cents a share, or $1.25 billion, in the comparable quarter last year.
Viacom's largest division in terms of operating income is its cable networks unit, which reported a 24 percent increase in revenue, to $1.66 billion, while cable operating profit rose 19 percent, to $634 million.
The company said that cable advertising revenue rose 28 percent and fees from cable operators were up 14 percent, aided by Viacom's raising its 50 percent stake in the Comedy Channel to full ownership last May.
The television unit, which includes the CBS and UPN networks, as well as television stations, reported a 1 percent decline in revenue to $2.1 billion.
Despite higher advertising revenue at the networks, results were hurt by a reduction in political advertising at the station group and lower revenue from sales of programming to cable networks. Operating income fell 23 percent, to $241 million.
The results were also disappointing at the radio station group, where revenue fell 3 percent, to $551 million, and operating profits were off 10 percent, to $252 million, in part because of weaker advertising.
In the entertainment division, which includes Paramount Pictures, theme parks and the book publisher Simon &amp; Schuster, revenue rose 41 percent, to $1.3 billion, and operating income was up 15 percent, to $66 million, largely as a result of DVD sales and higher movie ticket sales.
At Blockbuster, revenue was up 2 percent, to $1.6 billion. But same-store revenue, which is a comparison of stores open at least a year and is a measure that is closely watched by analysts, fell 6.8 percent in the quarter, as rental and retail revenues declined.
The company said that without the one-time charge, Blockbuster's operating income would have risen 23 percent, to $104 million.
Peter Mirsky, a media analyst at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, said Viacom faced uncertainties going forward.
''In a recovery, if the television and radio business improve, there is so much leverage that Viacom could show that kind of growth,'' Mr. Mirsky said. ''The outlook is still one of cautious optimism, but there is not a lot of tangible evidence that business will be great.''
Viacom took the large write-off for Blockbuster to comply with accounting rules adopted in 2002 that no longer allow companies to write off the good will associated with acquisitions over 40 years.
The new rule requires companies to test assets annually for impairment and revalue them by comparing fair value with book value. If the fair value -- an accounting formula for valuing assets -- is less than the book value, as it was for Blockbuster, a write-off must be taken to account for the difference.
While investors may be pleased that Viacom seems closer to a decision about Blockbuster's future, Mr. Mirsky noted that in getting rid of Blockbuster, Viacom would become a smaller company in a universe where its competitors continue to expand. It would also leave Viacom even more dependent on advertising, which currently represents 46 percent of corporate revenue.
Viacom has said it is looking for acquisitions. But if cable networks remain a leading choice, Mr. Mirsky said additional cable networks could make Viacom even more reliant on advertising.
