Through much of the ground zero precinct, hope is measured in the promise of construction. At Fiterman Hall, hope will take the form of demolition.
While plans have been laid for the Freedom Tower, a memorial and the permanent PATH station, the Borough of Manhattan Community College has tried to emerge from the shadow of Fiterman Hall. This freshly renovated 15-story classroom building was a month away from formally opening when 7 World Trade Center collapsed across Barclay Street. The toppling skyscraper clawed away at the building's wedding-cake tiers, set blood orange fires within its white brick walls and piled a mountain of ruin against its facade.
Since Sept. 11, 2001, Fiterman Hall has stood like a ravaged ghost, its skeleton alarmingly visible. Increasingly incongruous amid the scenes of revival playing out around it, it is a dispiriting reminder of a day its neighbors long to put behind them.
Now, Antonio Pérez, the college's president, says he is intent on demolishing Fiterman Hall and replacing it.
''It has to come down,'' he said in an interview on Monday. ''It has to be rebuilt, and it has to be rebuilt soon.''
Though there had been talk of trying to salvage what remains of Fiterman Hall, Dr. Pérez said inspections showed that the weight of debris from 7 World Trade Center leaning against several stories of the building had irreparably compromised the structure, particularly at the points of connection between columns and beams.
Dr. Pérez envisions a new hall -- also named Fiterman in honor of the original donors, Miles and Shirley Fiterman -- that would have more usable floor area than the old building, which was a renovated 1950's office tower. There would be commercial space on the ground floor; a small plaza on the south side, opposite a triangular park in front of the new 7 World Trade Center; and, if possible, more than 15 floors. How many more? ''It's hard to go shopping,'' Dr. Pérez answered, ''until you know how much you have in your wallet.''
''The city and state have been very supportive to have this move forward,'' he said.
''There are ongoing negotiations with the insurance company to come up with an agreement that would allow the college to tear down and rebuild Fiterman Hall,'' Dr. Pérez said. ''We feel optimistic about those discussions.'' (A spokesman for the insurer, FM Global, said the company did not comment on such issues as a matter of policy.)
Meanwhile, the badly overcrowded college -- where students attend some classes in trailers parked along West Street-Route 9A -- will gain some breathing room this year by opening what amounts to a 186,000-square-foot annex in an office building at 75 Park Place, one block north of Fiterman Hall.
Both Fiterman Hall and 75 Park Place occupy land that was set aside for academic ends in 1755, when Trinity Church granted the parcels to the fledgling King's College, now Columbia University. Its tiny campus was immediately to the east.
Long after moving uptown, Columbia continued to own the property, known as the Lower Estate. In fact, Burton P. Resnick of Jack Resnick &amp; Sons, developers of 75 Park Place, bought the site directly from Columbia in 1981, the first time it had changed hands since New York was ruled by King George II.
The community college, a unit of the City University of New York, will occupy a building within a building at 75 Park Place. It will have its own entrance on Murray Street, leading to escalators that will take students to a second-floor lobby, where they will board any of five elevators dedicated to the college's classroom, office and training floors.
''My office tenants won't even know they're there,'' said Scott N. Resnick, president and chief operating officer of Jack Resnick &amp; Sons. The largest tenants are R.R. Donnelly Financial and the New York City Office of Management and Budget.
The college will pay $75 million over its 10-year lease, Dr. Pérez said, a figure that includes the cost of constructing its space. The architects are Moed de Armas &amp; Shannon.
It was no easy thing to cobble together nearly 190,000 square feet of space, Scott Resnick said, since he technically had only 35,000 square feet of space available on the fifth floor when he was approached by the college's real estate brokers, Richard P. Levine and Joseph P. Whitaker of C.B. Richard Ellis.
They were looking for space within a 5- or 10-minute walk of the main college building, a megastructure that stretches nearly five blocks north of Chambers Street. ''There were a thousand reasons for the deal not to happen,'' Mr. Levine recalled.
Then pieces started falling into place. The Bank of New York wanted to get out early from its lease on the 10th and 11th floors, Mr. Resnick said. The General Services Administration made it clear that it would not renew its lease on the 12th and 14th floors when it expired in 2005. Donnelly sublet some of its space on the second floor to create the crossover lobby. Space was taken back from the garage to create the Murray Street entrance.
''By September, we will be there offering classes,'' Dr. Pérez said. ''My instinct is that B.M.C.C. has found a home in this building.''
That, of course, was what the college thought in 1993 when it was given the building at 30 West Broadway by its owner, Mr. Fiterman, a co-founder of Miles Homes in Minneapolis. The company became the largest nationwide supplier of prefabricated homes and was sold to the Insilco Corporation in 1972.
Mr. Fiterman's building was developed in the late 50's by Erwin S. Wolfson, primarily to house the stock transfer division of the Guaranty Trust Company. Designed by William Lescaze, a prominent Modernist best known for the PSFS tower in Philadelphia, the building bears two hallmarks of the period: white bricks and ribbon windows.
On acquiring the building, the college began using it for classes immediately, said Edward J. Sullivan, the director of operations, planning and construction. Then it undertook a $65 million renovation by Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates. Completion was scheduled for Oct. 31, 2001, Mr. Sullivan said. Fiterman Hall would have provided space for about 4,500 students during the day, or roughly one-quarter of the total enrollment.
Asked his feelings on the pending demolition of something he had designed, the architect Hugh Hardy likened it yesterday to a kick in the teeth, even if it was made inevitable by the structural damage, the contamination and the mold.
''The tough thing is that we were so close,'' Mr. Hardy said. ''It was literally another month or so. So many people had tried so hard to make it work.''
Among the flourishes Mr. Hardy's firm added during the renovation was a curving, backlit, perforated aluminum marquee with ''Fiterman'' in big block letters. It is still visible behind the barricades that now surround the ruined structure.
Other parts of the building, however, were destroyed by the collapse of 7 World Trade Center. While walking around Fiterman Hall on Monday, recalling the attack and its aftermath, Mr. Sullivan was asked to point out where his office had been.
''It's gone,'' he said simply. ''It's on Staten Island.''
