After winning a less-than-hoped-for increase in the county sales tax from state lawmakers, Westchester County officials closed a huge hole in their $1.4 billion budget on Tuesday night by enacting an 18.8 percent increase in the county property tax, the highest such rise in at least a decade.
The move to fill a $28.5 million budget gap came three months after the county executive, Andrew J. Spano, proposed a budget that hinged on a one percentage point increase in the sales tax. But on Monday, state legislators agreed to raise the sales tax by only half a percentage point in most of the county. Additional revenue was approved in the form of increased mortgage taxes and auto-use taxes.
The action in Albany, while disappointing to many county officials, still represented a far more generous allowance than the previous year, when the state lawmakers representing Westchester rejected a similar request for a sales tax increase. ''Last year we didn't get anything, and it was crash and burn -- disastrous,'' William J. Ryan, the chairman of the County Legislature, said earlier yesterday, referring to the 15 percent property tax increase in the 2003 budget, as well as cuts in discretionary spending.
Although the jump in the tax levy was even higher than the one last year, the County Legislature avoided scores of layoffs and a raft of proposed cuts to county programs, from children's dental services and mosquito control to the enforcement of laws barring the sale of tobacco to minors. In addition, all but one of the bus routes that were slated for elimination were put back.
The county tax makes up about one-fifth of a homeowner's total tax bill in Westchester. Someone who pays $10,000 in annual taxes could face an increase of $376 under the amended spending plan, which totals $1.417 billion. But under the state's complex formula, rates can vary from town to town.
Under the bill passed by the State Assembly on Monday and by the Senate yesterday, the sales tax outside the four largest cities would rise to 7.5 percent from 7 percent. In a revenue split that made the hike more palatable to local state representatives, the county would receive 70 percent of the money raised. Other communities would receive 20 percent, with school districts getting 10 percent.
In November, Mr. Spano's original budget proposal of $1.397 billion called for eliminating 319 jobs, of which 236 were filled. The county's Department of Social Services would have borne the brunt of those cuts, chopping 181 jobs from a staff of 1,240. Assuming there would be a full percentage point increase in the sales tax, the county property tax was to rise by just 2 percent under Mr. Spano's plan.
But later that month, the County Legislature adopted a slightly larger budget of $1.411 that restored all the job cuts but raised the county property tax by 8.5 percent. That spending plan also counted on a sales tax increase of one percentage point.
Officials in Westchester and in counties across New York have bemoaned the growing number of mandated expenses imposed on counties by the state government, from Medicaid to pension costs. Mr. Spano said that $1.015 billion of his budget, or 73 percent, was required by the state. The most costly program is the federal Medicaid program, which provides health benefits to the poor.
''We need to come up with structural changes, not one-shots, but structural changes, so that we can turn this around in a positive way and continue to deliver services in the most cost effective way possible,'' Michael B. Kaplowitz, chairman of the County Legislature's Budget and Appropriations Committee, said late Tuesday night, before the Legislature's 9 to 5 vote for the tax increase.
Many counties have slashed spending and cut jobs while reducing services to close the gaps. Westchester has shrunk its work force by about 10 percent in the past decade, according to county officials.
