After clashing about the racial composition of the jury in the Jayson Williams aggravated manslaughter trial, opposing lawyers on Tuesday disagreed sharply in opening statements in their explanation of the shotgun blast that killed a 55-year-old chauffeur at Mr. Williams's country estate nearly two years ago.
Toward the end of his 50-minute opening statement, the chief prosecutor, Steven C. Lember, told the jury that the chauffeur, Costas Christofi, was killed because Mr. Williams had shown ''a conscious disregard of a substantial risk'' while handling a double-barreled, 12-gauge shotgun as Mr. Christofi walked just feet away.
Mr. Lember said Mr. Williams did not intend to kill Mr. Christofi. But, the prosecutor argued, the shooting was not an accident either, and resulted from Mr. Williams's recklessness and ''extreme indifference to the value of human life.''
Minutes later, one of Mr. Williams's lawyers, William R. Martin, disagreed, telling the jury in his opening statement that his client was unaware of any risk as he handled the shotgun and did not consciously fire it at Mr. Christofi.
Mr. Martin suggested that Mr. Williams, 35, will testify in his own defense later in the trial and will say that the shooting was accidental.
''Jayson Williams will tell you what happened that night,'' Mr. Martin told the jury. ''Jayson Williams will tell you how this horrific, totally unforeseeable accident occurred.''
The lawyers' sharply differing portrayals of Mr. Williams's state of mind at the moment the gun fired were just one of several disagreements over details in the case. They suggested that the trial, expected to last two months, will be marked by a stream of contradictory evidence on many issues, from Mr. Williams's attitude toward Mr. Christofi the night of the shooting to details about how Mr. Williams, a former star for the New Jersey Nets, handled the gun before it discharged.
The deep disagreements highlighting the opening arguments followed a stormy morning of jury selection.
Mr. Lember and the other prosecutor on the case, Katharine Errickson, used half of their 12 peremptory challenges to dismiss six blacks -- five men and a woman -- from the jury. Mr. Williams's other lawyer, Joseph A. Hayden, objected to those dismissals in four different sidebar conferences with the presiding judge, Edward M. Coleman. Judge Coleman apparently rejected all four of the objections, although he made no public announcement of his decisions in the courtroom.
The jury of 16 ultimately seated included 4 men and 12 women, including 4 black women. At the end of the trial, 4 of the 16 jurors will become alternates and will not deliberate.
After the lunch recess, Mr. Hayden again objected to the dismissal of the six blacks, this time in open court. Mr. Hayden argued that the prosecutors had systematically excluded blacks from the jury, in violation of state law and of Mr. Williams's constitutional rights.
Mr. Williams is biracial; his father is African-American, and his mother is Polish-American.
In rulings in 1986, the United States Supreme Court, swiftly followed by the New Jersey Supreme Court, barred the systematic dismissal of blacks or members of other racial or ethnic groups from juries through the use of peremptory challenges. In such challenges, prosecutors and defense lawyers do not have to cite a reason for a dismissal.
In response to the defense objections after lunch, Mr. Lember, the prosecutor, denied the dismissals were racially motivated. He said he was ''somewhat appalled'' by Mr. Hayden's charge.
Judge Coleman rejected Mr. Hayden's complaint. The judge seemed upset by it and contended that Mr. Hayden made it for ''public consumption'' and possible eventual appeals to higher courts.
Judge Coleman said he had carefully and patiently listened to the defense objections in the private conferences and had ruled then that the prosecutors had valid reasons for the six dismissals and had not engaged in any racial bias.
''To argue the state is blindly challenging people based on race is incorrect,'' the judge said. He also noted that 4 of the jury's 16 members, or 25 percent, were black. He said that blacks account for about 7 percent of the population in Somerset County, where the trial is being held.
Before Mr. Christofi was shot at about 2:30 a.m. on Feb. 14, 2002, Mr. Williams and several friends attended a Harlem Globetrotters basketball game in Bethlehem, Pa. Afterward, the party went to a restaurant near the Williams estate for a late dinner and drinks. Mr. Christofi drove four the Globetrotters to the restaurant and later took several other guests back to the estate.
Mr. Lember, the prosecutor, told the jury that Mr. Williams taunted and swore at Mr. Christofi both in the restaurant and later, moments before he was shot.
Mr. Martin, the defense lawyer, denied the allegation, saying his client had no ill will toward the chauffeur. At one point, Mr. Martin described Mr. Williams as a ''big teddy bear'' and said Mr. Williams had ''love in his heart'' for Mr. Christofi.
Mr. Lember also said Mr. Williams tried to cover up the crime. Among other things, the prosecutor said, Mr. Williams wiped his own fingerprints from the shotgun and tried to place Mr. Christofi's hands on the gun as he lay dying.
In response to that allegation, Mr. Martin said the fatal blast caused chaos and pandemonium in the bedroom. He said Mr. Williams ''panicked'' after the shooting.
''Maybe he should have done something different, but he didn't have criminal intent,'' Mr. Martin said.
