One of the suspended starters on the St. John's men's basketball team has withdrawn from the university and another appears to be on the way out. Both were to face a university hearing yesterday over their roles in a scandal last week.
The sophomore guard Elijah Ingram avoided the hearing by agreeing to leave the university, and the senior center Abe Keita told people after his four-and-a-half-hour hearing that he thought he would be expelled, a person in contact with the players said.
Michael A. D'Aquanni, one of the lawyers helping Ingram, said in an e-mail message that Ingram ''voluntarily withdrew'' and that his withdrawal was accepted by St. John's before his hearing. The e-mail message said that Ingram was ''looking forward to resuming his education at another college/university in the immediate future.''
A person who spoke with Ingram's family yesterday said last night that he would probably transfer to Oklahoma, seeking a fresh start.
Keita looked distraught as he stepped into a black sports utility vehicle after his hearing before a nine-person panel: five faculty members and four graduate and undergraduate students. Their recommendation will be presented to James P. Pellow, the university executive vice president. The university's judiciary board completed deliberations last night, and Jody Fisher, a university spokesman, said it was expected the university would provide further information today.
The campus is still in turmoil after six St. John's players broke curfew and went to a strip club outside Pittsburgh after a game last Wednesday. They negotiated to have a woman have sex with them for cash at a hotel. The woman was later charged by the police with falsely accusing the players of rape; she said the players had refused to pay.
The Red Storm has been left with eight players after five were suspended over the incident. A sixth, Grady Reynolds, has been expelled because he had been on disciplinary probation.
The team's bus pulled up to Alumni Hall shortly before 3 p.m. yesterday as Keita's hearing was to start. The players were to fly to Pittsburgh and take a bus to their game at West Virginia tonight.
In an unusual move, the university decided the team would travel by bus to Queens immediately after tonight's game; the original plan was to fly back. More than a decade ago, when Lou Carnesecca was coach, taking bus trips back was a way to keep players out of trouble on the road.
The interim head coach, Kevin Clark, did not travel with the team, staying behind to attend Keita's hearing.
Reporters were ordered to leave the campus by university security guards before being allowed to wait outside University Center in exchange for agreeing not to conduct interviews on the grounds.
As reporters waited for the hearing to end, several students who walked past whispered ''Harrington'' and ''culture,'' referring to remarks by the university president, the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, on Saturday that questioned how the culture of the men's basketball team had made such behavior possible. Harrington was careful to say he did not mean an ethnic or religious culture. He said Saturday that St. John's was seeking the expulsion of Ingram and Keita because they ''were involved throughout and admitted to behavior that is clearly not acceptable.''
Two other suspended players, Mohamed Diakite and Lamont Hamilton, will have hearings today. Another player, the freshman Tyler Jones, who did not go to the hotel with the other players, has been practicing but did not accompany the team on its trip yesterday.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
