Rocco DiSpirito, the engaging chef of ''The Restaurant'' reality television show, is being sued by his restaurant partners, who claim he has failed to provide food and service of sufficient quality.
The restaurant, called Rocco's 22nd Street, won national fame last summer when it became the setting for the reality television show, which focused on Mr. DiSpirito's struggles to open his new business. The lawsuit claims that the restaurant has foundered while Mr. DiSpirito has benefited from the limelight.
The companies, China Grill Management R.I.A. L.L.C. and China Grill Management 12 East 22 L.L.C., claim in the lawsuit, which was filed on Monday, that the restaurant, at 12 East 22nd Street, has never turned a profit in the seven months it has been open.
''Things aren't working out,'' a lawyer familiar with the suit said. ''It's an effort to end the unfortunate situation.''
In short, the lawyer said, it is ''a business divorce.''
Mr. DiSpirito denied the charges. In a statement provided by his spokesman, Ian Bell, he said that the restaurant has been a success.
''In creating Rocco's 22nd Street, I unfortunately chose the wrong business partner,'' Mr. DiSpirito said. ''I have refrained for months from suing Jeffrey Chodorow,'' an owner in the companies that brought the suit. Now that the situation has been taken to court, he said, ''I look forward to having him held accountable for his actions.''
Mr. DiSpirito did not give further details about differences with his partners. He added that ''Rocco's is a success because of my vision and hard work.''
The lawsuit faulted Mr. DiSpirito's management of the restaurant.
''DiSpirito has spent insufficient time on the food and service at the restaurant and has not devoted the time and effort needed to operate the restaurant in a financially responsible manner,'' the lawsuit says.
The lawsuit further claims that ''the quality of the food and service has been widely criticized.''
Six episodes of ''The Restaurant'' were broadcast on NBC, starting last July, as Mr. DiSpirito struggled to find a location for the business, hire a staff, train them and face other challenges on the way to the opening. A second season has already been produced, and will be shown starting in late spring, said Jennifer Skorlich, a spokesperson for NBC.
The companies that sued Mr. DiSpirito also contended that he has received ''substantial sums'' from his appearances on the reality show, but that his business partners have not benefited from the show's activities.
Mr. Bell declined to comment directly on the suit's charges.
