The last time they were in New York, their stay turned into a nightmare out of the Dark Ages, but yesterday John Tull and his wife, Lucinda Marker, came back to thank the doctors who had saved their lives.
In November 2002, Mr. Tull and Ms. Marker of New Mexico were visiting New York when they began feeling queasy. Two days later, their illness was diagnosed as bubonic plague, apparently contracted through flea bites on their five-acre ranch outside Santa Fe.
They were possibly the first cases of bubonic plague to strike in New York City in 100 years, and given the jitters over Sept. 11, doctors did not immediately rule out the possibility of bioterrorism. Plague occurs naturally in the southwestern states, where there have been rare cases of transmission by wood rats and fleas.
Yesterday, Mr. Tull, 54, walked into Beth Israel Medical Center, across the street from Gracie Mansion, leaning on a walker but otherwise betraying no sign that both of his legs had been amputated just below the knees because of infection from the disease. Ms. Marker, 48, who had a less severe case of plague, followed, smiling broadly.
''Hello, Dr. Silane,'' Mr. Tull said in his native Texas dialect as he caught sight of Michael Silane, the chief of vascular surgery. The doctor had amputated his legs using an operation he had never performed before but that he thought might give his 6-foot-2 patient the best chance of walking again. ''How are you, sir? I'm walking around.''
Dr. Silane looked at him in disbelief, and answered, ''Isn't that fabulous.''
In November 2002, Dr. Silane said, he would not have predicted that Mr. Tull would survive his brush with what was once known as the Black Death, which has killed about 30 million people throughout history, let alone live to walk again.
''You know what?'' Mr. Tull said yesterday. ''Early on in this ordeal, I figured I had some choices. I could go kill myself, obviously. I could be a slug and sit around in bed or in a wheelchair for the rest of my life. But I knew from the very beginning that I could get back and be a normal person, and I'm almost there.
''I'll be hiking in my beloved mountains this summer,'' added Mr. Tull, shortly before switching from the walker to a cane to show off his progress.
He is no stranger to combative situations, as a former county prosecutor in Amarillo, Texas; a former plaintiff's lawyer in business fraud cases; and former director of the insurance fraud division for the state of New Mexico. He quit his last job and went into business with his wife, an actress turned financial planner, about five months before visiting New York in 2002.
He has had his share of emotional pain, but had never faced death before. He is twice divorced. His brother, who was his best friend, he said, won $27 million in the Texas lottery in the mid-1990's, and they became estranged.
Yet throughout his treatment, he was so upbeat that his doctors were still marveling over his attitude yesterday. After he was brought in, he began suffering from lung and kidney failure and blood clotting, and yet, ''you were trying to joke with us while you were gasping for breath,'' Joseph Sharkey, a physician's assistant, said. ''I was thinking, 'I wonder if he can read our faces?' Because we knew how serious it was.''
On the first day he was hospitalized, Mr. Tull told his wife to send in their health insurance payment by overnight mail because it had come due. Without that, he said, their medical bills, now $2 million and counting, might not have been covered.
From early November to mid-January, Mr. Tull was in a medically induced coma, which left him so weak he was ''unable to move my little finger,'' as he put it.
When he came out of it, he recalled, Ms. Marker told him, ''It's 2003.''
''No, don't be ridiculous,'' Mr. Tull responded. ''That's next year.''
Then she told him his legs had been amputated. But he found that so bizarre that he did not absorb the news. She recalled that he kept asking her to massage his missing toes.
Mr. Tull was a biker, hiker and cross-country skier. He now walks with the help of prosthetic legs below the knees and works out five days a week. He says his upper-body strength is back to normal.
Relatives said yesterday that the ordeal has been harder, in some ways, for Ms. Marker than for Mr. Tull. He has no memory of the time he was in a coma. After leaving Beth Israel, he was hospitalized in Albuquerque until June 19, 2003. During his 226 days of hospitalization in two states, Ms. Marker was left to deal with family, friends and the range of emotions surrounding his illness. Then, she said, ''we went to our house, which was a beautiful lovely house, and we were alone. It was just terrifying.''
She said she had found a sense of community in johnandlucinda.com, a Web site created by friends to chronicle her husband's progress; it has logged 3,000 messages.
Mr. Tull said: ''In the midst of all this adversity, I'm a lucky guy, and I think about all my good fortune daily.''
