Senator John Edwards of North Carolina spoke for just eight minutes Tuesday night, enough for a few bursts of cheers, before dashing off stage for a larger purpose: a round of national network interviews to explain why he should stay in the presidential race despite being soundly defeated in his neighboring states of Tennessee and Virginia.
Before a crowd of a couple hundred in the American Serb Community Hall here, Mr. Edwards sought right away to bat aside suggestions that his weak second-place showings behind Senator John Kerry meant the Democratic contest was over.
''We are going to have a campaign,'' he declared, ''an election, not a coronation.''
He plunged into the issue that he believes resonates strongest here, job loss, speaking of a father coming home to a young daughter, jobless and hopeless.
''Tonight he will come home to tell her his factory closed, to tell her he is going to lose his job,'' Mr. Edwards said, adding, ''Don't tell me this doesn't happen, because I see it with my own eyes.''
But the evening had a rushed feel, with the business of campaigning looming. Mr. Edwards left the stage quickly after his speech for the interviews, and the crowd in the hall filed out shortly after. Some in the crowd remained resolute in support of him, though few seemed to believe he would actually win the next primary, here on Feb. 17.
''He's in front and I'm the underdog and I'm fighting,'' Mr. Edwards said of Mr. Kerry on CNN's ''Larry King Live.''
Judy Ashmore, a systems analyst from Milwaukee, seemed a bit resigned, suggesting, ''If we can't have him as president, I hope we can have him as vice president.''
Despite Mr. Edwards's upbeat tones, he was left struggling for viability. For weeks he had promoted himself as the Democratic candidate who could carry the South and warned his party that it could not ignore his home region. He had declared at virtually every stop for days that ''the South is not George Bush's backyard, it is my backyard and I will beat George Bush in my backyard.''
But Mr. Kerry crushed him in his home territory, and even before polls closed in Tennessee and Virginia, his campaign was making an argument that losses to Mr. Kerry would not cripple the Edwards candidacy.
Nick Baldick, Mr. Edwards's campaign manager, told reporters in a conference call that the expected Kerry victories came from the lift he gained by romping through most of the early primaries and that the pace would begin to slow after Wisconsin's primary, allowing voters more time to scrutinize the remaining candidates.
''At this point, Senator Kerry obviously has a lot of momentum,'' Mr. Baldick said, adding that he anticipated that Mr. Edwards would have an easier time breaking through in what he expects to be, for practical purposes, a narrower field by Wisconsin.
''No one might drop out, but there will be a practical winnowing,'' Mr. Baldick said. ''General Clark said he had to win Tennessee, if he doesn't do that the voters will take a harder look at that.''
Aides to Gen. Wesley K. Clark said Tuesday night that the general would leave the race after his third-place finish in Tennessee and Virginia.
Though he did somewhat better, Mr. Edwards now faces the challenge of convincing contributors and voters that Mr. Kerry's string of decisive victories has not locked up the race.
''Kerry has answered a critical question, 'Can you win in the South and are you a national candidate?' '' said Jenny Backus, a Democratic consultant. ''I think he has satisfactorily answered that.''
Referring to Mr. Edwards's second-place showing in Virginia and Tennessee, Ms. Backus said he had ''to figure out some way to explain why he could not pull out one victory in one of those states.''
Mr. Edwards has won just one primary, South Carolina, his birthplace. He drew notice for a second-place in the Iowa caucuses but then came in fourth in New Hampshire. Mr. Baldick said the Edwards campaign had enough money to push to Wisconsin's primary though he hedged on earlier declarations by campaign aides that the senator had enough money to compete through Super Tuesday, March 2, when a host of populous states vote, including New York and California.
''We are in good financial shape through Wisconsin,'' Mr. Baldick said.
Mr. Edwards is planning a detour from Wisconsin on Thursday and Friday for fund-raisers in California and an appearance Friday on NBC's ''Tonight Show,'' his first.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SOUTHERN SENATOR
