The White House released 18 months of President Bush's National Guard payroll records on Tuesday showing what administration officials asserted was proof that Mr. Bush had fully completed his service in the Guard during the Vietnam War.
But the records, which the White House obtained from blurry 30-year-old microfiche files, show only the specific days in 1972 and 1973, 82 in all, that Mr. Bush was paid for his service.
Although Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, said the documents ''clearly show that the president fulfilled his duties,'' he would not say, under repeated questioning at a contentious White House briefing, that the records definitively proved that Mr. Bush reported for duty on those dates.
''These documents show the days on which he was paid,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''That's what they show.'' The president, he said, ''does recall showing up and performing his duties.''
Mr. McClellan could not say why some of Mr. Bush's commanding officers did not recall his turning up on the dates he was paid, but he suggested they might have forgotten. ''We're talking about 30 years ago,'' Mr. McClellan said.
The White House released the records under intense election-year pressure from the Democrats, who have accused a president who sent men and women into battle in Iraq and Afghanistan of shirking his own military duty during the Vietnam War. Terry McAuliffe, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, has called Mr. Bush ''AWOL'' from the National Guard. John Kerry, a decorated Vietnam War veteran who is leading in the Democratic primaries, has repeatedly called on the president to answer questions about his record.
The White House has appeared to be caught off balance by the aggressiveness of the Democrats, who have put Mr. Bush in the rare defensive position of having to respond. Tim Russert of NBC kept the issue alive when he asked Mr. Bush in an interview on ''Meet the Press'' on Sunday if he would release all his military records. Mr. Bush, who was honorably discharged, replied almost offhandedly that he would.
''Yeah, if we still have them,'' Mr. Bush said. Then the president added: ''And I'm just telling you, I did my duty, and it's politics, you know, to kind of ascribe all kinds of motives to me. But I have been through it before. I'm used to it.''
By Monday night, White House officials said they had obtained the payroll records, which they said they had not previously known were available, from the Air Reserve Personnel Center in Denver.
After the release of the records on Tuesday, Mr. Kerry then said he had no comment. ''It's not my record that's at issue, and I don't have any questions about it,'' he told reporters between campaign stops in Tennessee and Virginia.
The payroll and other records show that Mr. Bush did not report for service from mid-April to late October, 1972. During that period he worked as the campaign manager for Winton Blount, a Republican Senate candidate in Alabama and a friend of his father's.
Mr. Bush never served in Vietnam. His service in the Guard has previously erupted as a political issue in his two campaigns for governor of Texas and his 2000 presidential campaign. Then, as now, the period in contention is May 1972 to May 1973, and where, when and how often Mr. Bush reported for duty during that time. What is indisputable is that for part of that year, from May 1972 through November 1972, Mr. Bush lived in Alabama to work on Mr. Blount's campaign. He received permission to train with an Alabama unit of the Guard, and has always said he reported for duty.
But one of Mr. Bush's commanding officers, Lt. Col. William Turnipseed, has said that while he is not sure, he does not remember Mr. Bush reporting for duty. He also has said, however, that he does not recall how often he himself was not on the base at that time. The Alabama Guard, meanwhile, has no record of Mr. Bush's service in the state.
The payroll records released by the White House shed some new, but not definitive, light on Mr. Bush's Alabama service. They show that he was paid for two days in October 1972 and four days in November 1972. But they do not specifically say that he reported for duty in Alabama.
On Tuesday, Alabama Guard officials said that while they have no records of Mr. Bush reporting for duty, they would also not necessarily have those records. Officials at the time, they said, would have sent Mr. Bush's duty reports on to Texas.
In the winter of 1973, Mr. Bush was back in Texas, where his payroll records show that he was paid for six days in January, no days in February or March, two days in April, 14 days in May and five days in June.
Mr. Bush then served 19 days in July before going to Harvard Business School that fall. Although he still had about six months left in his six-year service, Mr. Bush told Mr. Russert that he ''worked it out with the military.''
Mr. Bush's spokesmen have always said that he made up the many training dates he missed, and that he would not have been honorably discharged unless he had done so. To support that claim on Tuesday, the White House made public some documents that it also released in 2000; they show that Mr. Bush had accumulated his required retirement points, based on his service, in 1972 and 1973.
Mr. Bush acquired 56 service points in each year, the documents showed; the minimum requirement is 50 points.
The documents were reviewed, the White House said, by Albert C. Lloyd, a retired lieutenant colonel in the Guard who assisted the Bush campaign in releasing Mr. Bush's records in 2000. The documents on Tuesday included Colonel Lloyd's declaration that Mr. Bush ''completed his military obligation in a satisfactory manner.''
Guard officials said Tuesday that it was possible to have as many missed dates as Mr. Bush did and still make them up, as long as a member talks over the absences with the commander. Guard members also say that it was possible to be paid in 1972 and 1973 without actually turning up for the service dates because of relaxed record keeping at the time.
In 1972, the Alabama National Guard had about 19,500 members, with fewer than 3,000 serving in the Alabama Air National Guard. The 187th Tactical Reconnaissance Group, the air unit Mr. Bush was expected to report to in September 1972, but did not at the time, is based at Dannelly Air National Guard Base in Montgomery.
According to those same reports, it was rare, though not unheard of, for Alabama Guard members to be disciplined for failing to show up for training. In 1972, for example, 43 Alabama Guard members were disciplined for ''continuous absence from drills,'' the records state. The records, however, do not identify those disciplined.
On ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Bush said emphatically that he had shown up for service in Alabama.
''There may be no evidence, but I did report,'' he said. ''Otherwise, I wouldn't have been honorably discharged. In other words, you don't just say, 'I did something,' without there being verification. Military doesn't work that way. I got an honorable discharge, and I did show up in Alabama.''
Mr. McClellan said again on Tuesday, as he has since the Democrats first leveled the charges, that calling Mr. Bush ''AWOL'' -- or a ''deserter'' as the film maker Michael Moore did with Gen. Wesley K. Clark at his side -- was an ''outrageous, baseless accusation.'' Mr. Bush's opponents, Mr. McClellan said, are ''clearly more interested in twisting the facts to seek partisan political advantage in the context of an election year.''
