Reversing itself, the New York State Labor Department says it will support paying unemployment benefits to gays involved in long-term relationships who quit their jobs to follow their partners who obtain work out of state.
The Labor Department's top lawyer sent a letter on Monday to the state's Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board, telling it to reverse a two-year-old ruling that barred jobless benefits in such cases.
Gay advocacy groups applauded the decision, saying it was important that gay partners will be treated like married spouses in receiving jobless benefits in these circumstances. The Labor Department reversed its policy after gay advocacy groups urged Gov. George E. Pataki to have the state reconsider its position.
''This is wonderful news,'' Alan Van Capelle, executive director of Empire State Pride Agenda, an advocacy group for gays, said yesterday. ''The Department of Labor understands that it is love and commitment that makes a family. We thank the governor for weighing in on this important issue.''
Two years ago, the unemployment insurance board rejected an appeal by Jeanne Newland, who quit her job in Rochester to follow her companion, who had landed a prestigious computer job in Virginia. Citing a state law that said people who voluntarily left their jobs could receive benefits only when there was good cause, the board ruled that following a spouse, but not a domestic partner, could be good cause.
The decision will not take effect until the appeals board reverses its previous ruling in Ms. Newland's case. She said she expected to receive about $3,500.
Explaining the Labor Department's reversal, Jerome Tracy, the department's top lawyer, wrote in his letter: ''This policy recognizes that there exist in certain long-term committed relationships certain financial, legal and emotional commitments that justify voluntarily separating from employment to follow a marital partner. However, this rationale can apply equally to persons who are in a committed unmarried relationship, so long as there are objective indicia that demonstrate that financial, legal and emotional commitments exist to justify a claimant voluntarily separating from employment to follow an unmarried partner.''
One of the department's concerns was that reversing its policy would open the door for domestic partners in brief relationships to qualify for jobless benefits in similar circumstances.
Stressing that Ms. Newland was in a long, committed relationship, Mr. Tracy noted that she had been with her partner, Natasha Doty, for four and a half years when she first sought jobless benefits two years ago. Mr. Tracy added that the two had twice bought houses together and shared living expenses and bank and money market accounts. Ms. Newland received health benefits through two of Ms. Doty's employers and was the beneficiary of her partner's life insurance policy. In addition, the two had prepared wills leaving their possessions to each other.
In stating the new policy, Mr. Tracy wrote that unmarried partners may have good cause ''for leaving a job to follow their partners, provided sufficient proof of a long-term committed relationship exists.''
Yesterday, Ms. Newland said: ''This is a wonderful conclusion to a very long process. This is a victory not just for me, but for many others.''
James Esseks, litigation director of the lesbian and gay rights project of the American Civil Liberties Union, said, ''This is another situation where the State of New York is very progressive on this issue. It has recognized a broader and more functional definition of family.''
