Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts rolled to commanding victories in the Tennessee and Virginia primaries on Tuesday, solidifying his position as the perhaps unstoppable front-runner for the Democratic nomination and dealing a serious blow to his two Southern rivals.
Mr. Kerry won by substantial margins in each state, and surveys of voters leaving the polls showed that he ran well among whites and blacks alike. Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who fought hard in their native region to halt Mr. Kerry's drive to the nomination, finished far behind.
After his third-place showings, General Clark abandoned the race for the nomination. The general was returning to his hometown, Little Rock, Ark., where he planned to formally announce his withdrawal on Wednesday, a senior campaign aide said. The move by General Clark, a first-time candidate and former supreme allied commander of NATO, ends a candidacy that many Democrats once considered among the strongest. [Page A25.]
The victories were Mr. Kerry's first in the South and an important test of his national appeal. He has now won 12 of the first 14 Democratic primaries and caucuses -- his only losses were in South Carolina and Oklahoma -- and his campaign is increasingly focusing its attention on an anticipated general election battle with President Bush.
Mr. Kerry told a rollicking rally at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., on Tuesday night: ''Once again, the message rings out loud and clear. Americans are voting for change -- East and West, North, and now in the South.'' He then turned his fire on Mr. Bush, denouncing him for the ''wreckage'' of the economy.
With 100 percent of the vote counted in Virginia, Mr. Kerry had 52 percent to Mr. Edwards's 27 percent. General Clark had 9 percent.
In Tennessee, with 98 percent of the vote tallied, Mr. Kerry had 41 percent, Mr. Edwards 26 percent and General Clark 23 percent. Howard Dean was in single digits in both states.
The results increased the pressure on Mr. Kerry's rivals to reassess their candidacies.
Mr. Edwards vowed to take his campaign on to Wisconsin, which votes next Tuesday, and dismissed the idea that the race was over. The voters want ''an election, not a coronation,'' he said.
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, who did not compete in the final days of the Virginia and Tennessee contests and has yet to win a primary or caucus, is also focusing on Wisconsin, where he campaigned on Tuesday.
Even so, many Democrats said Mr. Kerry's remaining challengers had little chance of toppling him. Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, chairman of the Democratic national convention, in an interview after the polls closed, called for the party to close ranks around Mr. Kerry.
''The time has come to rally around Senator Kerry,'' Mr. Richardson said. ''He has won in every region of the country, and we should unite behind him.''
Kerry Donley, chairman of the Democratic Party in Virginia, said: ''I think the race is probably over. This furthers John Kerry's momentum, it shows he's competitive in the South, and it's probably a fairly serious blow to the candidacies of Wes Clark and John Edwards.''
Steve Murphy, who was campaign manager for Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri until Mr. Gephardt's withdrawal from the race, said: ''The only thing that could stop John Kerry now is if he pulls a Howard Dean and blows himself out. That's not likely. He's nothing if not cautious.''
But even in the face of Mr. Kerry's impressive victories, Dr. Dean told an enthusiastic crowd at the Irish Heritage and Cultural Center in Milwaukee: ''This is a chance to turn around a campaign that's been managed by the media and the folks inside the Beltway. Wisconsin voters have a long history for standing up for what they believe, not when it's popular but when it really matters.''
Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Roy Neel, said, ''We're throwing the kitchen sink in Wisconsin,'' although he acknowledged that Mr. Kerry was well ahead in the polls there.
There were 151 delegates at stake in Tuesday's voting. Mr. Kerry showed particular strength among black voters, carrying two-thirds of their vote in Virginia and half in Tennessee, according to the surveys of voters leaving the polls.
General Clark's departure winnows the field to five candidates: Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards, Dr. Dean, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio and the Rev. Al Sharpton. The Edwards campaign has long hungered for a smaller field, arguing that their candidate could only prosper in a one-to-one comparison with Mr. Kerry. Moreover, in the South, where the battle for the nomination will move again on March 2, General Clark and Mr. Edwards were competing for many of the same votes.
General Clark drew substantial support within the party last fall, when Dr. Dean appeared headed for the nomination. Many Democrats, who considered Dr. Dean too much of an angry, antiwar candidate, saw the telegenic retired general -- who was also a critic of the war -- as an attractive alternative. But General Clark struggled to find his footing in presidential politics. And when Mr. Kerry, a decorated veteran with his own national security credentials, caught fire in Iowa, the Clark campaign lost much of its wind.
Some experts cautioned against reading too much into Tuesday's results about Mr. Kerry's Southern appeal, noting that the ability to win the votes of Southern Democrats is very different from the ability to carry Southern states in a general election. That has proved to be much more difficult for the Democrats.
Merle Black, a political scientist at Emory University and a longtime scholar of Southern politics, said with a laugh, ''The conservatives aren't voting today -- that's the big difference.''
Mr. Black said he believed that Mr. Kerry still faced an uphill battle in the South in a general election matchup. But he added that he considered him competitive in Florida, where the 2000 election was bitterly contested for more than five weeks.
The surveys of voters in Virginia and Tennessee underscored, once again, the Democratic voters' consuming interest in choosing a candidate who they believe can defeat President Bush. A third of those polled said that quality of electability mattered most to them, and they overwhelmingly gave their votes to Mr. Kerry.
At the Julia Green School in an affluent Nashville neighborhood, several voters cited the ability to take on Mr. Bush as paramount.
''Kerry,'' said Linda Brown, a strategic planning consultant, explaining her vote. ''He's got the best chance nationwide. Clark and some of the others are great, but I don't think they can compete the way Kerry can.''
Mr. Kerry ran well across the board. In Tennessee he carried roughly 4 in 10 voters in every demographic group in the poll, and he did even better in Virginia. He was running particularly strong among voters 65 and older.
He also continued to draw important support from veterans. About a quarter of the voters in each state said they had served in the military, and half of them said they had voted for Mr. Kerry.
As was the case in other states, about half the voters in the Tuesday primaries did not make up their minds until the last week or so, the surveys showed, and more than 4 in 10 of them voted for Mr. Kerry. This is a source of frustration to strategists in rival camps, who argue that the speeded-up primary calendar is creating a self-perpetuating momentum for Mr. Kerry: He wins because he looks like a winner.
The surveys were taken by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for a pool of the five television networks and The Associated Press.
As was the case in the earlier Democratic primaries and caucuses, voters appeared to be far more concerned about the economy, jobs and health care than about the war in Iraq and the threat of terrorist attack, based on the surveys.
Voters here in Tennessee said Tuesday that they had considerable anxiety about the nation's finances, with more than 8 in 10 voters saying the state of the national economy was not so good or poor. Seven in 10 said United States trade policies with other countries had taken jobs away from Tennessee, and one in 10 of the voters reported that they were out of work and looking for a job. About half the voters in all of these groups voted for Mr. Kerry.
In Virginia, more than 4 in 10 of the voters said they were worried that a member of their household would lose their job at some time in the next year.
There were several signs of Mr. Edwards's appeal in the polls. Voters looking for someone who is stalwart in his beliefs backed Mr. Edwards, as did voters who said they were looking for a candidate with a positive message.
How the Poll Was Conducted
The primary election day polls were based on questionnaires completed by voters on Tuesday as they left voting stations throughout Virginia and Tennessee.
The polls were conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J., and Mitofsky International of New York for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, The Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News and NBC News.
The results are based on voters in 35 randomly selected precincts across each state, 1,685 voters in Virginia and 2,489 in Tennessee, interviewed as they were leaving voting stations. In Tennessee, 500 of the interviews were conducted by telephone with self-described absentee voters.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus 3 percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters who cast ballots in each of these Democratic primaries.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on Election Day like the reluctance of some voters to take time to fill out the questionnaire may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
