SHE played mother hen for three decades to Malcolm Forbes's felicitous collection of nine Fabergé eggs and other bejeweled baubles, snapped up en masse this month by Russia's fourth-richest mogul for around $100 million before Sotheby's even got it to the auction block. So the curator Margaret Kelly Trombly might be allotted a few postpartum pangs. No more imperial eggs, synonymous with the heyday of czarist Russia and the romantic tragedy of Nicholas and Alexandra, to tend? It seems impossible not to think of this as a whole new spin on the empty-nest syndrome; since Ms. Trombly is a careerist and feminist who didn't marry until she was 48, and is childless, this is her only spin on it. She's bearing up well.
Her favorite egg (the pearl-encrusted Lilies of the Valley model) and Mr. Forbes's favorite (the Fifteenth Anniversary Egg) as well as the most expensive Easter egg ever hatched (the 1897 Coronation Egg, estimated by Sotheby's at a potential $24 million) are gone forever from the Forbes Galleries, where they were beloved focal points of a collection of antique toys, presidential manuscripts and art that attracts 60,000 visitors annually. Ms. Trombly, vice president of the Forbes Collection and coordinator of its licensing operations, is resident docent.
But now the eggs are out of her jurisdiction and back in the mother country pursuant to what Ms. Trombly dispassionately describes as ''a business decision'' by the Forbes heirs that was anticipated by their father, who died in 1990. ''Malcolm Forbes had always put it out there as a possibility to the kids that if they ever tired of custodianship of any collection, they should put it on the auction block for someone else to buy and have fun with,'' she recalls.
''Sure, it's sad for me to see the eggs go, but the nicest part of this is that they'll stay together as a collection and go back to their homeland. How can you argue with that? Malcolm, let's face it, had a very good eye: this is what legacies are for. These collections exist for a reason. With all corporate art collections, there's always an agenda.''
MR. FORBES was, she thinks, ahead of his time in using the mystique and exclusivity of the Fabergé artwork as a promotion for the Forbes brand: eggs as capitalist tools.
But even corporate art curators (Ms. Trombly was a pioneer of the discipline) who subspecialize in art-as-product licensing arrangements -- like Fabergé egg knockoffs incarnated as evening bags with four-figure price tags -- probably develop sentimental attachments to the art they catalog, display, lecture on and, if they're theme dressers, wear. That's no generic pendant around her neck: it's a swirl-patterned Fabergé miniature egg. ''And, can you stand this, I have another one,'' she says, leaping from her desk to fetch a chain of porcelain eggs strung together by Yuri Petrochenkov, a jeweler whose work earned an exhibition in the gallery. At the risk of committing egg overkill, she tosses it, too, around her neck.
Ms. Trombly, a bird-boned strawberry blond damsel of 54, even cracks a few egg jokes -- ''I've been around eggs for so long, I'm ready to grow feathers,'' she warns -- and calls it no mere coincidence that she breakfasted on an omelet and had a poached egg in her Balthazar salad at lunch. ''I feel very positive about eggs,'' she says mischievously. And yes, there really are Fabergé groupies, aesthetes who follow the scholarship and collections; no, they are not called Eggheads.
Inside her shipshape office at Forbes Magazine headquarters on lower Fifth Avenue, the decorating scheme remains tenderly eggcentric. There are two egg-style purses on her desk (they're copies of the Lilies of the Valley and the Coronation Eggs; she carries them at black-tie affairs), an egg-shaped notecard holder, and a needlepoint pillow of the Rosebud Egg (also licensed by the Forbes Collection). She says, seriously, that she tries to leave the egg motif at the office: the home front in Chelsea is dedicated to collages assembled by her husband, Preston, an announcer for Sirius, a satellite radio service. ''I'm a good egg, and so are the Forbeses,'' she says of a job that seemed more like a sinecure, probably because she idealized the boss. ''I've met very few people in my life who have real charisma, but Malcolm Forbes had it. He was a one off.''
The day his Coronation and Lilies of the Valley Eggs arrived from London in a duffel bag, he put the bag straight into her hands and put her on a plane to Boston, where the Museum of Fine Arts had organized an instant display. When Elizabeth Taylor confided that the Lilies of the Valley Egg was her favorite, Ms. Trombly made sure word got back to Mr. Forbes: ''She didn't get the real egg, but he sent her a birthday cake that looked just like it.''
Ms. Trombly grew up in Chicago, where her father ran a riveting company; she was the youngest of seven children and fell in love with art at the Thorne Rooms at the Art Institute of Chicago. She encountered her first Fabergé egg in 1969, when she spent her sophomore year of college in France and took a train excursion to Moscow and Leningrad. She didn't see another until Christopher Forbes hired her in 1974 as a part-time cataloger of his father's collection; her specialty then was British and French art, but she quickly became enamored of Peter Carl Fabergé's handiwork. ''This isn't a confession, but let's just say that if you were writing a detective novel, you'd find my fingerprints all over those eggs,'' she says, following up with a not-so-guilty giggle.
PUBLIC LIVES
