HINTS that China might let its currency rise 5 to 10 percent against the dollar in the next few months have stoked hopes in the United States of a smaller trade deficit and some stanching, at least, of the flow of manufacturing jobs to China.
But representatives of American unions and manufacturers, along with many economists, said yesterday that the yuan would have to rise 20 percent or more to make much of a difference in trade flows -- a move that no one expects.
''Five percent is something, but it's certainly not enough to stem the tide,'' said Franklin J. Vargo, vice president for international economic affairs at the National Association of Manufacturers. Ron Blackwell, director for corporate affairs at the A.F.L.-C.I.O., agreed. ''It would not change very significantly the imbalance in trade and investment with China,'' he said.
The official Chinese news agency Xinhua said yesterday that government officials denied reports in a Chinese financial newspaper over the weekend that the central bank was considering revaluing the currency by as much as 5 percent by March and perhaps by another 5 percent toward the end of the year, according to Reuters.
At a meeting yesterday of top Chinese officials to discuss financial issues, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao said China would ''maintain the basic stability of the yuan at a reasonable and balanced level,'' Reuters said.
Since 1994, China has firmly pegged the yuan to the dollar, but lately has come under growing international pressure to let it rise. In a thinly veiled reference to China, finance ministers of the Group of 7 industrialized countries, gathered last weekend in Boca Raton, Fla., said ''more flexibility in exchange rates is desirable for major countries or economic areas that lack such flexibility.''
The weekend reports out of China were received with some skepticism. ''Seeing is believing,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. ''There have been many false starts before.''
Goldman Sachs, which has hired some of the best-connected Chinese economists, has been predicting since last autumn that China would revalue soon. But other investment banks, including Morgan Stanley, have been more dubious, noting that while China runs a large trade surplus with the United States, it runs deficits with other countries and has only a slight surplus over all.
In the United States, protectionist sentiment has been rising along with the current account deficit with China, which swelled to about $125 billion last year, from $83 billion in 2001.
Mr. Vargo pointed out that the three million manufacturing jobs lost over the last three years could be attributed in good measure to the drop in manufacturing exports, which fell by over $100 billion between the third quarter of 2000 and the same period of 2002, when the dollar was at its strongest.
As the dollar has fallen over the last year, overall manufacturing exports have recovered. But it is against the euro, for the most part, that the dollar has gotten cheaper, cutting into the European Union's exports, dampening Europe's recovery -- and inciting European officials to join the calls for a weaker yuan.
China, said Mr. Blackwell, is a free rider, letting the rest of the world bear the brunt of a global realignment of currencies driven by a dollar that is weakening under the weight of the United States' large current account deficit.
''The problem is that the free rider has about a fifth of the world population,'' he said.
Not all economists agree that China should shoulder this cost. Carl B. Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, a forecasting firm in Valhalla, N.Y., argued that ''it is a mistake for the U.S. to try to impair the Chinese economy'' by pushing Beijing to raise the yuan's value.
''The rich world has ganged up on China,'' said Stephen S. Roach, chief economist of Morgan Stanley. He argues that China is not causing the United States trade deficit. Rather than blame China for its trade deficit, he argues, the United States should recognize that it has a trade imbalance because it spends beyond its means. If the deficit with China were to close, Mr. Roach says, it would open up with another country.
While most analysts agree that a 5 percent appreciation of the yuan would have little impact on investment and trade flows, there is less agreement about how big a move would be needed to effect a change.
Mr. Roach said currency values would need to swing sharply to significantly curtail either American investment in China or Chinese exports to the United States. ''China competes on the basis of labor costs, technology, infrastructure and other factors,'' Mr. Roach said. ''The currency is a small piece of the equation.''
Yet C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics, a research center in Washington, said that a 25 percent rise in the yuan could reduce the United States' trade deficit with China by about $40 billion. It would also make it easier for other Asian nations to let their currencies drift up, too, slicing America's global trade deficit -- currently about $490 billion a year -- by another $10 billion.
Over all, Mr. Bergsten said, letting the yuan rise by 25 percent would ultimately add 500,000 high-paying jobs to the American economy.
There is no sign that anything like such a shift is under consideration in Beijing. Indeed, a spokesman for the Treasury Department in Washington said yesterday that if Chinese officials were weighing any sort of move, the weekend news reports would probably derail it.
Still, Beijing has to be mindful, at least, of the protectionist talk in the United States.
Last September, Mr. Schumer and co-sponsors from both parties introduced a bill contending that the yuan was undervalued, on average, by 27.5 percent and calling for American tariffs against Chinese imports to compensate. Democratic presidential candidates, including Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, have also been talking tough.
If China's trade imbalance with the United States continues to swell, the pressure could reach a boiling point. At the current growth rate, Mr. Vargo of the National Association of Manufacturers argues, the trade deficit with China could triple by 2008, ''fanning such protectionism that it would risk affecting the whole world.''
Market Place
