The National Football League filed papers in United States District Court in Manhattan yesterday seeking a stay of the decision that has allowed Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett and other underclassmen to enter the draft in April.
The N.F.L. plans to appeal last week's decision by Judge Shira A. Scheindlin. She ruled that the league's restriction on draft eligibility -- a player must be three years out of high school -- was a violation of antitrust law.
The appeals process will not be completed before the draft. Scheindlin has a previously scheduled hearing on the case today, and a decision on the stay could come then.
If the stay is denied, Clarett will announce that he will enter the draft, his lawyer, Alan C. Milstein, said yesterday. Clarett has said he plans to attend next week's N.F.L. combine with other players who are in the draft.
If the stay is granted, Clarett and other underclassmen will not be allowed in the draft. The league could appeal if a stay is not granted. In its motion, the league argued that if the Clarett decision were allowed to stand, there would be ''immediate, fundamental and profound adverse consequences'' for the league, teams, undergraduate players and even veteran N.F.L. players who may lose their jobs as teams consider the additional underclassmen available in the draft.
The league pointed to the interrelated personnel decisions that teams make leading up to the draft as a reason they believed the stay should be granted until a decision on the appeal.
''They have to prove irreparable harm,'' Milstein said of the league.
''Two minutes after the decision, they decided to let Larry Fitzgerald into the league,'' Milstein said, referring to the Pittsburgh wide receiver.
The league ruled Monday that Fitzgerald met the requirement to be three years past his high school's graduation date because he attended a fifth year of high school at a military school to improve his grades.
''How are they harmed by Maurice coming into the league?'' Milstein said. ''They refuse to lose. If they were the Carolina Panthers, they'd still be on the field. Nobody else would be there, but they'd still be on the field.''
FOOTBALL
