Sometime in spring training, one of the Mets' young pitchers will pause after throwing the perfect pitch and have one of those ''ah-ha'' moments. It will be something of an epiphany as delivery meshes with mental preparation for a strike at the precise spot the pitch was intended to go.
''They will have those moments, yes, when this system makes sense,'' Rick Peterson, the Mets' new pitching coach, said Wednesday. ''They already had some today.''
Indeed, the right-hander Aaron Heilman's eyes opened wide with interest as Peterson quietly pointed out something in his stride that could make for more efficient delivery of a pitch.
Standing in a large room at the American Sports Medicine Institute, which is basically a biomechanics pitching laboratory, Heilman had his motion dissected by a video camera that can record 500 frames a second. Later, Peterson interpreted the video frame by frame on a monitor as Heilman leaned closer to study himself.
The 25-year-old Heilman, a contender for the fifth spot in the Mets' starting rotation, was also tagged on his legs and arms with 15 reflective metal markers like buttons. The exact movement in his delivery, shoulders to feet, was recorded, then digitized by six infrared cameras mounted on the walls above the indoor pitching mound and sent to a computer.
Heilman was represented on the screen by a stick figure that allowed his hip rotation to be measured for efficiency.
Five years ago, as Oakland's pitching coach, Peterson analyzed and interpreted data here the same way on the Athletics' vaunted young pitchers Barry Zito and Tim Hudson, the linchpins of a team that made the playoffs the past four seasons. Both became 20-game winners, and Zito won the 2002 American League Cy Young award.
In each of Peterson's six seasons as the Oakland pitching coach (1998 to 2003), the A's finished in the top three in the A.L. in earned run average.
The biomechanics system Peterson used in Oakland and will use with the Mets is not his creation, although he is a significant partner in it. The system is a collaboration of institute doctors and Peterson, who started out in 1989 under the guidance of Dr. James Andrews, the orthopedic surgeon, to try to find out why so many pitchers developed arm trouble.
At the nonprofit institute, the recorded video and digital images of pitchers are compared with a visual database of some of the more mechanically sound pitchers, Roger Clemens among them.
Andrews said Major League Baseball needs to take the lead in educating young pitchers on proper throwing mechanics and overuse.
''They need to realize pitchers are becoming more of a commodity and cost more and more money to get healthy; then this system will catch on,'' Andrews said.
The Kansas City Royals brought their top prospect here recently, and the Cleveland Indians have scheduled their top prospects for a visit. The Boston Red Sox have also shown interest.
But none of those teams have Peterson, who can interpret the data and use it on the field.
''This was a success with Oakland because there was a pitching coach who knew what to do with the data,'' said Dr. Glenn S. Fleisig, the research chairman at the institute.
Zito and Hudson were not the A's only success stories. Cory Lidle was not good enough to start consistently for Tampa Bay, but he went 13-6 for Oakland after the A's acquired him before the 2001 season.
Ted Lilly, who struggled with the Yankees in 2001 and part of 2002, won six of his last seven starts for the A's last season. Jason Isringhausen had one save for the Mets in 13 games in 1999 and was traded to Oakland. He recorded 67 saves in two seasons for the A's (2000-1).
Peterson, 49, has the respect of the Mets' young pitchers.
''Everybody knows who he is,'' said Tyler Yates, a 26-year old right-hander who will also compete for the fifth spot in the Mets' rotation. ''He's got a very good reputation, so when they invited me to come here for this, I was all for it. I don't think anyone is saying he created Zito and Hudson, but he helped them get to the next level.''
Peterson, a native of Woodbridge, N.J., was eager to move back to the East Coast, and the Mets were eager to improve on their 10th place standing in the National League in E.R.A. last season.
''Is this going to relate to the exact same performance we had in Oakland?'' Peterson said. ''That's something out of my control. All you can do is prepare them.''
Peterson said the Mets have helped the pitching staff by improving the defense up the middle with the acquisition of center fielder Mike Cameron and shortstop Kazuo Matsui, and the switch of José Reyes to second base. ''Those moves are going to take care of a lot of little bloop hits that were falling in,'' Yates said.
Peterson said the Mets' organization was helping his cause by taking an interest in the institute's science and his philosophy. Jeff Wilpon, son of the Mets' owner and the team's chief operating officer, flew here recently and toured the facility with other team executives.
But is Peterson really the remedy for Heilman, who struggled through 2003 with a 2-7 record and 6.75 E.R.A.?
''This won't make me a better pitcher; it will make me a better thrower,'' Heilman said. ''The mental stuff, the pitching, knowing when to throw the right pitch, that's more up to me.''
In addition to Heilman and Yates, Scott Kazmir, Pat Strange and Bob Keppel were analyzed on Tuesday. Five other Mets pitchers -- Jeremy Hill, Jeremy Griffiths, Neal Musser, Brandon Looper and Royce Ring -- will throw here Wednesday. Guy Conti, the minor league field coordinator, described these 10 pitchers as having the most upside in the Mets organization.
Peterson, the son of Pete Peterson, a former Pittsburgh Pirates general manager, would not be specific when asked about the tips and instruction he gives to his pitchers. He considers them trade secrets, and he tries to protect what he regards as proprietary information.
''What it is,'' Peterson said, ''is an opportunity to untap people's potential. This is a philosophy, and we continue to improve it and make it better.''
BASEBALL  Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  A sports picture caption on Wednesday with an article about the use of technology in baseball misidentified the Mets player whose pitching motion was being analyzed. He was Scott Kazmir, not Pat Strange. The article misspelled the given name of another Mets pitcher scheduled for camera analysis. He was Braden Looper, not Brandon.
