A Newfoundland named Josh, a serene, lumbering black working dog, won the Westminster Kennel Club's best in show at Madison Square Garden last night, the second victory ever for the breed.
The judge, Burton J. Yamada, took more than 20 minutes to decide on Josh, or Ch. Darbydale's All Rise Pouchcove, walking up and down the line of seven finalists, examining over and over, peering at them as he shielded his eyes from the arena's glare.
''I didn't know it took so long,'' said Yamada, who chose the same dog last year to win the working group. ''I was having too much fun. You have to give people their money's worth.''
Michelle Ostermiller, Josh's handler, could only say, ''I'm stunned.''
The co-owner of the 155-pound dog, Peggy Helming, said: ''It was just an awesome performance. It's a great way to retire this boy. It was perfect. We couldn't have asked for any more from him.'' His final, and most significant best in show, was his 46th.
Ultimately, Yamada said, it was Josh's ''showiness'' -- including a spontaneous bark that charmed a crowd that rallied behind him -- that led him to defeat the top dog in the country last year, a Norfolk terrier named Coco, as well as a Pekingese, a Sussex spaniel, an Ibizan hound, a Pembroke Welsh corgi and a standard poodle.
Earlier in the day, Yamada said that when a group of seven finalists epitomize the standards of their breeds, he goes for the showiness and attitude. ''What makes a good actor?'' he asked. ''They assume the part, and have the desire and attitude to win.''
Yamada also recalled what he felt upon spotting Josh for the first time last year. ''When he came in,'' he said, ''I couldn't wait to get my hands on him.''
In victory, Josh did not leap into the trophy cup that is his to keep, as other, smaller winners have. He merely sat for the photographers and TV cameras, occasionally tilting his head at the to-do he had caused.
''He's usually unflappable,'' Helming said. ''Tonight, he really was.''
Josh's victory was a surprise, if only because he did not rank among the top 10 dogs in the country, according to Dog News. Five of the seven finalists were in those standings, led at the top by Coco, the Norfolk terrier officially known as Ch. Cracknor Cause Célèbre.
Terriers have built a Yankee-like dynasty. Six of the past 13 best in shows have gone to them, including last year's, which was won by a Kerry Blue.
''They, in particular, have very outgoing personalities, they're alert, they catch the judge's eye,'' said William M. Duryea Jr., a member of the Westminster's board and the show committee. ''The cute factor works very well with terriers.''
But Josh, who would overwhelm any terrier, stood in the way of another terrier victory. He provided the working group with its 15th best in show at Westminster.
Four groups were chosen Monday, leaving the final three (hound, sporting and herding), and best in show, to be decided last night.
The night began with the sporting group's title going to Ch. Clussexx Three D Grinchy Glee, or Stump, a 5-year-old brown Sussex Spaniel from Houston, whose tail wagged constantly and who defeated a variety of elegant pointers, field dogs, gun dogs, hunters and retrievers, some with water-repellent coats, others with wire-haired coats. Stump is broader and lower to the ground that his cousins among spaniels. ''I love his temperament and attitude toward life,'' said Scott Sommer, his handler, who led a pouffy, exuberant Bichon Frise named J.R. to Westminster's best in show in 2001.
Then came Bunny, the Ibizan hound, or Ch. Luxor's Playmate of the Year, so named for the brown and white markings on the rear of her back that describe the logo of Playboy magazine.
''She's my first champion,'' said her owner, Wendy Anderson.
Frank Murphy, who handles Kevin, or Ch. Hum'nbird Keepn Up'pearances, the winningest Pembroke Welsh corgi of all time, said that heading directly from winning the last group right into the best of show ring did not faze his 5-year-old, the diminutive red and white winner of the herding group.
''It's an advantage,'' Murphy said. ''He knows he's just won, and he's all excited. Now he can go back into the ring still excited knowing he's just won.''
This would be Kevin's final show, retiring to a life in Florida highlighted by watching Atlanta Braves games, according to Murphy.
Josh's people did not say what his retirement plans will be.
DOG SHOW
