The failure to find unconventional weapons in Iraq has produced headlines around the world about how American credibility has been reduced to tatters, producing fresh concerns in the Bush administration over possible damage to the effort to curb the global spread of such weapons.
Yet administration officials assert that despite the blow to American credibility, allies are expressing a new willingness to work with the United States to combat the spread of nuclear and other illicit weapons in Iran, North Korea, Pakistan, Libya and elsewhere.
American officials acknowledge that the damage to the reputation of American intelligence has been significant, making it harder in the future to rally support for confrontations over banned weapons.
''The bar has been raised,'' the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, said recently. ''People are going to be very suspicious when one talks to them about intelligence. And they are going to be very suspicious when we try to use intelligence to justify certain actions.''
But administration officials say leaders in Europe and Asia especially are more determined than ever to help stop the spread of those weapons, in part to constrain the Bush administration from acting unilaterally.
''The best way of restraining the United States is to convince them that the world is taking this problem seriously,'' said a European diplomat.
Many diplomats say it would be dangerous if the failure to find weapons in Iraq became a source of complacency. If anything, they said, the need to act -- and in concert with international agencies -- is heightened.
''It's possible that if someone now comes and says we better take on Libya or North Korea, some of the credibility is gone,'' said Hans Blix, the former United Nations weapons inspector in Iraq. ''But in the longer term I don't think it matters. There is a lot to do in this area.''
Dr. Blix said that although he opposed the Iraq war, at least the world was now convinced of American and British seriousness and of the need to work with the International Atomic Energy Agency and the United Nations.
''We Europeans cannot simply resist forceful action by the United States and leave it at that,'' he said. ''We have to take positive action also. We have to push the United States to use international organizations to face threats to our common security.''
American officials, while in some cases defensive about the missing weapons in Iraq, nonetheless say they see no diminution of global concern.
''After the war, I certainly wondered what impact the search for weapons would have on our credibility,'' said John R. Bolton, under secretary of state for arms control. ''But while the chattering classes may chatter, I see no damage to our working with many other countries on these issues.''
Mr. Bolton, an outspoken advocate of a tough approach against the spread of weapons, said there were still differences between the United States and its allies. ''The real question is whether the lack of finding weapons stockpiles has made those differences worse,'' he said. ''In my own experience, it hasn't.''
He and other administration officials cite the fact that France, Germany and Russia, all of which opposed the Iraq war, have helped to press Iran to dismantle its rapidly accelerating nuclear arms program.
Moreover, when Libya decided to come clean on its weapons, American officials say, the International Atomic Energy Agency was brought in to help dismantle the program, even though Mr. Bolton and other officials have criticized the agency in the past.
The administration has also, in effect, handed over to China, another opponent of the Iraq war, the responsibility of organizing talks with North Korea, and it is working closely with Russia, South Korea and Japan to forge a common position.
More recently American and atomic energy agency officials say they have been cooperating on the investigation of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program.
Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the agency's director, said his agency's credibility had been vindicated because he had cast doubt on Iraq's nuclear capacity. But overall, he said, the battle against the spread of nuclear weapons has been made more difficult.
''People are now more cynical when you talk about the possibility of a country having weapons of mass destruction,'' Dr. ElBaradei said. ''That complicates our task.''
Administration officials concede that President Bush's longstanding emphasis on working with allies to negotiate with North Korea and Iran is the only choice he has, given the widespread perception of the blow to American credibility because of Iraq.
''Bush is not looking to fight another war anytime soon,'' said one official who has talked to the president about the matter.
Still others say that whatever blow has been dealt to American credibility, no one doubts American determination to confront the issue.
''I don't think people were that surprised to see that the weapons aren't there,'' said a prominent Middle East diplomat. ''What I'm seeing is that with Syria, Libya and maybe other countries, there's more fear of American might than anything else, and what America might do next.''
But a European envoy said the American experience in Iraq might have profound repercussions in other nations' expectations about American conduct in dealing with future crises.
''People will say, 'Show us the proof,' '' he said, adding, ''We are seeing a potential obstacle to American leadership and its ability to carry out effective, coordinated international action against terrorism or weapons or whatever.''
In the eyes of many diplomats, the biggest concern over Iraq is the Bush administration's doctrine of pre-emption, the well-publicized policy in which the United States reserves the right to take action even before a threat becomes imminent.
In a speech in Washington last month, the French defense minister, Michèle Alliot-Marie, assailed ''certain radical neo-conservative ideas'' that she said were ''the very antithesis of European sensibilities.''
Others say, though, that the outcome in Iraq has put the pre-emption doctrine in abeyance, at the very least. ''Pre-emption was an idea created for Iraq,'' said one European official. ''It has now died in Iraq.''
A foreign minister from Asia put it this way: ''The whole war was operated on the theory that Iraq had these weapons. One would not want to conclude that the United States was wrong in every respect. But clearly the United States now has to face the fact that as long as its actions are unilateral it will have a credibility problem around the world.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DIPLOMACY
