Al Jackson, an original Met and now a spring training coach, looked on with admiration Tuesday as the team's celebrated middle-infield twosome took ground balls together for the first time. The Mets are hoping they will ultimately develop into the National League's premier double-play combination.
Jackson watched the new shortstop from Japan, Kazuo Matsui, begin to mesh with the new second baseman, José Reyes, who was the Mets' shortstop for 69 games last season. Jackson said it took him a long time to fully grasp the importance of soft hands for a defensive player.
''I finally started to see that guys with soft hands don't make as many errors, because if they miss a ball, it usually won't be too far away from them,'' Jackson said. ''Sometimes they can still make a play. Let me tell you, both these guys have very soft hands.''
Once Matsui, 28, and the 20-year-old Reyes finished hitting with third baseman Ty Wigginton and several others at the Mets' minor league park here, they took infield practice for about 30 minutes. The first session was devoted to fielding and throwing to first base. Then they began working on their throws and footwork in double-play situations.
Reyes's first throw, after a distinctively quick pivot, sailed over the head of John Stearns, a minor league manager serving as the first baseman. Reyes's fifth throw looked like a carbon copy.
Still, Reyes persevered as Edgar Alfonzo, a coach under Stearns at Class AA Binghamton last season, talked to him in Spanish about his technique. Alfonzo has been assigned, along with the former major league shortstop Chico Fernandez and the coach Matt Galante, to help Reyes make the transition to second.
Fernandez, expected to arrive here Wednesday, worked with Reyes for about a month and a half in the Dominican Republic's winter league. Reyes agreed to the move in mid-December before Matsui signed a three-year, $20.1 million deal.
''He has the ability to play second base and shortstop,'' Alfonzo said of Reyes. ''We're just teaching him the basics of playing second base, like how to turn a double play. It's not that hard, but it's not that easy, either. He's a great worker, though, and he'll be fine. I see him being an All-Star second baseman. He has such a great arm and such great range.''
Reyes clearly displayed the stronger arm Tuesday -- Jackson said Reyes's arm was considered an 8, the top rating. But Matsui, who has played nine seasons in Japan's Pacific League, looked the part of a veteran; he seemed to feel no need to impress the Mets this early in the game. He fielded about 15 grounders before beginning to throw to first base, then threw with relative ease for some time.
''I'm feeling no pressure,'' Matsui said through his interpreter and business agent, Toru Mihara. ''I'm enjoying the challenge.'' It was his fourth practice here and Reyes's first.
Matsui, who speaks virtually no English, and Reyes, who uses English as a limited second language to his native Spanish, began honing their communication skills. Reyes said they agreed on where each likes to receive the ball in double-play situations.
Matsui said: ''I told him wherever he throws the ball is fine with me. But I realize that during spring training I've got to construct some communication with him by speaking and eye contact. A comfortable relationship is very important, so I'll do my best to establish one with him.''
Matsui said that he was trying to remember English words from television programs but that he was having trouble. Mihara said Matsui could say, ''Atta boy'' and ''That's what I'm talking about.''
Bobby Floyd, a Mets coach who threw batting practice to the two Tuesday, found himself trying to communicate with Matsui in Japanese. Floyd began a session in which a player had to get a hit to keep going. On any pop-ups or weakly hit balls, he yelled, ''Next,'' just as barbers do -- he would say later -- when it is time for another customer.
After Matsui popped up, Floyd yelled, ''Next,'' then added, ''I have to figure out what a barber says in Japanese.'' It's ''Tsungi,'' Mihara said, chuckling.
Just as Matsui was not concerned about showing off his arm, he did not go out of his way to exhibit his power -- he hit 150 career Pacific League home runs. Only two of his hits reached the fence on a bounce, although he seemed to focus on hitting from the left side, where he has less power.
Reyes raised some eyebrows by hitting with power from both sides of the batter's box. He was especially impressive hitting left-handed; one line drive cleared the right-field fence. ''You didn't do that for me last year,'' said Floyd, who managed Reyes at Norfolk before his promotion to the Mets.
Matsui is prone to bowing when being introduced to teammates and coaches. He is being helped in adjusting to a new culture by Mihara and the presence of his wife, Mio, and 3-year-old daughter, Haruna. Matsui is also becoming accustomed to playing on dirt infields after years of performing on artificial turf, and he is familiarizing himself to a slightly bigger baseball.
''Practice is his No. 1 priority,'' Mihara said. ''He will do everything it takes to get himself ready. And he thinks that playing with Mr. Reyes will make him a better player.''
BASEBALL
