Gen. Wesley K. Clark is abandoning his race for the Democratic presidential nomination after third-place finishes in the Tennessee and Virginia primaries on Tuesday demolished his argument that he was the Democrat best qualified to carry the South against President Bush in November.
Matt Bennett, communications director for the Clark campaign, said a formal announcement is scheduled for Wednesday in Little Rock, Ark., General Clark's hometown.
Returns from Virginia showed that with all precincts reporting, General Clark had just about 9 percent of the vote, behind Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, with 52 percent, and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, with about 27 percent.
General Clark performed a little better in Tennessee, where with 98 percent of precincts reporting he had 23 percent of the vote, to 41 percent for Mr. Kerry and about 26 percent for Mr. Edwards.
General Clark entered the Democratic race with a splash in September, drawing attention because of his 34-year military résumé, which many Democratic strategists believed made him an impressive candidate in the post-Sept. 11 era.
He used his years in the military, including his service as the supreme allied commander of NATO, to give weight to his bruising attacks on President Bush's approach to Iraq and to fighting terrorism.
Despite his political inexperience, he rose for a time in the polls and proved a prodigious fund-raiser. He skipped the Iowa caucuses to focus on the New Hampshire primary, a move that his son, for one, called a mistake. And on the stump he often seemed a novice.
The decision to quit the race, aides said, came in a private meeting of General Clark, his wife, Gertrude, and his son, Wesley Clark 2d, who have traveled together across Tennessee in recent days. Also in the room, Mr. Bennett said, was Eli Segal, the campaign chairman, and a handful of other senior staf members.
Mr. Bennett said a number of factors contributed to the decision to drop out.
''There was this tremendous pressure in this cycle for answers about when people were going to drop out of this race,'' he said. ''I think that pressure came for a variety of reasons. One was Senator Kerry's momentum in the race, the other was financing. But those are kind of a piece. When your momentum dies, your financing dies with it.''
With little money available for commercials in Wisconsin, which holds the next primary, on Feb. 17, a senior aide to General Clark said earlier in the evening that it was ''pretty obvious where things will end up.''
General Clark had not made a final decision when he came downstairs to a half-filled ballroom in the Marriott Hotel in downtown Memphis to speak to supporters, many of whom had journeyed from the campaign headquarters in Little Rock for the night.
His remarks were noncommittal about whether he would stay in. ''We may have lost this battle today, but I'll tell you what, we're not going to lose the battle for America's future,'' General Clark said. ''Our goal remains the same: to change the direction of our country and bring a higher standard of leadership to the White House.''
Aides said he would support the eventual Democratic nominee and would be willing to campaign on his behalf in the South and elsewhere.
The general had staked much of his candidacy on Tennessee, citing his appeal to fellow Southerners who shared his values of patriotism, faith and family. He promised to win the state and spent more than $1.2 million on television advertising, radio commercials and direct mail there. But his claim to Tennessee and the South as a whole met a strong challenge from Mr. Edwards.
General Clark eked out a 1,300-vote victory in Oklahoma on Feb. 3, but he finished a distant fourth in South Carolina behind Mr. Edwards, the victor, Mr. Kerry and the Rev. Al Sharpton after spending heavily there for weeks before that state's primary, also on Feb. 3.
The strategy of focusing mainly on Tennessee and spending only one day in Virginia, where General Clark was also one of the earliest candidates to begin broadcasting television advertisements, was a further acknowledgment that for all his Southern roots he was not as strong in the region as Mr. Edwards.
Throughout Tuesday, there were conflicting signals about the campaign's fate. Senior aides were working on concession and withdrawal speeches even as General Clark told voters in Nashville that he planned to stay in the race at least through Super Tuesday, March 2.
There had been signs in recent days that General Clark and members of his senior staff were contemplating a future in which the general was not a candidate. In conversations with reporters this week, General Clark referred to his campaign in the past tense at least twice, as did two senior staff members.
''I just want to tell you that I've really liked having you along,'' the general said on Tuesday to a reporter who has traveled with him since the week he entered the race.
Campaign aides ascribed the general's failure to catch on to several factors, chief among them the compressed primary schedule, which called for 12 primaries or caucuses in the two weeks after the New Hampshire primary.
With the contests stretching from Washington State to Maine in the north and from Arizona to South Carolina in the South, it was all but impossible for a candidate to devote resources to each of the elections, they said. Additionally, General Clark did not enter the race until mid-September, leaving him only about 19 weeks to introduce himself to voters before the balloting began.
''There's only so much you can tell people in that amount of time,'' said one senior aide to the general. ''He went from zero to 80 in one night.''
Outsiders said the general's late entry certainly affected his prospects but added that it would be foolish to discount the candidate's own inexperience.
''It's incredibly difficult, given the enormous scrutiny that occurs in today's world, to be a first-time candidate for president,'' said Howard Wolfson, a Democratic strategist. ''A lot of the mistakes that were made were the result of inexperience. If he had run for any other office previously, or started earlier, a lot of those could have been avoided.''
A former four-star general who won a war in Kosovo as military leader of the NATO alliance, General Clark based much of his candidacy on criticism of the Bush Administration's policy in Iraq. Yet on the first day of his candidacy, General Clark said he probably would have voted for the congressional resolution. He then spent part of many subsequent days explaining that he had opposed the war from the beginning and never would have authorized given the president such a ''blank check.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
