Howard Dean went on the air in Wisconsin on Tuesday with a commercial that implored voters to buck the establishment and not to be a ''rubber stamp'' for the selection of Senator John Kerry as the Democratic nominee.
It is the first new advertisement that Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, has released since the New Hampshire primary in late January, when his campaign, by then running out of money, halted his advertising.
Dr. Dean had been ignoring the contests in Virginia and Tennessee to concentrate on Wisconsin, whose primary is Feb. 17.
''There's a big election next Tuesday, a week from today, and if I win it, I've got a good chance of being president,'' Dr. Dean told about 75 children on Tuesday at the Latino Community Center in South Milwaukee. ''If I don't win, then maybe I won't be president. We'll find out.''
The advertisement presents Dr. Dean's last-ditch pitch to Wisconsin voters: that he is the true alternative to President Bush.
''They say his campaign has given the Democratic Party its voice back and helped reclaim its soul,'' an announcer says as the screen flashes images of a beaming Dr. Dean addressing throngs of supporters. Detailing Dr. Dean's stands against Mr. Bush on the Iraq war and health care ''before it was politically popular,'' the announcer continues, ''Now the media tells us the race is over and the Washington insiders have won. So, on Tuesday, Wisconsin can be a rubber stamp, or you can vote for real change.''
The spot never mentions Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, by name. But for more than a week Dr. Dean has been portraying him as a ''Washington insider'' beholden to lobbyists.
Steve McMahon, Dr. Dean's media adviser, said of the advertisement, ''We're challenging Wisconsin voters to demonstrate their independence from the political establishment.''
Dr. Dean began advertising again on Monday, when his campaign reintroduced a spot that ran in Iowa and New Hampshire describing his path from medical student to Vermont governor to presidential candidate. That one-minute commercial will continue to run, his advisers said. And starting Wednesday, they said, the campaign will also introduce two new spots in Wisconsin that were made by supporters.
In one, a gray-haired stockbroker, Michael Reinhardt, says he was a Republican but now supports Dr. Dean, who he says is ''all for building alliances with Europe and Asia; I like his position on gun control.'' In another, a claims adjuster who identifies herself as Max, says, ''When all the other Democrats were laying around like, 'Oh, I'm so afraid of Bush I can't do anything at all,' Howard Dean came out and said he was against going to war with Iraq.''
Dr. Dean's campaign is spending more than $300,000 to run these advertisements in Wisconsin in the coming week, but his advisers said it was the new spot urging voters to strike out for change and for Dr. Dean that best summed up the case he was making now.
Strategists for Dr. Dean's rivals and Wisconsin political experts said they were not certain how effective the advertisement could be when many polls were showing overwhelming support in the state for Mr. Kerry.
Charles H. Franklin, a professor of political science at the University of Wisconsin, said Dr. Dean would need more than advertisements to climb in the polls.
''His problem is he was giving people a reason to support him back in the summer and the fall and for whatever reason, the voters decided they didn't want to support him,'' Professor Franklin said.
He said the best way for Dr. Dean to slow Mr. Kerry would be to run an advertisement that more directly criticized him. But Dr. Dean's strategists have not wanted to come after Mr. Kerry too harshly, fearing it would alienate primary voters who want to see the candidates attacking Mr. Bush, not one another.
Dr. Dean's advisers said Tuesday that they had no plans to run any negative advertisements against Mr. Kerry in Wisconsin. Still, Mr. McMahon said in a recent conference call with supporters that he was not willing to rule anything out.
--------------------
Donors to Anti-Dean Ads
WASHINGTON, Feb. 10 (AP) -- A group that ran an advertisement using a picture of Osama bin Laden to attack Dr. Dean was financed by donors that included labor unions and the former Democratic Senator Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey, according to a finance report the group provided Tuesday to The Associated Press.
The group, Americans for Jobs, Healthcare and Progressive Values, spent $15,000 on an advertisement broadcast in South Carolina and New Hampshire that showed a picture of Mr. Bin Laden and said that Dr. Dean lacked the experience needed to take on terrorists.
Mr. Torricelli, who is currently raising money for Mr. Kerry, donated $50,000 from his Senate campaign fund to the group. He did not immediately respond to a message seeking comment.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
