The outspoken owner of the Dallas Mavericks, Mark Cuban, is on a crusade for the world's overworked professional basketball players.
Cuban does not want them playing in the Olympics because they jeopardize their bodies and their contracts. The Mavericks' Steve Nash, Dirk Nowitzki and Eduardo Najera each played in his country's qualifying tournament last summer and suffered fatigue or injury.
Larry Brown, the coach of the Detroit Pistons and the United States Olympic team, engaged in a verbal cross-fire with Cuban through the news media over the weekend. Brown said that the first Dream Team was responsible for developing international basketball -- including the players Cuban has.
''You talk about all these benefits; what are they?'' Cuban said before the Knicks played the Mavericks on Tuesday night at the American Airlines Center. ''The Dream Team was 11 years ago. Dirk didn't switch to basketball when he was 15, he switched because his coach played basketball for the German Olympic team. Yao Ming, his mother played for his Olympic team.''
Cuban called Brown's argument hypocritical. ''The whole concept of the Dream Team was because all these European bloc countries started developing basketball players at a young age,'' he said.
''Numbers don't hold it up. It's great to talk about it. Let me talk about the flip side. But the Global Games was where Darko Milicic was discovered. And Krstic. Do you know who pays for the Global Games? Me.''
The Global Games, a junior world tournament, are in Dallas every summer, and Cuban said he paid ''hundreds of thousands of dollars for it.''
In response to Brown's defending the United States team, Cuban said: ''More power to him for contributing than volunteering. That doesn't remove the fact that the Olympics are a commercial endeavor. Let him coach the Global Games. Let him coach the junior team. If representing your country is the ultimate experience, then why do contracts come first?''
Cuban suggested that the winner of the N.C.A.A. tournament should represent the United States. He said the United States team was more about ''cherry-picking all-stars'' than promoting a team concept.
PRO BASKETBALL
