Buglisi/Foreman Dance drew a rapt audience into a much warmer, prettier world than the chill city streets outside on Saturday afternoon at the Joyce Theater. Each of the program's two new pieces seemed to take for granted the premise that entertaining dance need not be a guilty pleasure.
Jacqulyn Buglisi's ''Scene 1: Pollen in the Air,'' danced to music by Schumann, Sibelius and Beethoven, is fragmentary but flavorful. Inspired by the film ''The King of Hearts,'' ''Pollen'' takes two couples (Jennifer Emerson and Walter Cinquinella, and Helen Hansen and Yarden Ronen) through the motions of love, expressed most strongly in skewed partnering in which the men support the women in unexpected ways.
The dance flows along with the liquid music in one long ripple of antic encounters and near-misses. The setting might be a park, filled with red and white balloons and showered occasionally with small bursts of white confetti. The vividly tatty women's costumes, designed by Ms. Buglisi, convey the film's atmosphere of light and sweet confusion. The set was designed by Deborah Maché and Jack Mehler. Mr. Mehler also designed the lighting for both premieres.
Music and dance became one in Donlin Foreman's ''Song,'' a world premiere set to music composed and conducted by Lisa DeSpain. Mr. Foreman filled the stage with a mass of black-garbed members of the New York Choral Society who effectively became a shifting set. The conductor and solo singers, lead by Kelly Rucker, were ranked at the front at the beginning and end of the piece.
Five dancers (Ms. Emerson, Ms. Hansen, Christine Marcus, Mr. Cinquinella, Mr. Ronen and Kevin Predmore) darted among them, their lighter, softer costumes, designed by Elisa Jimenez, giving the musicians an even more sternly totemic look. Mr. Foreman likes big themes. In ''Song'' the onstage presence of the musicians allowed the dancers just to dance.
The musicians seemed to cup the dancers in the palm of a large hand when they regrouped in a half-circle at the side. But the dancing held its own, lapping across the stage and back, bodies rocking at times and at other times assuming still sculptural lifts and stage patterns.
DANCE REVIEW
