American commanders have ordered a sharp reduction in the presence of occupation troops in Baghdad, senior officers announced Sunday. The most visible role of policing the capital is being turned over to local forces while American troops pull back to a ring of bases at the edge of the city.
Brig. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, commander of the First Armored Division, which has responsibility for security in Baghdad, made the announcement during a visit by Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary. Mr. Wolfowitz returned here on an inspection tour three months after the hotel he stayed in then was hit by rockets fired by insurgents in an attack that killed one Army officer and wounded more than a dozen people.
American officers said that after reaching a peak of almost 60 operating locations in Baghdad, the American military had already cut its posts in the capital to 26, and that the number would drop to 8 by mid-April. Six of those bases will be in the Baghdad outskirts, and two will be in the high-security ''green zone'' that is home to the American-led occupation authority inside the city.
General Dempsey said the new Iraqi police force and civil defense corps ''are capable of handling the threat'' inside the city.
Mr. Wolfowitz, while touring a Baghdad police station, said, ''Clearly it's better for us if they're in the front line, and it's better for them and better for their country.''
The American military is working to ''cede the city security problem to them,'' he said. He said the American military presence included ''sandbags, concrete barriers and concertina wire,'' which cause serious disruptions and frustration for the residents of Baghdad, as well as creating targets for insurgents.
On Sunday, security was a priority for Mr. Wolfowitz's visit. No announcement was made in advance of his arrival, and Black Hawk helicopters ferrying his delegation around the capital flew zigzag routes just above rooftop level to minimize the opportunity for any adversary to spot and fire on the aircraft. The helicopters gained and dropped altitude at dizzying speeds as they hopped over a succession of city power lines like winged hurdlers.
General Dempsey said insurgent forces in the capital had been hurt by a series of American-led offensives. ''I don't think they are as organized as they were a month ago,'' he said.
As the First Armored Division prepares to hand over the American military mission in Baghdad to fresh forces of the First Cavalry Division, rotating into Iraq from Fort Hood, Tex., the United States forces will remain poised to assist Iraqi police and civil defense forces. They are also taking steps to reassure the population that the troop rotation does not represent a withdrawal of the American military -- or of American political interests -- from Iraq.
''We will move from leading the security effort to supporting it,'' said Brig. Gen. Mark P. Hertling, assistant commander of the First Armored Division. ''There is a point of diminishing consent for them wanting us to be here. They want their security forces taking care of them, at least most of them do.''
A senior Pentagon official said one reason for removing significant numbers of American forces from the city center was to withdraw as much as possible from buildings, posts and offices associated with the fallen government of Saddam Hussein. But a number of palaces used by his government at the edge of the city will still be used by the occupying military, and the occupation political authority continues to use a Hussein-era palace in the city center as its headquarters.
A senior military officer said about 8,000 Iraqi police officers now patrolled Baghdad, a city of about 5.5 million, although security analysts say the city needs 19,000. About 1,000 new policemen are being trained each month, the officer said.
A senior official with the Coalition Provisional Authority here said recent bombings of Iraqi police stations had not driven new recruits away from police training.
Military intelligence now indicates that from 250 to 300 hard-core insurgents operate in the city, dispersed among various neighborhoods but loosely organized into about 14 cells.
The American military and Iraqi security forces are battling a spate of kidnappings by insurgents, who hope to compel the victims' families to carry out attacks against American troops and Iraqi police officers or who are trying to extort money to pay for attacks, a senior military officer said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: OCCUPATION
