Like ''military intelligence'' or ''jumbo shrimp,'' the phrase ''pop opera'' may strike some as an oxymoron. But the five singers who make up Amici Forever, a London-based international group that calls itself ''the world's first opera band,'' are aiming to be more MTV than PBS.
''When we perform, it's not like a classical recital, where we're standing quite formally,'' explained the group's bass-baritone, Nick Garrett, 30, over dinner at a Midtown Manhattan restaurant. ''There's not that distance you can sometimes get in a classical performance. It's more relaxed. Think classical singing with a pop aesthetic.''
Amici's newly released debut album, ''The Opera Band,'' currently No. 2 on the Billboard classical charts, gives works like ''Nessun dorma'' from Puccini's ''Turandot'' and ''Soave sia il vento'' from Mozart's ''Così Fan Tutte'' a contemporary touch, not a complete makeover.
It also has new versions of the theme song from the television mini-series ''Band of Brothers'' and the pop classic ''Unchained Melody,'' sung in Italian, along with ''Prayer in the Night,'' a song based on Handel's ''Sarabande.'' To call Amici a band is a bit misleading, since none of the members play instruments.
For a recent performance at the Players club on Gramercy Park the singers traded traditional tuxedos and floor-length gowns for hipper, less constricting outfits. The men -- Mr. Garrett; David Habbin, 31; and Geoff Sewell, 31 -- wore tasteful black suits and matching T-shirts. Jo Appleby, 28, a made-for-''Baywatch'' beauty, was dressed in slim-fitting white jeans and a sheer lingerie top, while Tsakane Valentine, 25, also easy on the eyes, opted for a silver, micro-mini dress, more Beyoncé Knowles than Renée Fleming. That evening the show was not over until the skinny lady -- Ms. Appleby -- sang.
''No question that looks played a part in the formation of the band,'' said David Weyner, the general manager of Arista Associated Labels. ''But genuine musicality and real stage experience were also extremely important. Many great-looking people wanted to be in this band but were eliminated because they didn't meet the other two requirements.''
All in Amici have studied opera and sung professionally for years. They can distinguish an aria from an arioso. Mr. Sewell, the group's founder, said: ''I suppose that the pop genre goes for image first then quality of voice second. But for us we go for quality of voice and the blending of our voices before the look factor.'' Pointing to the success of crossover classical singers like Charlotte Church and Josh Groban, whose second album, ''Closer,'' peaked at No. 1 on the Billboard Top 200 last week, Amici was optimistic about its chances of making it big in the United States, a good thing since BMG, Arista's parent company, reportedly paid $10.8 million to sign the group.
''There seems to be a huge market for people who like strong classical singing but don't want to sit through a full-length opera to get that sort of vocal power,'' said Mr. Garrett, who is from Britain. ''I suppose we're just giving it to them in bite-size chunks.''
Whether Americans will down those ''bite-size chunks'' remains to be seen. Audience reaction at the group's performance the other evening ranged from ''They're absolutely fabulous'' to ''I don't get it.'' Opera purists may accuse Amici of watering down classical music, a criticism for which the group has braced itself.
''You never escape any backlash from the critics,'' said Mr. Habbin, who like Mr. Garrett is British. ''Appreciation is subjective. If there is a good percentage of the people that like you, that's all you need.''
Mr. Sewell, a New Zealander, said he formed the idea for an opera group after noticing a gap in the market. ''There was no group with five voices offering the full range of sounds from soprano to bass,'' he said. A former accountant, he quit his job after what he said was a life-altering trip to Graceland convinced him that he would prefer entertaining. ''I'm a massive Elvis fan,'' he said. ''I know it sounds cheesy, but that was a major catalyst.''
Mr. Sewell and Mr. Habbin provide Amici's tenor voices. Ms. Appleby, also from Britain, and Ms. Valentine, from South Africa, are sopranos. The group once went by the name Tenors &amp; Divas but decided to drop it for fear that the contributions of Mr. Garrett, a bass-baritone, would look as if they were being ignored. After toying with names like Pacifica, the quintet set upon Amici.
''Amici means friends in Italian, and we sing in Italian, and we're all mates,'' Mr. Sewell said with a grin as white as a picket fence.
The group is not on a mission to prove ''how trendy opera can be,'' Mr. Habbin said. He later added: ''We're certainly not saying, compare us to Pavarotti. We're just five singers that sing with a classical voice, and if you like it, that's great.''
