LANDMARK decisions in two of the biggest continuing battles in the world of invention were made in January. Eolas v. Microsoft and Symbol Technologies v. Lemelson both evoke David versus Goliath, but only one ends like the biblical tale -- at least for the moment. In one case, the giant is dealt a mighty blow; in the other, David dies a death of a thousand cuts.
Both cases underscore a truth often obscured by a national mythology that celebrates the likes of Edison and Bell as lone, brilliant inventors: assigning proper credit for the invention of any given technology can be a murky enterprise.
On Jan. 23, a federal judge in Las Vegas invalidated patents granted to the well-known independent inventor Jerome H. Lemelson for bar code scanners and machine-vision technology. This will save hundreds of companies about $1 billion in royalties they would otherwise have had to pay to the Lemelson Medical, Education &amp; Research Foundation.
When customers started getting letters in 1998 demanding royalty payments, Cognex, the leading maker of machine-vision technology, sued the Lemelson Foundation. The next year, Symbol Technologies and seven other makers of bar code scanners also filed suit against the foundation.
Bar code scanning and machine-vision technology are pervasive. Robotic assembly lines ''read'' with scanners and ''see'' with machine-vision cameras to mass-produce everything from chocolate chip cookies to circuit boards. Scanners are also widely used at the checkout counters of supermarkets and other stores.
The Lemelson Foundation had already demanded and received $1 billion to $1.5 billion in royalties from a range of industries. Though he died in 1997, at the age of 74, Mr. Lemelson is still receiving new patents posthumously. On Dec. 3, he received his 589th patent, which means he has more patents than any other inventor except Thomas Edison (although Mr. Lemelson still has patents pending, while, presumably, Edison does not).
A lawyer for the foundation, Gerald Hosier, whom Forbes magazine has called the nation's highest-paid lawyer, is known for his blustery bravado. These days, however, he seems introspective.
''It's disappointing,'' he said of the decision. He acknowledged that Mr. Lemelson's patents took a long time to work their way through the Patent Office.
''They are very basic inventions presented in a fairly primitive form by today's standards,'' Mr. Hosier said. ''But the Wright brothers had an airplane that only flew 300 feet. The fact that it was primitive -- that it led to later planes that were much more sophisticated -- didn't detract from its importance.''
The difference, however, is that Mr. Lemelson never built a business, much less a prototype, out of what he described in his patents. Judge Philip M. Pro of the United States District Court in Nevada concluded that Mr. Lemelson had the obligation to pursue his patent applications aggressively rather than let them linger. That, said Jesse Jenner, a lawyer for the plaintiff, is what Mr. Lemelson did. That allowed him to add new patent claims to the pending applications as new technologies came to fruition, at which point Mr. Lemelson sought royalties.
On Jan. 14, a federal district court judge in Chicago upheld a $521 million judgment against the Microsoft Corporation for infringing a patent covering an aspect of another pervasive technology: the Internet Explorer browser.
While teaching at the University of California in 1994, Michael Doyle filed for a patent covering software that enables a user to call up several separate applications, like a media player or document viewer, within a single browser window. Mr. Doyle left the university to found Eolas Technologies Inc., a small company that had exclusive rights to market the invention.
Some critics see the Eolas suit as part of a trend of individual or small-scale patent owners shaking down large companies for royalties without having created anything of value themselves.
''The granddaddy of this is the Lemelson Foundation,'' said Douglas J. Kline, a lawyer with Testa, Hurwitz &amp; Thibeault in Boston, who contends that software and business-method patents lend themselves to entrepreneurial litigation.
''You tend to see it on computer software-Internet side of business, and you don't see it on the life sciences end,'' he said. ''There aren't a lot of people sitting around in their basement splitting DNA and thinking, 'I can patent this.'''
Although statistics documenting an increase in this kind of litigation are hard to come by, the Eolas lawsuit is just the largest of a number successfully prosecuted recently against big Internet, software and electronics companies.
Important skirmishes still lie ahead for Eolas. Microsoft will appeal. On Oct. 30, the Patent and Trademark Office announced that it would re-examine the validity of Mr. Doyle's patent. It did so at the request of, among others, Tim Berners-Lee, one inventor of the Internet (who, by the way, has never filed a patent application for his work).
In a footnote to his decision, however, Judge James B. Zagel seemed to sniff at the idea of a re-examination, suggesting it may have been motivated mainly not by assertions that Mr. Doyle's invention was unoriginal but by the general philosophy that ''royalties ought not to be paid for patented Web innovations.'' Moreover, he ordered Microsoft to pay Eolas more than $45 million in ''prejudgment interest'' while it prepares to appeal the ruling.
Meanwhile, Mr. Hosier is appealing the Las Vegas court decision on behalf of the Lemelson Foundation to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, the highest patent court in the land. The court will likely reach a final judgment on the appeal within the year.
If he loses, history is likely to deny Mr. Lemelson a perch in the pantheon of great inventors no matter how many patents he is ultimately granted. His stature as a philanthropist, however, seems secure. Reportedly a frugal man who lived simply, Mr. Lemelson and his family have given more than $100 million to support innovation programs for college students, underwrite an invention center at the Smithsonian Institution, and endow an invention prize administered by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Patents
