Lincoln Center has backed away from the hard-line stance it adopted toward the New York Philharmonic when the orchestra announced last year that it was merging with Carnegie Hall.
The center is no longer arguing that the orchestra violated its contract when it said it intended to leave Avery Fisher Hall for Carnegie, a deal that fell apart in October. Two weeks ago the center withdrew a list of demands it was seeking to impose on the Philharmonic after the orchestra rejected them as a starting point for contract negotiations.
Lincoln Center had been widely expected to make the orchestra pay a price for its flirtation with Carnegie Hall. Instead the center appears to be the one trying to make amends, and the Philharmonic, rather than being weakened and chastened, continues to show a strong hand.
The Philharmonic demonstrated its regained bargaining power Jan. 14 when it abruptly called off a meeting between representatives of each organization because it was unhappy about a list of new contract terms it had just received from Lincoln Center. The center's chairman, Bruce Crawford, said he then promptly called the Philharmonic's chairman, Paul B. Guenther, to head off any further rupture.
''All I attempted to do is say, 'Let's get on with this thing,' '' Mr. Crawford said.
The two agreed to set aside the list of terms, which included a proposal that the orchestra cover a bigger share of any deficit for Avery Fisher Hall, where it performs. In addition to being the Philharmonic's landlord, Lincoln Center does its own presentations in Avery Fisher; the Philharmonic covers a third of any deficit there and Lincoln Center the rest. There were also proposals on scheduling and ticket pricing.
Mr. Crawford and Mr. Guenther also decided to join the negotiations personally, hoping to expedite them. ''We're getting into it so that we can accelerate,'' Mr. Crawford said. ''I don't think any of us felt that it was moving fast enough.''
Mr. Guenther was out of the country last week and unavailable for comment.
In addition, the orchestra has been invited back into the discussions about Lincoln Center's redevelopment plan, talks it had been excluded from since the proposed merger with Carnegie was announced.
This conciliatory, collaborative approach is striking given that Lincoln Center had begun to pursue legal action on the grounds that the Philharmonic had violated its constituency agreement, the contract that governs each of the 12 groups on the Lincoln Center campus. ''The constituency agreement has been breached by virtue of the New York Philharmonic's decision to go to Carnegie Hall,'' Reynold Levy, president of Lincoln Center, said in August, two months after the Philharmonic's plans to move first came to light.
Even after the merger fell through and the Philharmonic agreed to stay put, Lincoln Center maintained that the constituency agreement had been nullified by the orchestra's announced departure and that a new one must therefore be negotiated.
In October Mr. Crawford said Lincoln Center would seek to make the terms of the constituency agreement tougher. ''The constituency agreement between the Philharmonic and Lincoln Center is a contract that states that in exchange for certain privileges and obligations, the Philharmonic won't perform anywhere else in New York through 2011,'' he said at the time. ''We'll sit down and talk about privileges and obligations and work things out for the future.''
The Philharmonic, however, has insisted that because it never left, its contract with Lincoln Center was never breached.
Last week Mr. Levy confirmed that Lincoln Center had abandoned its legal action. ''These discussions are aimed toward creating a more up-to-date, more constructive, more forward-looking document,'' he said. ''It's being worked on in a spirit in which interpretations of past events are simply not relevant.''
Because the agreement was drawn up about 40 years ago and has never been revised more than slightly, it does not reflect the changes that have taken place since then, among them that Lincoln Center has stepped up its role as a presenter, through the Lincoln Center Festival and the Great Performers series, for example.
It is unclear what the current attempt at a more amicable approach will mean for the agreement. Mr. Crawford said talks would ultimately result in ''mutually agreed-upon revisions that will lead to a new constituency agreement.'' But Zarin Mehta, executive director of the Philharmonic, said he expected the agreement to remain intact. ''As far as we're concerned, it stands,'' he said. ''You can make some amendments as circumstances change.''
The rapprochment between Mr. Crawford and Mr. Guenther is noteworthy given that Mr. Crawford had been blindsided by the Philharmonic's decision to go to Carnegie Hall and was not expected to have further dealings with Mr. Guenther, a stance that necessitated the appointment of the two representatives for each side. Many Lincoln Center officials predicted after the merger fell through that Mr. Guenther would be forced to step down.
Yet Mr. Guenther is still standing. And Mr. Crawford essentially has said, let bygones be bygones. ''Paul and I thought we've got to set a positive tone,'' he said.
That is not to say all matters have been resolved. The two sides are bound to clash over various issues regarding the management and renovation of Avery Fisher Hall. After conducting a study on the economics of producing classical music, Lincoln Center is interested in exploring variable pricing so that tickets cost less on certain nights of the week or people get discounts for buying tickets to several different events at the hall. Lincoln Center is also seeking more advance notice from the Philharmonic on scheduling so that it can better plan its own programming.
Mr. Levy said he was open to leaving certain provisions as is, like the percentage of financial responsibility. ''If we switch positions, it could be seen as an opportunity or a burden,'' Mr. Levy said. ''Either one is fine with me. If the Philharmonic prefers we stay with two-thirds, that's fine.''
