Ordinary Americans may find it hard to imagine even a wisp of resistance to accomplishing the most thorough and independent investigation possible into the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Yet that is the sorry state of affairs in politically charged Washington. The White House and Republican Congressional leaders continue to foot-drag as the 9/11 commission seeks adequate time and information for its task. The bipartisan, independent panel needs an extension beyond the May deadline for finishing its report. Congress should approve this forthwith, and the Bush administration should stop trying to schedule the panel's work with one eye on the election calendar.
The commission's excellent work thus far was made clear last week in hearings that aired details on the porousness of security defenses on 9/11 and the lack of preparedness when it came to responding to a terrorist attack. Some attackers apparently were able to sneak disabling sprays and knives aboard the planes. And 9 of the 19 hijackers were flagged for passenger screening but eventually allowed to board. Federal aviation officials acknowledged that they did not consult -- or even know about -- a State Department terrorist watch list that might well have blocked some attackers. Obviously the fullest inquiry is needed on all these details as well as the White House's admission that one of the Oval Office intelligence summaries to President Bush before 9/11 warned that a catastrophic attack might be imminent.
What could be a higher priority than finding out exactly how the terrorist attacks happened? Yet the White House initially opposed the inquiry, then sought to steer its gavel to Henry Kissinger, whose unsuitability for the task was made clear when Mr. Kissinger backed out rather than sever himself from a consulting business that presented rampant possible conflicts of interest. Since Thomas Kean, the former Republican New Jersey governor, took the helm, the administration has offered bureaucratic resistance and delays as investigators sought documents and access to high-ranking officials.
The administration surely does not want to enter an election season laboring under the smallest suspicion that it is getting in the way of Mr. Kean's important work. It can do two things: agree at last to the panel's request for testimony from President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney and extend the deadline. If politics is the rub, a Congressional proposal to extend the reporting date beyond November will solve that problem.
