When it comes to recording images, Eastman Kodak has met its match. And it has come in the form of a little electronic card encased in plastic.
Vast improvements in flash memory cards -- small, thin, but decidedly unsexy products capable of storing hundreds of photographs -- have made the significant growth in digital camera sales possible.
But now these devices, known by such names as CompactFlash, Memory Stick and SD Card are also becoming the storage media of choice for a range of other consumer products, including TV's, cellphones, music players, personal digital assistants and camcorders. And as the notion of the connected home begins to resonate, ever-smaller versions of flash memory cards will routinely be found, offering consumers an easy way to transfer pictures, movies, music and data from one to another.
Even as the flash memory business is growing rapidly over all, however, some formats are losing market share. And within the next five years, analysts say, a few will disappear altogether.
''In the long term, two memory formats will survive, Memory Stick and SD,'' said Nelson Chan, senior vice president for SanDisk, the only company licensed to make and sell every flash memory format, which includes MultiMediaCard, SmartMedia and xD-Picture Card.
Not everybody agrees with that. But in the last year, the SD memory card's monthly market share has surged. By last November, 42 percent of all aftermarket flash memory cards sold in the United States were in the SD format. CompactFlash, its closest competitor, accounted for under 26 percent, according to the NPD Group, a market analysis company.
In the United States, 10.9 million flash memory units were sold in the first 11 months of 2003, according to NPD, a 54 percent increase from the same period in 2002.
Yet like film before it, flash memory's dominance will also be challenged by yet another storage format -- mini hard drives, which are tiny, fast-spinning disks that can store multiple gigabytes of information.
Flash memory has some inherent advantages, though. Unlike hard drives, the devices have no moving parts and can be subjected to more rough handling without fear of erasing data. And low-capacity versions capable of storing several hundred pictures cost a quarter the price of the current crop of tiny hard drives.
The growing popularity of small cellphones that can also take still pictures is likely to mean that the CompactFlash or CF format, which is still found in the majority of digital cameras, will lose ground. The CF format's larger cards will not fit in the diminutive cellphones, which are expected to account for 29 percent of flash memory applications by 2006.
While smaller versions of both SD and Sony's Memory Stick are available, Bill Frank, executive director of the CompactFlash Association, said, ''it is technically not possible to make a smaller CF card.''
The SD format, available in both regular and mini sizes, is expected to forge ahead. This year, SanDisk plans to introduce a one gigabyte version of the SD memory card, up from 512MB, and plans 2GB and 3GB versions for succeeding years. ''By 2006 we will have SD cards with sufficient capacity and transfer speed to record high-definition video,'' said Andrew Nelkin, a vice president for digital technology at Panasonic's consumer electronics division.
During the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas last month, Panasonic, a unit of Matsushita, showed a prototype of a miniature high-definition camcorder that uses an SD card to record images. Panasonic markets the only DVD-quality video camera that uses solely flash memory -- one of its D-snap models, the size of a credit card and weighing less than 6 ounces.
The pictures captured with the D-snap can then be viewed by inserting the SD card into a compatible product, like a television or a PC.
Industry executives say they believe that the growing desire to connect various products will encourage consumers to stick with the same memory format used by their existing gear, to avoid introducing incompatible products into the home. That is likely to sustain the popularity of Sony's Memory Stick, even though few other manufacturers have adopted the format.
Sony, the biggest seller of camcorders and digital cameras in the United States, will be able to keep the Memory Stick viable as it incorporates the technology into a wider range of devices, including televisions and music players, industry analysts say.
Last spring, Sony introduced in Japan its Mobile Movie concept, a series of products that enable customers to record TV shows at home and then watch them later using a compatible portable player, a Sony Clié hand-held or even a cellphone.
''Memory Stick will remain strong as long as Sony continues to support it, since the company has a substantial share of the camera and P.D.A. businesses,'' Stephen Baker, director of industry analysis for the NPD Group, said. The format holds 16 percent of the market now, and is expected to become the second most popular format, behind SD, by 2007, because Memory Sticks can be made small, with high storage capacities and fast data transfer rates.
Because technical factors limit its memory capacity, SmartMedia is being phased out in favor of xD-Picture, a flash memory device used by Olympus and Fuji in digital cameras. The MultiMediaCard, which has the same dimensions as SD, is being positioned primarily for use in cellphones.
A 256MB flash memory card is more than adequate to store hundreds of still photographs, but much more storage capacity is needed for long home movies or thousands of songs. As the industry develops flash memory cards capable of storing up to 4GB of data, the challenge will be producing them at a cost that is competitive with miniature hard drives of the same capacity.
Several mini hard drives, measuring as little as one cubic inch, are available for less than $100 wholesale from companies like Cornice, Hitachi Global Storage Technologies and RioSpring. Last month, Toshiba announced what are said to be the world's smallest hard drives, 2GB and 4GB models that are less than an inch long.
More than 3 million hard drives smaller than 2.5 inches were sold in 2003, according to Gartner, which expects an exponential increase in sales over the next four years, to as many as 20 million units. That growth will be fueled by including the devices in cellphones, MP3 players (the Apple iPod is one of the largest users) and camcorders.
''While a mini hard drive is less shock resistant than flash memory, it is not the most fragile element of a camcorder,'' John Monroe, a vice president at Gartner, said. ''A lens will break first.''
While hard drive memory, per megabyte, is less expensive, individual flash cards, irrespective of capacity, will probably always be cheaper.
''Where memory capacity is key, such as in $200 MP3 players, mini hard drives will dominate,'' Mr. Monroe said. ''But with less-expensive digital still cameras, flash has the edge. Unlike flash memory, mini hard drives will never cost eight dollars.''
TECHNOLOGY
