A Missouri congressman once declared: ''I come from a state that raises corn and cotton and cockleburs and Democrats, and frothy eloquence neither convinces nor satisfies me. I am from Missouri. You have got to show me.'' More than a century later, understanding Missouri -- the state where I grew up -- begins with understanding the show-me mentality.
Missouri's soil is thin and rocky. Successful farming has always required grit and ingenuity. Although the state is now largely urban and suburban, the difficulty of making a living off the land planted the seeds of the state's populist character. Missourians are skeptical, practical, frugal, cunning and proud. Harry Truman was an exceptional Missourian, but not an unusual one. There is a little Truman in all Missourians: plain-spoken, blunt, intolerant of fakes.
Though I'm not affiliated with a presidential campaign, it seems clear that momentum is carrying John Kerry, and the compressed calendar makes him the favorite. But as he nears ultimate victory, he faces the dangers of high expectations. Presidential primaries are the twilight zones of politics, where a win can be a loss and a loss can be a win.
To challenge Mr. Kerry, the other candidates must use the remaining hours before the primary to flood the state's media markets. Their goal must be to create a Kerry loss; who wins is less important.
Missouri is actually more culturally attuned to Howard Dean's bluntness, John Edwards's small-town populism, and Wesley Clark's résumé. Mr. Kerry's strategy is to overcome this cultural gulf by turning his momentum into endorsements and news coverage. Establishment support matters in St. Louis and Kansas City, cities where the remnants of the Democratic machine can still deliver votes.
But today, a candidate must also win the vote-rich suburbs surrounding these cities, and the quality of a campaign's advertising is often the decisive factor. There, Mr. Kerry's success depends on his ability to run advertisements that add texture to his profile as a winner by giving voters a sense of who he is. If he gets his message across, the money spent in Missouri will have been a smart investment, saving him from having to engage in costlier contests in New York and California.
The other campaigns should take the fight directly to the front-runner, just as the field did to Howard Dean before Iowa. Unlike voters in other states, Missourians often look for candidates who embody that famous Truman phrase: ''I never give them hell. I just tell the truth and they think it's hell.''
Missourians take pleasure in seeing someone get their comeuppance, and they can spot a fake a mile away. That's why the plain-spoken Richard A. Gephardt is so popular in the state -- he gave voice to Missouri's populist roots. And now that each of the candidates has embraced populism to some degree, the voters will scrutinize news coverage and TV ads to determine whose brand of populism is genuine. Like many states in the industrial Midwest, Missouri has suffered from the decline of the family farm and the loss of high-paying manufacturing jobs. And, just as in communities across America, suburban families are being squeezed out of the middle class. After talking about foreign policy for months, the campaigns would be well advised to focus on the economy.
Tomorrow, Missouri is the place where John Kerry has the most to lose. A strong showing by another candidate would mean more there than it would in a state like South Carolina, where Mr. Edwards is a virtual favorite son. While a Kerry loss in South Carolina or Oklahoma would not upset the current dynamic of the campaign, a loss in Missouri could change everything.
Still, to make that happen the rest of the field must hope for a break -- and in politics, you never know. Mr. Kerry could make a colossal blunder like trying to claim that Ted Williams was a better hitter than Stan Musial. And any Missourian knows someone that dumb about baseball is too dumb to be president.
Op-Ed Contributor David Doak is a Democratic media consultant.
