Joshua B. Bolten, the new overseer of the nation's $2.3 trillion annual budget, spent two long hours last Wednesday in front of what he called the ''murder board,'' a role-playing session with his senior staff to prepare him for the antagonistic questioning he is certain to get from Congress this week. At the same time, the staff prepped him for his grilling at a Republican Congressional retreat, where he faced objections from conservatives seething over what they view as a White House on a manic spending spree.
''I don't mind being interrupted, as long as it's not too hostile,'' Mr. Bolten told his staff with a faint tone of hope.
Hostility is certain to be the order of the day on Monday, when Mr. Bolten, who has been director of the Office of Management and Budget for only six months, presents President Bush's proposed 2005 budget.
Republicans will attack it for running up a record deficit of more than $500 billion. Democrats will attack it for enormous cuts in domestic programs, including some that were once pet projects of the president.
Many of Mr. Bolten's old colleagues at Goldman Sachs describe him as a moderate, not an ideologue, and they question whether he is a true believer in a White House policy that asserts it is possible to increase spending on national security, make the president's trillion-dollar tax cuts permanent and still cut the deficit in half in five years.
''Yes, absolutely, I am,'' Mr. Bolten, 49, said in an interview last week in his office. ''And this is not radical stuff, I want to emphasize. This is not some fringe perspective. This is serious budgeting, supported by sound numbers.''
Mr. Bolten is the most powerful person in the Bush administration that most people have never heard of. As Mr. Bush's policy director in the 2000 presidential campaign, he helped create the economic program he is now carrying out. As the White House deputy chief of staff, his job until June, he effectively took economic policy away from Lawrence B. Lindsey, Mr. Bush's former chief economic adviser, who was fired, along with Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill, in late 2002. At the Office of Management and Budget, Mr. Bolten replaced Mitchell E. Daniels Jr., who resigned to run for governor of Indiana.
Mr. Bolten has attributes that have served him well in the Bush White House: discretion, organizational ability, political sophistication and, above all, allegiance to the president.
''I mean, I've done probably literally hundreds of presentations to the president in five years, and two or three minutes into a presentation I'll be interrupted with a question,'' Mr. Bolten said. ''It's not personal, but it's awfully combative. He asks very probing questions, and he has a great knack for even in complicated subject matter getting right to the nub question that really goes to the presidential decision.''
Mr. Bolten said he met with Mr. Bush throughout the fall to shape a 2,500-page budget that increases spending less than 4 percent. Mr. Bolten said the major players on White House policy were included in those meetings: Vice President Dick Cheney and Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political adviser.
But the president, Mr. Bolten said, made the tough calls.
''He gave the directions and said, 'O.K., I want a budget that funds these priorities and is tight otherwise,' '' Mr. Bolten said. The result was a budget that increases spending on defense by 7 percent, domestic security by nearly 10 percent and everything else by 1 percent, which after inflation represents huge, across-the-board cuts.
The president, Mr. Bolten added, ''usually decides on the policy first, and then the tactical decisions are made based on the politics. Now on the budget, I guess if I had said, 'It's just politically unrealistic to do options one and eight,' then he might say, 'Well, let's not mess with it.' ''
Mr. Bolten is well liked by the president for what friends say is his wry wit and a devotion that often keeps him at work until midnight.
''It's kind of an odd bond,'' said R. Glenn Hubbard, former chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers and now a professor of economics at Columbia University. ''The president is outgoing, athletic and gregarious, and Josh is not. But he is an effective organizer who delivers.''
In the Texan-dominated White House, Mr. Bolten has become an insider with an outsider's résumé: he was brought up inside the Beltway, in northwest Washington, the son of a Central Intelligence Agency officer who worked in the directorate of operations, the agency's covert espionage arm.
Mr. Bolten graduated from St. Albans, the exclusive private boys' school in Washington, and then Princeton and Stanford Law School. He has assets of as much as $4 million from his days at Goldman Sachs, where he worked for nearly six years in the 1990's.
As Mr. Bolten prepared for budget hearings before Congress this week, he said he would never describe his new job as pleasurable. ''I'm not sure many budget directors say they have fun in the job,'' he said. ''But it is a labor of love, because O.M.B. is in many respects at the fulcrum of government. So this is a terrific spot to be. It's not an easy spot to be.''
