Stereotypically, bands are supposed to release many records during their careers, with each new recording a progression or artistic leap forward. But there are some bands that are either skillful or lucky enough to get it right on the first try. All future CD's from them are simply bonus rounds, icing on the cake.
This is true of the first CD's by bands as diverse as Portishead and the Strokes. While both acts released strong second CD's, if one were to recommend a Portishead or Strokes disc to a friend, there would be no option but to favor the predecessor.
The same is true of the French electronic-music duo Air and the Texas country-folk band the Flatlanders, both of which recently released new CD's. While it would be a shame if either act stopped recording, it seems doubtful that they could top the timeless blast of fresh air that they provided their first time out.
'Talkie Walkie'  Air
It is telling that the promotional sticker affixed to this CD reads, ''from the creators of the classic 'Moon Safari.' '' Though Air has recorded four CD's (including soundtracks and collaborations) since ''Moon Safari,'' its debut full-length album, that pivotal recording remains its definitive work. ''Moon Safari'' ranks among easy-listening electronica's best and most lounge-worthy CD's. From start to finish, it creates a clean retro-futuristic atmosphere that seduces, charms and lulls, with every synthesizer sound tweaked to lush perfection.
The band's official follow-up, ''10,000 Hz Legend,'' was hit and miss. Though some songs, like ''How Does It Make You Feel?'' and ''People in the City,'' were spellbinding, overall the CD was a disappointment. ''Talkie Walkie'' (Astralwerks) is a major improvement, the band's best outing since ''Moon Safari.'' Though songs like ''Cherry Blossom Girl'' and ''Surfin' on a Rocket'' stand out as the sweetest and most stunning tracks, there is not a dud here. The arrangements are light and immaculate, the vocals coo and cajole, and the melodies are addictive. Yet as good as this album is, if you have never heard the band before, buy ''Moon Safari'' first.
'Wheels of Fortune'  The Flatlanders
Few people heard the recording ''Jimmie Dale and the Flatlanders'' when it was originally released in 1973, partly because it was only available on eight-track tape. Since then the three singer-songwriter-guitarists in the band -- Jimmie Dale Gilmore, Joe Ely and Butch Hancock -- have achieved varying degrees of fame through solo albums.
In the meantime the subsequent reissues of ''Jimmie Dale and the Flatlanders'' -- on vinyl in the 80's as ''One More Road'' and on CD in the 90's as ''More a Legend Than a Band'' -- have made it a classic of thinking-person's cosmic country. The music is not just a touchstone for today's Americana and alt-country; it also ranks, at least on my list, as one of the 50 best albums of the 20th century.
The debut recording by this group seemed destined to remain a beautiful one-shot until the trio reunited three decades later for ''Now Again'' in 2002. Though that was a good CD, the band was no longer the same: because every member had acquired overlapping cult followings, it was important for each to have a chance at songwriting and lead vocals. One result is that the Flatlanders of the 21st century sound more like a singers-in-the-round session than an actual band.
Their follow-up, ''Wheels of Fortune'' (New West), has the same feel. Certainly it is still a recommended CD: the combination of the wisdom of Mr. Hancock, the reediness of Mr. Gilmore and the muscle of Mr. Ely is potent. The title track, ''Wheels of Fortune,'' is the type of metaphysical relationship song the band does best (though it shines just as spectacularly on ''Two Roads,'' an earlier concert recording with only Mr. Gilmore and Mr. Hancock). And it is interesting to hear Mr. Ely singing Mr. Gilmore's bluesy death dirge ''Midnight Train'' and his Zen rocker ''Go to Sleep Alone.''
But when measured against the omnipresent musical saw, the thin, desolate production and the cerebral, spiritual and lonesome lyrics of the band's debut recording, there is no comparison.
New CD's
