What an odd Super Bowl. Armadillos raced in the pregame show, followed by a nearly scoreless first half, with CBS's Greg Gumbel and Phil Simms offering up nearly every term for gridiron inertia.
Then came an explosion of points in the last three minutes of the second quarter, and, most surprising of all, the halftime baring of Janet Jackson's right breast by Justin Timberlake, for which there was no analysis by replay or Telestration. Imagine if Vince Lombardi had seen what happened to Janet, who, for a day or two, will be the most famous Jackson sibling on earth.
And the quotation of the night was a nugget of pigskin-sexual advice from Simms: ''You want to call out the manhood of a football team? Run the football.''
To think, the game looked boring at first. For a time the most action was Gen. Peter Pace, the vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, escorting Beyoncé to the field, where she sang the national anthem. He looked happy.
It seemed that the phrase, ''That goes nowhere,'' had become Gumbel's mantra.
A first down was occasion for a Sharpie dance.
''So far, not many exciting plays on offense,'' Simms said before New England and Carolina posted 24 points in the final 3 minutes 5 seconds of the first half.
And the first use of the improved EyeVision -- a system of cameras arranged around the stadium to create a 360-degree whiparound replay -- was for, sadly, an incomplete pass, not something spectacular.
Then things changed and this somehow turned into one of the most exciting Super Bowl broadcasts ever, and no one ever discussed Tom Brady's or Jake Delhomme's passer rating.
Simms and Gumbel were as usual a playful pair, no more so than when they discussed the annoying members of CBS's ''Survivor: All-Stars''. Simms first-guessed plays several times, diagnosing blitzes on-screen before they happened, and he explained how difficult it was physically for Delhomme to throw an 85-yard touchdown pass off his right foot. And Simms rightly questioned why Carolina Coach John Fox went for a 2-point conversion early. ''Never chase points until you have to,'' he said.
Of course, Simms, the former Giants quarterback, can be wrong -- and he is willing to admit it before you think he should -- but in one instance, you cannot blame him. Adam Vinatieri had missed two field goals for New England, the Patriots were down by 22-21, and Simms said, ''I don't know if the Patriots are feeling real confident in the field-goal situation.''
Vinatieri won the game with a field goal in the final seconds. Although Gumbel led into the attempt by mentioning the misses, he should have gone further and said that the heroics might not have been needed had Vinatieri made the 6 points earlier in the game. But he did immediately connect New England's ability to win the game to the out-of-bounds kickoff by the Panthers' John Kasay, putting the ball at the Patriots' 40.
As for the pregame, well, each year, the Super Bowl network provides prima-facie evidence for federal legislation mandating that no sport should ever program more than one hour for a big game.
When I saw the armadillos racing, I thought of what Jack Buck said when the gimpy-legged Kirk Gibson hit a home run to win Game 1 of the 1988 World Series: ''I can't believe what I just saw.''
These noctural creatures were forced to compete live in the cloudy daylight to reach who, disenfranchised armored mammal lovers? This was clearly the nadir of all pregame Super Bowl productions.
Can you imagine the production meeting where CBS approved the race segment?
CBS producer: ''O.K., we have some good really stuff today. Phil Simms will discuss game film with Titans Coach Jeff Fisher. Boomer Esiason is talking to his old Bengals coach, Sam Wyche, and we have a nice piece on the camaraderie between the Carolina running backs. And oh, we'll have Deion Sanders and Jim Nantz do their hee-ha thing on longhorn steers and then we'll race two armadillos. Any thoughts?''
CBS animal wrangler: ''Can we put numbers, names and saddles on the armadillos?''
Producer: ''Great idea. Let's call it 'Survivor: Dasypus Novemcinctus.' ''
The most moving features in the credible part of the four-and-a-half-hour pregame show were Armen Keteyian's on the illnesses of Esiason's and Jim Kelly's sons, and the death of Trent Dilfer's; and Dick Enberg's on the families of the astronauts of the shuttle Columbia, which exploded a year ago yesterday. But if Houston was not home to NASA's Johnson Space Center would CBS have done the piece?
The analysis from Esiason, Deion Sanders and Dan Marino was scattered and did not offer enough to be memorable, and the best possible analytic segment had the wrong focus. Tennessee Coach Jeff Fisher's laser-pen look at the films with Simms told us little we didn't know, as Sanders said, and anyone who has watched Simms break down film knows he could have done far better on his own.
TV SPORTS
