In northern Alaska, some people tear off their clothes and plunge naked into the ocean when the temperature finally rises above freezing.
That did not happen in New York yesterday. But as the mercury rose above 32 degrees for the first time in 10 days, small but unmistakable signs of joy broke out all over the slowly thawing city.
Young couples strolled hatless in the sun. Runners re-emerged on the sidewalks, sidestepping puddles and newly melted slush. Families ventured deep into Central Park, untroubled by thoughts of frostbite.
''It feels like a heat wave,'' said Marzena Sienkiewicz, 28, as she stood outside the Metropolitan Museum of Art, where a dozen people were lounging on the steps as though it were the first day of spring. ''I walked outside this morning, and I couldn't believe it.''
The temperature in Central Park reached a high of 35 degrees at 3 p.m. It was the second-warmest day since Jan. 6, when the subfreezing spell began, said Jeff Warner, a meteorologist at Penn State University.
The milder weather, which is expected to last through Thursday or Friday, ends an unusually potent cold snap. Last month was the 10th-coldest January in New York City since 1872, when the records began, Mr. Warner said. And it was the first January on record to be in the top 10 for both snow and cold, he added.
Thanks to the ice, alternate-side street cleaning rules have been suspended since Jan. 15, the longest continuous stretch in more than a decade, said Tom Cocola, a spokesman for the city's Transportation Department. They will remain suspended through tomorrow because of the three-day Muslim holiday Id al-Adha, Mr. Cocola said.
As the temperature reached its high yesterday, Andy Hemmen jogged down Fifth Avenue in sweat pants and a gray T-shirt.
''It's the first time I've been out since October,'' he said. ''I was just getting the wheels tested out again.''
Nearby, Mike Lichtenstein bounded toward the 79th Street entrance to Central Park, clutching a bright orange Boogie board. He had come all the way from Hoboken, N.J., with Ms. Sienkiewicz after seeing the weather forecast, ready for a day of sledding.
''It's been a while since we've done anything outside,'' he said. ''Like, December.''
Inside the park, Erika Shlomm stood watching her husband and their 16-month-old son, Andrew, frolicking in the snow.
''It's a glimmer of hope,'' she said. ''We've all readjusted our standards in the past few weeks, but today we got to spend the whole day outside.''
Not everyone was pleased with the thaw. On a nearby hillside, Bernard Adnet was standing with his wife, gazing out at the snowy park.
''It makes me a little bit sad,'' said Mr. Adnet, a children's-book illustrator who was born in Grenoble, France. ''I'm from the Alps. I like it when the weather is extreme.''
To those who have no choice about spending time outdoors, the warmer weather was an unmixed blessing.
''A few degrees makes a world of difference,'' said Mike Mallory, a doorman at the Michelangelo Hotel on West 51st Street. ''Today's a very good day when you consider what we've had.''
To the homeless, it came as a godsend.
''For me, it's a big plus,'' said Guy Butler, 48, who was gathering empty bottles and cans at Fifth Avenue and 56th Street and planning to redeem them at a nearby supermarket. ''I've got to make the best of it while I can.''
The cold spell has made it a little easier to panhandle for money, because people are more sympathetic, said Mr. Butler, who generally spends his nights at the Bellevue Men's Shelter. But in other ways, it has been painful.
''Believe me, they welcome this warmth,'' he said of his fellow homeless men and women. ''This winter has been rough on us.''
