The career of Malcolm Gladwell, a writer for The New Yorker and an author whose book, ''The Tipping Point'' (Little, Brown, 2000), popularized the term to the point of ubiquity, may be reaching an inflection point of its own.
Mr. Gladwell's theories of how change is often accelerated by ''social epidemics'' has been followed rabidly by many companies, many of whom have paid him to speak at their conferences. Now one firm has developed a ''Tipping Points index,'' and has formed what it calls ''a research advisory alliance'' with Mr. Gladwell.
Last month, Simmons Market Research Bureau in New York sponsored the ''Future of Information Summit,'' and Mr. Gladwell was the keynote speaker, talking about how 12.5 percent of the population ''possesses social power in the marketplace.''
These ''connectors,'' he said, are the people who influence others, whether to buy a new product or embrace a new idea. Now, Simmons announced, with Mr. Gladwell's help, it can find ways for companies to better reach that eighth of the population.
''I wrote a sort of manifesto,'' Mr. Gladwell said, referring to his article in The New Yorker and later in his book, which described how crime, smoking and even best-sellers grow or retreat based on the accumulation of small events until a tipping point is reached.
''And you would feel sort of dumb if nobody picked up on the challenge. I'm happy that people are continuing to talk about it and I think that in the end, it all sort of redounds to The New Yorker.''
At many publications, however, writers are prohibited from doing business with companies that they could potentially write about. Mr. Gladwell said that Simmons Market Research paid him for the use of his ideas and for speaking fees, but that he has no continuing business or consulting arrangement with the firm. He said he saw no conflict in speaking for and collaborating with various companies, even though he occasionally writes about business.
David Remnick, the editor of The New Yorker, declined to comment on Mr. Gladwell's burgeoning sideline.
For the time being, Mr. Gladwell's dual career as both a marketer and a writer will continue.
DAVID CARR
