The decision by Steven P. Jobs, chief executive of Pixar Animation Studios, to walk away from his partnership with Michael D. Eisner and the Walt Disney Company is the clearest indication yet that Mr. Jobs is becoming the personification of the digital media mogul.
The collapse last Thursday of the Disney-Pixar negotiations over a new distribution agreement appears to have been a clash of egos and business interests. But it was also very much a sign of the changing balance of power between the conventional media giants and the entrepreneurs wielding digital technologies that are rapidly changing the way media content is made and distributed.
Compared with the ambitious but often unfocused visions of executives in the dot-com boom, like the largely failed strategy behind the merger of AOL and Time Warner, Mr. Jobs is familiar enough with digital technology to see not only its capabilities but also to recognize its limitations.
And so in the case of the iPod portable music player and iTunes online music store by Mr. Jobs's Apple Computer, an easy-to-use hand-held computer and an accessible network database are transforming not music itself, but the way music is distributed.
The success of Mr. Jobs's digital film studio, Pixar, has come not from upending the business of distributing movies, but from employing computers as powerful creative tools for movie animators steeped in the traditional art of storytelling.
For all his talk of revolution over the years, Mr. Jobs has taken a disciplined, evolutionary approach to the media industry that has been remarkably successful: Apple is the leader in the music download market and Pixar's ''Finding Nemo'' is one of the most financially successful animated films.
''With his fingers in music and film and computers, it is obvious that Steve can now hold his head up with the other moguls,'' said Danny Hillis, a former computer scientist at Disney's Imagineering division and now the chief technology officer of Applied Minds, a technology and consulting company in Glendale, Calif.
Mr. Jobs declined to comment for this article.
Disney and Pixar could resume contract negotiations, of course. And even if Mr. Jobs does forge a distribution agreement with some other big studio, Pixar could have trouble getting better terms than it has had with Disney, which takes 12.5 percent of box-office revenue and 50 percent of the profits from each Pixar film. But the fact that Mr. Jobs is prepared to walk away from Disney's mighty marketing machine indicates he thinks that Pixar has become a media power in its own right.
''Those of us who come from a technology background and who have paid our dues in learning to understand the entertainment industry have a significant contribution to make,'' said Rob Glaser, a former Microsoft executive who founded RealNetworks. Although RealNetworks competes with Apple's iTunes music store and QuickTime media-playing software, Mr. Glaser sees himself and Mr. Jobs as representing the ascendant new media executive. ''This is more than just about egos,'' Mr. Glaser said. ''It's about where value gets created.''
Mr. Jobs's career has been built on his ability to anticipate the public's appetite for technical innovation -- as with his insight as a 19-year-old co-founder of Apple Computer in 1976 that a personal computer could be much more than a hobbyist's toy, and then with his correct hunch with the Macintosh in 1984 that Xerox's mouse and graphical display would have mass appeal.
And yet he has suffered major setbacks, like his ouster from Apple in 1985 after a power struggle with John Sculley and the failure of Mr. Jobs's subsequent computer company, Next Inc. (Mr. Jobs returned to Apple in 1997.)
In the case of Pixar, though, he has displayed only foresight, combined with luck. When he acquired Pixar in 1986 for $10 million it was the computer graphics division of the ''Star Wars'' director George Lucas's Lucasfilms.
By 1989, with the company losing money, a group of Pixar technologists met with Apple executives trying to persuade the company to buy Pixar from Mr. Jobs for $20 million. Steve Perlman, the co-founder of WebTV, who was an Apple engineer at the time, recalled that Apple chose not to buy Pixar, in part because it had no interest in helping Mr. Jobs. It would be six more years before Pixar's first feature-length animation, ''Toy Story,'' would pave the way for Pixar's public stock offering, which made Mr. Jobs a billionaire.
What may be most notable about Pixar's success, said Mr. Perlman, is that despite the company's roots as a maker of specialized animation tools and custom hardware, its continuing success has been largely because of the quality of its storytelling rather than any technological advantage.
''Pixar has become less and less of a technology company,'' said Mr. Perlman, who noted that the company now increasingly uses standard software tools and off-the-shelf hardware to make its movies.
Indeed, one of Mr. Jobs's strategic strengths may be his understanding of the limits of technology.
At this year's Consumer Electronics Show, Mr. Jobs's longtime rival, the Microsoft chairman Bill Gates, exhibited a portable media player that he is counting on to surpass Apple's iPod, because the Microsoft device can play not only music but videos.
But several days earlier, in an interview after he introduced an even smaller version of the iPod, Mr. Jobs said he doubted there would be a mass market for a small, portable video player.
''With an inexpensive pair of headphones you can approximate a $10,000 speaker system,'' he said. ''However, there is no portable video alternative for a 50-inch plasma HDTV screen.
He acknowledged that Apple was experimenting with portable video technologies, but he also noted that two excellent portable products were already available for watching movies: portable DVD players and notebook computers with DVD drives.
Mr. Jobs points out that Hollywood has been much more sophisticated than the recording industry about expanding its distribution strategy. It is already possible, for example, to watch movies in a wide range of different ways, including rental videos, pay-per-view and even free television.
Some industry executives have wondered whether Mr. Jobs's breaking off the Disney negotiations was partly a prelude to efforts to take the top job at a Hollywood company -- maybe even Mr. Eisner's job.
But others note that Mr. Jobs has always done best when he has stayed close to the technology. And they predict that this new media mogul will have no need to go Hollywood.
News Analysis
