It's a platitude that opera singers can't act. And Ewa Podles, the Polish contralto who has developed a veritable cult following over the years, has sometimes been held up as an example of old-fashioned operatic acting. But this claim should be silenced forever by Ms. Podles's performance as the fiery Princess Eboli in Verdi's ''Don Carlo,'' a role she took on for the first time with the Opera Company of Philadelphia at the Academy of Music here on Friday night.
Seeing her transform herself from a middle-aged woman into a vain flirt, first thwarted in love, then lashing out and finally flooded with contrition when she sees the consequences of her actions, should have made clear that Ms. Podles's vocal and dramatic art are inextricably wedded.
The power of her vocal art is undeniable, although it would probably send some American voice teachers into paroxysms; Ms. Podles in no way does what one is ''supposed'' to do. One is not supposed to sing with three distinct registers, from a deep, almost masculine low through a warm middle voice with a whiskyish burr to firm if slightly slender top notes. One is not supposed to chop up the long legato vocalises of the Veil Song, Eboli's first and notably tricky aria, to emphasize the breaks between these three registers.
Well, a voice teacher's loss is a voice buff's gain, since the tradition of singing with three distinct registers extends back through Maria Callas to a time when it was considered part of a solid vocal technique.
Ms. Podles has a way of raising other performers to her standards when she's onstage. Happily, the Philadelphia cast didn't have far to go to get there. ''Don Carlo'' is infamous for requiring six strong Verdi soloists, and Philadelphia's production was remarkable in delivering them pretty much across the board.
Eduardo Villa gave authority to the wimpy title figure, singing with an honorable, strong sound. As Elisabetta, the Queen of Spain -- originally betrothed to Carlo and now married to his father -- Angela Brown, a soprano, brought dignity and shimmering pianos, and hit a bull's-eye with her final aria. Vitaly Kowaljow, a Ukrainian bass, was a warm King Philip, if still a little young for this complex role; and Gustav Andreassen was fabulous in the second bass role of the Grand Inquisitor. Franco Vassallo, the baritone who played Carlo's loyal friend Rodrigo, was slightly pale, but gathered his resources to pack a punch at the end of his aria.
The sets were forgettable; the score of the long opera notably cut, and Maurizio Barbacini's conducting a little erratic and sometimes overloud. It was still a great evening. Performances continue through Feb. 15.
OPERA REVIEW
