Bribery and poor security at motor vehicle offices across the country allowed thousands of fraudulent driver's licenses to change hands last year, for as little as $350 each, a report to be released today says.
The report, by the Center for Democracy and Technology, a Washington policy group, focuses on internal fraud at the motor vehicle offices -- a development that the center says has been overlooked as a national problem. The group relied on information culled from local news reports.
For years, people have questioned the wisdom of allowing state-issued licenses to serve as identification cards nationwide. And now, amid greater national security concerns and fears of identity theft, more energy is being devoted to ensuring that driver's licenses accurately identify people.
Much of the brainstorming has concentrated on detecting fraudulent applications and preventing forgeries, the center says. Some suggestions: add more personal details to licenses, establish nationwide standards for issuing them and pool information into a national database.
But what if problems exist elsewhere in the process? What if employees are creating authentic ID's for people who should not have them?
''Even if we make this ID as strong as possible, even if we make this a national system, bribery is still an issue at the local level,'' said Ari Schwartz, associate director for the Center for Democracy and Technology. ''The problem we're pointing out has not gotten as much attention as it deserves because it has been seen as a local problem.''
The report describes 18 cases of internal fraud, plus 5 cases of data theft, at motor vehicle offices in 15 states. In Tysons Corner, Va., for example, two employees provided more than 1,000 illegal licenses for as much as $2,000 each, while an employee at a Washington, D.C., office helped sell more than 900 licenses for about $1,500 each.
In Newark, the entire 11-person staff of a motor vehicle office was fired last February after investigators uncovered multiple cases of fraud, including the creation of dozens of fake licenses using the department's equipment. At the Indiana Bureau of Motor Vehicles, a volunteer translator was arrested in November on forgery charges related to helping immigrants illegally get state ID's.
The American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, which represents state motor vehicle departments, says it has tried for years, long before Sept. 11, 2001, to garner enough federal support for tougher standards.
Upon reviewing a draft of today's report, the association told the center that it had created a database of stolen materials that might be used to make licenses and that distributing that information to its members had already led to several arrests.
The association added that it was developing a program in which motor vehicle departments would grade one another's security measures.
''We know as an association that there are loopholes in the driver's license issuance process,'' said Jason D. King, a spokesman for the association. ''Our members have been talking about this for years.''
The center, which said it liked the association's projects but wanted them to be more transparent, is proposing that the General Accounting Office rate motor vehicle departments on their efforts to prevent fraud, and it suggested that the allocation of federal highway money eventually depend on the ratings. The center also urges tougher penalties for motor vehicle employees who accept bribes.
Most of all, it recommends that agencies issue different ID's for different uses, thus making the driver's license less of a prize. ''Strengthening the standards only helps us to a certain extent,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''The real answer is to stop relying so heavily on this form of ID.''
