Nine of the past 14 Super Bowls, including this one, featured teams that had not met during the regular season. Often in the Super Bowl, a lack of familiarity breeds a blowout. One team usually figures out the other one in a hurry.
The average margin of victory of the past eight such games was nearly 20 points.
In Super Bowl XXXVIII, however, a lack of firsthand knowledge, especially early on, bred confusion and restraint.
Coupling the Carolina Panthers and the New England Patriots on Sunday night translated into two teams engaging in a lengthy get-to-know-you session. The teams, similarly built and with mirroring philosophies, opened each half by playing it the same way.
Get a feel. Run the ball. Highlight field position. Embrace punting. Patiently wait for chances to take shots at big plays. And when cracks are revealed, speed to the other team's fragility in a direct, quick and bold response.
Gain courage from your failures.
Strong-minded teams do that, and Carolina and New England played a full 60 minutes of football that way.
The start of this Super Bowl was a tapestry of pricking and plodding that lasted for nearly 27 minutes in what proved to be the longest scoreless start to a Super Bowl. The finish, however, showed that once the Patriots and the Panthers discerned where to dig for points, they found them in bunches.
New England gained the final points with four seconds left in a familiar way: an Adam Vinatieri field goal that vaulted them to a second championship in three years, this time by 32-29. Vinatieri made the winning kick against St. Louis in Super Bowl XXXVI on the final play.
At the start, Vinatieri blew two field-goal chances, with one missed and the other blocked. There were no points until the Patriots scored with 3 minutes 5 seconds left in the first half. Carolina responded by finding a crack and exploiting it. From that point, it looked as if it would be a 7-7 game at halftime, because only 1:07 was left. An even game with an even chance for the championship, right?
New England's offense, though, answered Carolina's brazen approach. It drove 78 yards in 49 seconds for another touchdown. O.K., only 12 seconds left. A 14-7 halftime score, right? No, the Panthers made the most of those final seconds and scored on a 50-yard field goal as time expired. Then, in the third quarter, the teams settled back into ''let's play it straight up and safe and see what it gets us.''
Habits are hard to break. But that was the beauty of this Super Bowl, the fact that neither Carolina nor New England was willing to sacrifice substance for style. Neither was willing to dump its philosophy in a panic.
For a while, the game showed that a defensive-minded Super Bowl can, indeed, be a game worth watching. For a long while, this was a throwback game.
''I mean, they had 1 passing yard in the first quarter,'' Patriots cornerback Ty Law said of the Panthers.
Carolina safety Mike Minter said of New England, ''They only had 15 rushing yards in the first quarter.''
By game's end, however, it was a Super Bowl with nearly every scheme and every philosophy illustrated. It was a game with a style that was as much sunny skies as it was thunder and lightning.
Both coaches said they researched their opponents' coaching tendencies as long ago as 15 years. It took a while for that bundle of work to prove fruitful in point production.
First quarter: No points.
Second quarter: 24 points.
Third quarter: No points.
Final quarter: 37 points.
Take a chance, be bold, strike gold -- only after you inhale.
''I would never have imagined this game would have that many points,'' John Fox, Carolina's coach, said. ''There was some heavy hitting. Both defenses got wore down.''
New England was forced to overcome plenty by not taking full advantage of its field position early in the game and by not converting its field-goal chances. But the Patriots, in winning their 15th consecutive game, showed their remarkable ability to have more points on the scoreboard than their opponent in the end.
''It got a little hairy out there,'' Patriots linebacker Ted Johnson said. ''We were put in a position where we hadn't been too many times. We showed one more way to win a football game.''
The Patriots will be remembered for their rare sprint toward repeated greatness in an era when salary caps and free agency make it tough for teams to remain intact. They overcame startling adversity during the season and in this game when injuries nearly depleted them and when Carolina's competitiveness nearly extinguished them.
The Patriots are a team of calm and cool. Their imagination on offense and persistence on defense were in full display.
They won it playing reserved. They won it playing fancy and free. They won it with linebacker Mike Vrabel earning their last touchdown on a pass play in which defensive end Richard Seymour played at running back. They won it with backup safeties inserted late in the game when both starters left injured. They inhaled. They exhaled. They mixed and matched, and in the end showed that in a game in which unfamiliarity was the backdrop, at the final curtain, they were more successful at cracking Carolina's shell.
''Sometimes,'' Carolina kick returner Rod Smart said, ''you got to do more than enough. We didn't. They did.''
Super Bowl Analysis
