Inside the Nets' locker room, the dry-erase board is filled with symbols of a new era.
Outside, as Coach Lawrence Frank explains the subtle but profound changes he has made in the past week, a sheet of paper sticks out from the front of his warm-up pants.
On the board and on the sheet of paper are a series of markings that look like complex mathematical equations. Though they are only basketball plays, they look more foreign than hieroglyphics to some of the Nets.
Since replacing Byron Scott as coach last week, Frank has made no structural changes to the Nets' offense. But he has expanded it in a variety of ways, featuring individual players when he senses they are in a rhythm and calling plays that had been collecting dust for the past season or so.
''It's a good thing I remember all of them,'' Kenyon Martin said. ''He's changing things up, tweaking the offense, adding a couple things here and there. He's doing a good job calling the plays.''
The rest of the league got a long look at the Nets' Princeton offense in the last two N.B.A. finals. When the Nets struggled to score early this season, they did not make enough adjustments to maintain their spot at the top of the Eastern Conference and to keep Scott employed. The Nets ranked 14th in scoring last season, at 95.4 points a game but are 24th this season at 88.9.
''We have an experienced team that's run the same system going into Year 3,'' Frank said. ''We're still using the same principles, but we're trying to maximize them. We can run plays so teams don't get locked in on defense. These are all the same plays we have worked on during practice, but maybe you haven't seen them so much in the games.''
Several times in his first week, Frank went away from the Princeton offense and ran more traditional plays.
He said he also ''manipulated the offense'' to get shots for particular players. In Orlando, Lucious Harris found his shooting touch and Frank promptly called a series of plays for him. In Houston, Frank ordered the Nets to pound the ball inside to Martin when he started to establish himself. Both players said they had gained confidence because of Frank's faith in them.
''He calls what's working and then he sticks with it until it dries up,'' Jason Kidd said. ''We're making more of an effort to stay with the hot hand. In the past, someone would get hot and we'd just continue to run the offense. You might ice the hot hand, not on purpose, but because of how the offense was built.''
While Scott's sideline demeanor was cool and laid-back, Frank gestures wildly on the sideline, making it clear who is calling every play. Martin refers to Frank as ''our Jon Gruden,'' in reference to the Tampa Bay Buccaneers' micromanaging coach.
''If you watch N.F.L. films, you see Gruden with that headset on, and he's always really animated,'' Martin said. ''I see a similarity.''
The Nets can only hope Frank is as successful. Since he took over, the team has reduced its turnovers, raised its field goal percentage and carries a four-game winning streak into its matchup at New Orleans on Monday night.
The Hornets are one of several teams that adopted pieces of the Nets' offense and beat them in the first meeting of the season. This time around, New Orleans may find the Nets much more difficult to read.
REBOUNDS
During every game, KENYON MARTIN is wearing a wristband on his left calf embroidered with No. 33, in honor of ALONZO MOURNING. Martin, who nearly brawled with Mourning at a practice earlier in the season, ordered the wristband after Mourning announced his retirement to have a kidney transplant.
PRO BASKETBALL
