Viacom is nearing a decision to spin off its Blockbuster video-rental business, having so far failed to reach a deal with a buyer, executives close to the discussions said yesterday.
The decision comes after Viacom explored selling Blockbuster last year amid increasing competition in the home video market from the likes of Wal-Mart and Netflix, as well as the threat that video-on-demand offerings by cable operators could make renting a physical DVD or VHS tape obsolete.
Without a buyer, a spinoff, whose form has not been determined, is the most likely outcome, the executives said. Analysts expect it to involve an exchange of stock between shareholders of Viacom and shareholders of the 18 percent of Blockbuster already owned by the public. Analysts say it would not be feasible for Viacom to sell its 82 percent stake to the public as newly issued Blockbuster shares because there would be scant demand for the stock.
Viacom and Blockbuster executives declined to comment.
In the last two months, Viacom has held many discussions with several private equity firms, including the Blackstone Group, Thomas H. Lee, Providence Equity Capital and the Quadrangle Group. But after much price haggling, the executives said, the negotiations have collapsed.
The executives said that the talks could resume, if Viacom were willing to lower its price. Based on the current price of Blockbuster shares, with no premium Viacom's stake could be expected to fetch $2.8 billion.
Viacom's board is expected to decide within two weeks, the executives said. Dennis Leibowitz, who runs Act II Partners, a hedge fund that specializes in media companies, said Viacom's share price had been affected by concerns over Blockbuster's outlook. Viacom's stock closed Friday at $40.30, about midway between its 52-week low of $33.11 last March and high of $49.75 late last May.
Tom Wolzien, a media analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, said Blockbuster ''produces free cash flow now, but a lot of shareholders are worried about the long-term prognosis, given the growth of video on demand and the competitive pressures as retailers like Wal-Mart have moved into the DVD sales business.''
Blockbuster stock went public at $15 a share in August 1999. It traded as high as $30 a share in May 2000, but has since fallen to less than $20 a share. Although Viacom originally planned to sell the rest of Blockbuster to the public soon after the 1999 stock offering, the company decided to retain its stake -- in part because of the business's steady cash flow and because Viacom became distracted by its integration of CBS, which it acquired in 2001.
Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, and president, Mel Karmazin, are notoriously hard bargainers. But in weighing the future of Blockbuster, they face particularly complex choices.
Through aggressive cost cutting, particularly in expenses for marketing, Blockbuster has continued to perform well financially. Year-end results have not yet been released, but in the first nine months of 2003 Blockbuster generated 22.5 percent of Viacom's $19.1 billion in revenue and 12 percent of its $4.4 billion in cash flow.
But Blockbuster's revenue growth was anemic: 8 percent. And with most of the cost cuts already made, and the continued fixed costs of the stores, analysts say, Blockbuster will not be able to achieve even that growth level this year.
If Blockbuster does not sell for a premium over its current share price -- it closed at $18.72 on Friday -- the $2.8 billion Viacom might realize for its stake might not be enough to justify losing the unit's $700 million in annual cash flow.
It is that cash flow that would most interest potential buyers, although the level in the future might not be as high as it has been, depending on the speed at which competing businesses continue to erode the video rental market.
Blockbuster's chief executive, John F. Antioco, is highly regarded, and analysts credit him with having maximized the unit's profitability. But now, at least one big institutional shareholder wants to see the unit sold.
Viacom has several options for a spinoff, including simply giving Viacom investors shares -- or fractions of shares -- of Blockbuster stock, based on the number of Viacom shares they own. Another strategy might involve an exchange, in which Viacom shareholders could choose to swap shares of their stock for shares of Blockbuster.
''One advantage of a deal involving shares is that it might not be a taxable event,'' Mr. Wolzien, the analyst, said.
If there is a spinoff in which Viacom shareholders can exchange their stock for Blockbuster stock, Mr. Redstone's choice will be carefully monitored. Through his company, National Amusements, Mr. Redstone owns 11 percent of the outstanding shares of Viacom.
