On one side of the electoral expert Carina Perelli's 30th floor office in the United Nations building is the enduring view of the soaring towers of midtown Manhattan.
On the other is a bulletin board jumble of chicken-scratch diagrams of the hastily constructed election process being proposed for Iraq.
In the coming days, Ms. Perelli and members of the Electoral Assistance Division that she leads will travel to Baghdad to judge whether that process or some refined form of it can bring lasting structure to the chaotic politics of Iraq.
It is a highly atypical mission for the division, which usually insists on months of surveys of local conditions and brings a rigor to the task that has gained the United Nations an international reputation as the most credible and trusted outside judge of elections.
That reputation was surely considered by the Bush administration when it discarded its longstanding reluctance to involve the world organization in Iraq and to ask in mid-January for an emergency mission by United Nations experts to try to rescue the American-led Coalition Provisional Authority's stalemated plan for political transition.
In an interview, Ms. Perelli said she could not discuss the specifics of the coming trip. But others at the United Nations said they felt the United States and its coalition partners had little understanding of the political dynamics of Iraq and had miscalculated in promising to hold a caucus-based vote setting up the transfer of authority to the Iraqis by June 30.
A senior United Nations official who has recently met with top Bush administration officials said he had told them that their belief in the power of quick elections to bring stability to countries with no history of democracy was ''simplistic.''
''We know from our experience that these things have to be gradual -- it is naïve of them to think otherwise,'' he said.
The mission that Ms. Perelli is leading will have the narrow focus of determining whether direct elections can be organized before June 30, and, if not, what adjustments need to be made to the current complex caucus process, which has drawn strong objections from various Iraqi leaders. Those leaders have told the Americans that they would be willing to accept only a transition plan that had United Nations approval.
Electoral assistance has become an increasingly important function at the United Nations because it is critical to the peacekeeping and stabilizing mission that occupies more and more of the organization's time.
Ms. Perelli, a 46-year-old sociologist and political scientist from Uruguay, has been chief of the unit since 1998 and has a background of political activism from growing up under military rule. ''I tend to be distrustful of large organizations, and if anything, my stint at the U.N. has made me even more distrustful of large organizations,'' she said.
She and her staff are used to front-line activity. Recent operations have taken them to East Timor, Liberia, the Central African Republic, Haiti, Afghanistan, Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone. ''Find a hot spot and we are probably there,'' she said.
They are tough-minded about their job. ''There are many ways to disenfranchise people without saying you are, and it's one of our jobs to discover that,'' she said. ''We have to determine whether a country really wants our help or do they want us there just to rubber stamp their process.''
The United Nations normally provides three kinds of electoral assistance: technical and logistic assistance, including registration, use of computer technology, training of polling officers, storage of ballot papers and support for administrators; the observation and monitoring of elections; and the organization and actual hands-on conduct of elections.
The assets the United Nations believes it brings to this process are experience, impartiality, legitimacy and respect for sovereignty. The division has a roster of 1,100 people with field expertise from around the world it can call on, and over the past two years, it has provided formal assistance to 53 countries.
''Peace processes always come up in elections at some point so we always end up coming in, and sometimes it is in the middle of the process,'' said Carlos Valenzuela, a Colombian who is one of Ms. Perelli's deputies. ''In Cambodia, we were being shelled every night and had to go around doing civic education in flak jackets and helmets, which is not exactly conducive to conditions for democratic elections, but we stayed there,'' he said.
No matter what happens in the current transition in Iraq, the United Nations is expected to be the major outside participant in the creation of direct elections now scheduled for 2005.
Ms. Perelli rolled her eyes at the thought. ''Sometimes people say, 'Oh, you have a lot of time because the vote is not until March of 2005,' '' she said. ''Well in this office, that comment is greeted with fits of laughter.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE EXPERTS
