The Oscar nomination bounce is alive and well, weekend box-office figures released yesterday showed. But the big winner was a newcomer about hip-hop dance competitors.
When a film receives a nomination for an Academy Award, studios often try to take advantage of the increased recognition that comes with the coveted honor and draw moviegoers to their offerings.
''It definitely heightens the awareness of the movies and the studios are smart to make these movies more available for the audience,'' said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which tracks ticket sales.
The box-office picture was complicated because of the Super Bowl, which competes for the attention of potential ticket buyers. The top 12 films grossed an estimated $75.2 million for the weekend. That is nearly 9 percent less than the previous weekend and 20 percent less than the same weekend last year. But the $75.2 million figure was only about 6 percent less than the weekend of last year's Super Bowl.
''Unfortunately, when the Academy push hits the same weekend as the Super Bowl, it gets a little tough for all of these features,'' said Bruce Snyder, president for domestic distribution at Fox.
''You Got Served,'' a ''Flashdance''-meets-''West Side Story'' tale, made $16 million in its opening weekend in 1,933 theaters nationwide. Its average of $8,277 a theater was more than twice the per-theater sales of all other films in the top 12. ''The teen audience definitely propelled that one to No.1,'' Mr. Dergarabedian said.
Among Oscar candidates, the bounce helped keep ''Mystic River,'' which received a best actor nomination for Sean Penn, a best director nod for Clint Eastwood and a nomination for best picture, in the top 10. It was added to 43 more theaters for a total of 1,370 theaters. The $4.4 million the film made over the weekend brought its total to nearly $65 million.
Oscar potential helped keep ''Master and Commander'' afloat for its 12th week in theaters. Fox raised its number of theaters by 883, bringing the total number to 1,118. The film made $2.3 million, with a tepid $2,057 average per screen, for a total so far of nearly $88 million.
A Fox executive said that the weekend's figures were good news for its naval tale. ''We're very pleased with the result,'' said Mr. Snyder of Fox. ''With the Super Bowl, I would have to tell you, that's a pretty successful weekend,'' he said.
''Cold Mountain,'' which received seven Academy Award nominations, held its place as the seventh-ranked movie of the weekend. The film earned $4.5 million in 2,396 theaters, 416 fewer than the week before. Considering the fact that this is the sixth weekend for the Civil War drama in theaters, ''the film is holding quite well,'' said Paul Pflug, a spokesman for its distributor, Miramax.
Oscar nominations mean even bigger gains for smaller pictures like ''Monster'' and ''Lost in Translation.''
New Market, the distributor for ''Monster,'' doubled the number of theaters showing the film last week, bringing the total to 668. The gamble paid off with $3 million in sales, bringing the total sales for the film to $10.6 million.
Similarly, ''Lost in Translation'' earned more than $2 million after its distributor, Focus Features, raised the number of theaters by 275 to 632. The film has now made $37.4 million, according to Exhibitor Relations.
A bounce is less noticeable with a film like ''Master and Commander'' than, say, with ''Monster,'' Mr. Snyder said, because ''if you've done 10, 15 or 20 million and you get 5 million in a weekend, you say, 'My God! That's 20 percent of the gross,'' he said.
MEDIA
