MANY businesses suffer in the event of flash floods, hail or snowstorms. But in the online weather industry, at least, nature's fury can be a balance-sheet blessing.
Internet weather services like Weather.com, WeatherBug and AccuWeather reported sharp rises in traffic last week as a winter storm blanketed the East. The week capped a monthlong torrent of harsh weather: snowstorms in the Midwest and Pacific Northwest, floods and ice storms in the Southeast and record low temperatures in parts of Minnesota.
Revenue figures are closely guarded in the Internet weather-reporting industry because the sites are privately held, but executives say they expect strong advertising sales growth for the month, as well as an acceleration in the growth of paid subscribers to premium services aimed at weather geeks and companies with weather-reliant operations.
''It was a pretty amazing week for us,'' said Lee Rainey, vice president for marketing at AccuWeather.com, the Internet unit of AccuWeather, which provides forecasts for television and radio broadcasters and newspapers. AccuWeather, with more than 15,000 clients worldwide, claims to be the world's largest commercial weather service.
Mr. Rainey said that traffic to AccuWeather's Web site hit a record last Tuesday as the storms converged on the Northeast. According to comScore Media Metrix, the Internet research firm, 907,000 people visited AccuWeather.com that day, compared with an average of 738,000 on the previous four Tuesdays.
ComScore also reported that Weather.com, which is operated by the interactive media unit of the Weather Channel cable programmer and is the most visited weather Web site, attracted an average of 2.9 million daily visitors from Saturday through Wednesday last week, compared with a daily average of 1.7 million over the previous month.
Mr. Rainey said that AccuWeather capitalized on the increased traffic in two ways. First, since AccuWeather gets paid for every advertisement it shows, the increased traffic raised ad revenues. Second, the company said it was able to sell its subscription service, AccuWeather Premium, to more people. (Mr. Rainey would not disclose actual sales.)
The Premium service, which costs $40 a year, offers hourly forecasts, tailored to the subscriber's region, that project 15 days ahead, along with radar displays, weather animations and other features not available on the free site. (Hourly updated forecasts on the free site are limited to a three-day outlook.)
AccuWeather was not alone in successfully pitching its premium service. Most popular online weather providers have in the last two years introduced similar offerings. Analysts do not track the number of premium weather service subscribers, but one company, WeatherBug, says it has more than 140,000 customers paying $20 a year for its service, called Pro.
Paid weather services are among a growing number of successful subscription offerings on the Internet, said Michael Zimbalist, executive director of the Online Publishers Association, a trade group. Mr. Zimbalist estimated that consumers paid $1.5 billion for information and entertainment online last year, compared with $1.3 billion in 2002. He said he expected growth of 20 percent to 25 percent this year.
Along with other general news, weather ranks No. 7 in the list of paid content areas -- the top three are dating services, business information, and music and video entertainment -- according to Mr. Zimbalist. But ''weather is one of the areas where this works,'' he said. ''Anything people are passionate about, they're willing to pay for.''
WeatherBug's Pro service is an outgrowth of what some saw as a bold experiment by its parent, AWS Convergence Technologies. AWS, which over the last 11 years has built a weather monitoring network that primarily serves news broadcasters, in 2000 introduced WeatherBug not as a Web site, but as an Internet software program that users have to download.
Once downloaded, the program, usable only on computers using the Windows operating system, displays the current temperature reading in the toolbar. When the reading is clicked, a continuously updated page of weather statistics pops up, along with news, forecasts and advertisements. If severe weather is approaching, an audio alert sounds.
In 2000, Internet analysts and executives were pessimistic about the prospects of any service that required users to download software, with the exception of file-sharing software. Back then, users were seen as generally reluctant to do anything on the Internet other than buy goods, read articles and exchange e-mail messages.
But WeatherBug's software proved relatively fast and easy to download and, with promotional help from meteorologists at more than 100 television stations, it grew quickly to rival the industry's dominant player, Weather.com. According to Nielsen/NetRatings, a research firm, WeatherBug had 5.5 million active users in the week ended Jan. 25, compared with 7.5 million for Weather.com. Combined, the visitation figures of the four weather companies that trail Weather.com and WeatherBug are 3.4 million, Nielsen/NetRatings said.
Andy Jedynak, WeatherBug's senior vice president and general manager, said last week's storms helped push the number of WeatherBug application users above 30 million. On Sunday, Jan. 25, WeatherBug distributed nearly 45,000 downloads, well above the usual daily distribution of 30,000 to 35,000.
Mr. Jedynak would not disclose the company's profitability, but he said advertising revenues were increasing. At times, WeatherBug must share the ad revenues with the TV stations that distribute the application from their Web sites. In those cases, the stations can sell some of the ad inventory on the WeatherBug page; WeatherBug controls the rest.
WeatherBug's popularity helped spawn similar services, including one from Weather.com called Desktop Weather Platinum.
But WeatherBug's ascendancy has not diminished Weather.com's growth. Joe Fiveash, who oversees Weather.com and is senior vice president and general manager for the Weather Channel Interactive, said the Web site's revenues last year increased 65 percent over 2002.
Without disclosing sales figures, Mr. Fiveash said he was ''very happy'' with the progress of the Platinum service, which started in August and is priced at $30 a year.
He would not disclose Weather.com's profitability, but said that the site's traffic grew 30 percent last year, while costs were not rising at anywhere close to that rate.
The company, Mr. Fiveash said, has also diversified its revenue sources by selling more weather information through cellphone providers, among others. Revenues from the Weather.com site made up 98.6 percent of Weather Channel Interactive's sales in 2002. Last year, that number fell to 80 percent. This year, Mr. Fiveash predicts it will drop to 70 percent. The company did not specify what percentage of revenues were individually contributed by its other services.
''Although ad sales will be the engine of our business forever, it will have its ups and downs in the future,'' Mr. Fiveash said. ''This will give us some degree of insulation from that.''
At least one of the five most popular online weather services has declared its profitability -- and it is one of the smallest. MyWeather, a spinoff from Weather Central, which provides weather data and services to television stations, among others, said last week that it had a profit in the fourth quarter of 2003 and expected to be profitable thereafter.
According to Matthew C. Peterson, MyWeather's president, the company's Web site, MyWeather.net, is not intended to be a big consumer destination. The company provides weather services to about 90 broadcast television companies, which use them to draw visitors to their Web sites. For example, viewers of the News10, ABC's Albany affiliate, will see meteorologist Andy Gregorio mention that periodic weather updates are available on the company's Web site, WTEN.com.
Mr. Peterson said the company had also recently begun exploring ways to provide Internet weather services to businesses like outdoor clothing retailers, which might offer weather information to their Web site visitors, along with pitches for seasonal clothing.
Indeed, industry-specific weather data may be one of the primary growth areas for these online services this year. Last week AccuWeather rolled out a service for businesses interested in keeping tabs on forecasts, a market that WeatherBug's parent company, AWS, has already tapped.
Mr. Jedynak, of WeatherBug, said that utility companies, for instance, could use detailed weather data ''to make a better decision about whether to buy energy on the open market or spin up a new generator.''
''If you get it wrong, he said, ''it can cost you a lot of money -- or cause a power outage.''
E-Commerce Report
