With the Democratic presidential candidates campaigning across the country on Sunday, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee accused President Bush of being AWOL during his Air National Guard service, a signal of the ferocious campaign ahead once the Democrats finish with one another.
Revisiting an issue that arose briefly at the end of the last presidential election, the chairman, Terry McAuliffe, said he expected Mr. Bush's record of military service in the 1970's to become an issue this fall, particularly if the Democrats nominate the front-runner, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
Mr. McAuliffe said he was staying neutral in the fight for his party's nomination. But, he said, if Mr. Kerry is the nominee, Mr. McAuliffe will relish comparing him with Mr. Bush.
''I look forward to that debate, when John Kerry, a war hero with a chest full of medals, is standing next to George Bush, a man who was AWOL'' in the National Guard, Mr. McAuliffe said on the ABC program ''This Week.''
''George Bush never served in our military in our country,'' he said. ''He didn't show up when he should have showed up.''
Ed Gillespie, chairman of the Republican National Committee, called the comments ''slanderous.''
''President Bush served honorably in the National Guard,'' Mr. Gillespie said in a telephone interview. ''He was never AWOL. To make an accusation like that on national television with no basis in fact is despicable.''
The issue of Mr. Bush's military service arose when the filmmaker Michael Moore, a supporter of Gen. Wesley K. Clark, called Mr. Bush a deserter at a rally last month.
Mr. McAuliffe's attack on Mr. Bush seemed partly pre-emptive, suggesting that the Democrats would swing back hard if the Republicans tried to portray Mr. Kerry, decorated for his service in Vietnam, as weak on national security because in his Senate career he has voted against increasing the Pentagon budget.
It might also have been a diversionary tactic by Mr. McAuliffe, who has watched with dismay as the Democratic candidates deliver increasingly harsh blows at one another. If that was the case, it failed.
Howard Dean continued to blast Mr. Kerry on Sunday, saying Mr. Kerry had taken more money from lobbyists than any other senator in the last 15 years. Citing an article in Time magazine that said Mr. Kerry once corresponded with Johnny Chung, who later pleaded guilty to illegally funneling money to the Kerry campaign, Dr. Dean said Mr. Kerry owed voters an apology.
''He misrepresented himself, grossly misrepresented himself, as a candidate who would take on special interests in Washington,'' Dr. Dean told reporters on his campaign plane. ''We cannot go on in this country having United States senators and public officials gather their money from people who they then perform favors for.''
Mr. Kerry told reporters that the Chung story was old news. ''The moment we had learned anything about that contribution,'' he said, ''we returned the entire contribution.''
On Saturday Mr. Kerry fired back, saying that Dr. Dean had conflicts of his own and had had to seal his records from his days as governor of Vermont to hide them. He also said that two of Dr. Dean's top campaign aides had been corporate lobbyists.
But Mr. Kerry generally held his fire on Sunday, staying in Fargo, N.D., and taking the posture of a front-runner as he anticipated a strong showing in Tuesday's string of primaries and caucuses. He also spurned the idea of a one-on-one debate with Dr. Dean, which he proposed before he won in Iowa and in New Hampshire.
''We're in a seven-state primary,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I don't have time right now.''
Dr. Dean, who has said he does not expect to win in any of the seven states that hold contests on Tuesday, said he would drop out of the race if someone else accumulated enough delegates to claim the nomination. But he also told reporters that he did not expect anyone to do that before the convention.
He said on the NBC program ''Meet the Press'' that he intended to stay in the race through March 2, ''Super Tuesday,'' when delegate-rich states like California and New York vote.
Mr. Kerry appeared to be running out the clock. Instead of charging off on Sunday to a populous state with more delegates than North Dakota, he stayed in Fargo to watch the Super Bowl.
Speaking to a crowd of about 600 North Dakotans at the Fargo Air Museum at midday Sunday, Mr. Kerry repeated his standard stump speech. He did not back off from his sharp criticisms of the Bush administration as being hostage to special interests, even in the face of continued sharp attacks from Dr. Dean.
Instead, Mr. Kerry vowed, as he has repeatedly in recent days, that if elected, he would sign executive orders barring government employees from becoming lobbyists for five years and requiring that any meeting between a lobbyist and a public official be a matter of public record. ''No more secret deals, secret meetings,'' he said.
The rally at the air museum was his only public event of the day, and he planned to spend almost 24 hours on the ground in Fargo, more hours than he has spent in Missouri, whose 74 delegates offer the richest prize on Tuesday. He delayed his flight to Albuquerque -- to stump for votes in the New Mexico primary on Tuesday -- until late Sunday night. The reason is that the senator from Massachusetts wanted to watch the New England Patriots in the Super Bowl.
Mr. Kerry planned to spend Tuesday night not in any of the seven states with contests that day but in Washington State, which votes Feb. 7, and where Dr. Dean had hoped to compete strongly.
Dr. Dean also plans to be in Washington on Tuesday night. Michigan also votes on Feb. 7, but he is looking ahead to Feb. 17, when Wisconsin votes. Mr. Kerry has the endorsements of the governors in Michigan and Washington.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who has staked the future of his campaign on winning Tuesday in South Carolina, appeared to rule out taking the vice-presidential slot if he did not win the nomination.
Asked on the CBS program ''Face the Nation'' what he would do if he were offered the No. 2 spot on a Democratic ticket, he said he would refuse because he is running for president. ''To bring the change I think needs to be brought to this country, I need to be the president of the United States,'' he said.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark was in Oklahoma and planned to campaign in New Mexico and Arizona. His campaign emphasized two new endorsements from Oklahoma newspapers.
''Clark is from Arkansas and he knows what Oklahomans and military communities are all about,'' The Lawton Constitution wrote. ''Simply put, he understands us better and he won't forget his roots.''
And Senator Joseph I. Lieberman promoted three new newspaper endorsements on Sunday as he hit three states that vote on Tuesday -- Delaware, Oklahoma and New Mexico.
Speaking to reporters after attending services at the New Destiny Fellowship Congregation in Wilmington, Del., Mr. Lieberman said that his campaign had enough money to continue through to the Virginia primary on Feb. 10 so that his ''unique voice'' could be heard.
''Unlike some of the other candidates -- who, I'm beginning to fear, are drifting toward outdated class warfare arguments -- I'm never going to be an antibusiness candidate because it's businesses that create the jobs for people and help people work their way up into the middle class,'' he said.
The Rev. Al Sharpton, campaigning in South Carolina, said on the CNN program ''Late Edition'' that he intended to remain in the campaign as well, saying he had essentially the same strategy as Dr. Dean: winning delegates, if not states. He noted that the black vote was split, as was the white.
Dr. Dean kept up a busy schedule, but not in the states voting on Tuesday. He met with black leaders in Milwaukee but did not come away with their endorsement. He also spoke at a black church in Milwaukee as former Vice President Al Gore appeared on his behalf in black churches in Detroit.
Dr. Dean said he would meet with labor leaders this week but brushed off suggestions that they want him to drop out if he wins no states on Tuesday. He also said he wanted to start revealing more about himself in an effort to connect better with voters.
''People have a strong sense of my message,'' he said at the event with black leaders. ''I'm not sure they have a strong sense of who I am.''
He flew here later for a town hall meeting and then headed for New Mexico for a forum on Monday on Hispanic voters.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW  Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  An article yesterday about the Democratic presidential candidates misidentified the magazine cited by Howard Dean for an article about Senator John Kerry's connection to Johnny Chung, who pleaded guilty to illegally funneling money to the Kerry re-election campaign. It was Newsweek, not Time.
