The founder of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, Abdul Qadeer Khan, has signed a detailed confession admitting that during the last 15 years he provided Iran, North Korea and Libya with the designs and technology to produce the fuel for nuclear weapons, according to a senior Pakistani official and three Pakistani journalists who attended a special government briefing here on Sunday night.
In a two-and-a-half-hour presentation to 20 Pakistani journalists, a senior government official gave an exhaustive and startling account of how Dr. Khan, a national hero, spread secret technology to three countries that have been striving to produce their own nuclear arsenals. Two of them, Iran and North Korea, were among those designated by President Bush as part of an ''axis of evil.''
If the Pakistani government account is correct, Dr. Khan's admission amounts to one of the most complex and successful efforts to evade international controls to stop nuclear proliferation.
The account provided by Pakistan on Sunday night came after years in which the government strongly denied that it or scientists at the Khan Research Laboratories had given crucial technology to other nations.
Officials detailed how Dr. Khan had presided over a network that smuggled nuclear hardware on chartered planes, had shared secret designs for the centrifuges that produce the enriched uranium necessary to develop a nuclear weapon, and had given personal briefings to Iranian, Libyan and North Korean scientists in covert meetings abroad.
Dr. Khan said he shared the technology because he thought the emergence of more nuclear states would ease Western attention on Pakistan, the senior official told journalists. He also said he thought it would help the Muslim cause.
The Bush administration offered no public comment on the Pakistani announcement on Sunday. But in recent weeks, administration officials have said that they forced the government of President Pervez Musharraf to confront the evidence, after Iran and Libya made disclosures that showed their reliance on Pakistani-supplied technology.
''This is the break we have been waiting for,'' a senior American official said. But the account provided by Pakistani officials carefully avoided pinning any blame on General Musharraf, the army or the Pakistani intelligence service, despite the fact that some of the material -- especially what was sent to North Korea -- appeared to have been transported on government cargo planes.
Pakistani and American officials have said senior Pakistani Army officials would have known if nuclear hardware had been shipped out of a tightly guarded nuclear facility.
The senior official told journalists that all nuclear transfers ceased after General Musharraf established a new National Command Authority to oversee the country's nuclear arsenal in early 2002. But according to American accounts, the nuclear transfers to Libya continued through last fall.
The Khan laboratory has for years been the crown jewel of the Pakistani nuclear program, and it received the highest-level support after Dr. Khan stole the basic technology for uranium enrichment from a European consortium, Urenco, in the late 1970's.
Dr. Khan's house has been surrounded by Pakistani security officials for several weeks, and he could not be reached for comment on Sunday. A spokesman for the families of Dr. Khan and six detained officials who the government says aided him said they would respond to the government allegations on Monday.
It was unclear whether Dr. Khan would be arrested, or whether General Musharraf's government would be further shaken by his decision to take on a man revered as the creator of the first Islamic bomb.
At the briefing on Sunday night, the Pakistani official insisted that the country's military and intelligence officials had been unaware of Dr. Khan's activities during the past decade, despite the huge houses and lavish life he maintained on a relatively modest government stipend.
''There were intelligence lapses on our part, and we admit to them,'' the official said, according to the journalists who attended the meeting. ''We should not have allowed this loose administrative and security system to have prevailed.''
There was no way to independently verify the senior official's account, though senior American officials said parts of it seemed in accord with intelligence they had gathered and provided to Pakistan.
The news of the confession came a day after Pakistan's government removed Dr. Khan from a senior government post. The government has been gradually paving the way for the announcement since December, when it first admitted that its scientists might have operated ''for personal profit.''
Until that time, accounts of secrets given up by the Khan laboratory were met by a string of denials. But after receiving detailed evidence last year from the International Atomic Energy Agency and the United States, Pakistan began an investigation into possible nuclear transfers to Iran and Libya in November.
The investigation has gained speed ever since, and General Musharraf personally questioned Dr. Khan, American officials say.
The senior Pakistani official said Dr. Khan transferred nuclear weapons-related designs, drawings and components to Iran between 1989 and 1991, according to the three journalists. He transferred nuclear technology to North Korea and Libya between 1991 and 1997, they said, though American officials believe that the transfers to Libya continued until just four months ago.
Dr. Khan also transferred additional technology to North Korea until 2000, the Pakistanis said. That is particularly significant because North Korea has denied, as recently as last month, that it has a secret uranium enrichment project under way, in addition to the plutonium project at Yongbyon that the C.I.A. believes has already produced several weapons.
Details from Dr. Khan's confession, if made available from the United States, could have a major effect on the negotiations to disarm North Korea, American officials said.
The Pakistani official who briefed reporters said Dr. Khan had met with Libyan nuclear scientists in Casablanca, Morocco, and in Istanbul; American officials were apparently unaware of the Istanbul meeting. He also met Iranian scientists in Karachi, Pakistan, and scientists in Malaysia, the journalists reported.
Dr. Khan made direct shipments of nuclear hardware through Dubai, in the Persian Gulf, and chartered flights to North Korea that may have included the shipments on government planes. American intelligence officials believe that he visited North Korea more than a dozen times.
He also tried to ship nuclear hardware by land from Pakistan to Iran with the aid of a Karachi businessman, the officials said.
According to the Pakistani account, centrifuges came from a factory in Malaysia that had been built by a Sri Lankan identified as ''Tahir,'' who was one of several middlemen Dr. Khan used to spread the technology.
The Pakistani official said, and American officials confirmed, that Tahir was in government custody in Malaysia. Centrifuge components made in Malaysia were intercepted en route to Libya in October, American officials said.
The other middlemen were three Germans identified by the senior official only by their last names -- ''Brummer,'' ''Heinz,'' and ''Liech'' -- the journalists said. A Dutch citizen identified by Pakistani officials as ''Hanks'' was also described as a middleman, though American intelligence officials believe that Hank is his first name. The man is believed to have some connection to Urenco, the European conglomerate where Dr. Khan once worked. Dr. Khan was convicted in absentia for stealing technology there, though the conviction was overturned on a technicality.
Dr. Khan smuggled out of Pakistan a mix of new and untested centrifuges and centrifuge parts, the senior official said. Some of the machines and components were defective, by his account.
The Pakistani officials charged Sunday night that after their government opened an inquiry into possible nuclear transfers in November, Dr. Khan wrote to Iranian officials and urged them to destroy some of their facilities and to tell officials that the Pakistanis who aided them had died. He also threatened to kill one of his subordinates in 2001 if he told anyone of the transfer, they said.
The senior government official told journalists that the Pakistani government first heard rumors that nuclear technology was leaving the country for North Korea in 2000. The Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence agency conducted a raid on a plane chartered by Dr. Khan that was bound for North Korea, but found nothing on board.
Two years later, in the fall of 2002, an American delegation to North Korea led by James A. Kelly, the assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs, confronted the North with intelligence that the country had a secret uranium enrichment facility. He based his charges on evidence first collected by South Korean intelligence agencies. According to the American account, North Korea admitted to having such a project, though it later insisted that it had been misunderstood, and had no such program.
American officials relayed the information to Pakistan, urging action. But when the news became public, Pakistan denied that its scientists had any role. On Sunday, however, the senior Pakistani official acknowledged that the government had found documents at the Khan Research Laboratories that showed equipment had been shipped out of the facility.
In February 2003, American officials showed Pakistani officials satellite images of Iran's large centrifuge complex, whose existence was disclosed by Iranian dissidents. American officials said the scale and design of the project suggested that the Iranians were getting aid from an advanced program like Pakistan's -- a charge that was confirmed when inspectors from the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations nuclear regulatory body, toured the facilities.
The inspectors discovered that some equipment had been contaminated with weapons-grade uranium, though it was unclear whether Iran had produced that material, or the equipment had been previously contaminated. The senior official here told journalists that the high enrichment level indicated that the equipment had come from Pakistan, the journalists said.
Iranian officials also informed Atomic Energy Agency officials that three Germans and two South Asians had aided their program, prompting Pakistan to open its inquiry in November. In mid-January, Libya informed Pakistani officials that they too had received nuclear aid from Pakistanis.
The senior official said Dr. Muhammad Farooq, the head of overseas procurement, had played a critical role in aiding Dr. Khan. He worked closely with the Sri Lankan middleman, the official said. The Sri Lankan established the factory in Malaysia that built components based on Pakistani designs, the official said. Dr. Farooq also traveled with Dr. Khan to the meetings with Libyan officials in Istanbul and Casablanca and recorded some of the conversations.
The senior official told journalists that General Musharraf would address the nation about the results of the inquiry, and any disciplinary action, shortly after a series of national holidays, which end on Thursday.
