To get a sense of the mixed emotions swirling around the building boom in Harlem, consider the Thurgood Marshall Academy, which is to move this morning to its new home at Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard and 135th Street.
The public school -- the first to be built in Harlem in 50 years -- has been praised by local residents who marvel at its spacious greenhouse, its wireless classrooms, its library stocked with 20,000 books.
But creating a new home for the school, which is moving from 135th Street and Edgecombe Avenue, has also drawn the criticism of local preservationists who complain that it and a pancake house would be taking over the spot long occupied by a famous Harlem nightclub. In addition, a neighbor's lawsuit maintains that poor construction put a six-foot sinkhole in her basement and destroyed her pipes.
The second renaissance of Harlem has arrived, but it has arrived in a vortex of money, opportunity, new hopes and old resentments. Even as developers have brought in Starbucks, Disney and the Body Shop, not to mention scores of beautifully refurbished brownstones, many residents have cried foul play.
Perhaps no group has felt this shifting tide of anger and excitement more keenly than the Abyssinian Development Corporation, which built the school in partnership with New York City. As the development arm of the Abyssinian Baptist Church, which has served the poor in Harlem for 195 years, the corporation has been forced to walk a fine line between bringing economic growth to the community and remaining true to its community roots.
It has not always been easy. Abyssinian has struggled to create a balance between working successfully with big developers like Forest City Ratner while keeping an ear open to local residents who complain of changes in the quality of their life, like rats invading their block.
''People recognize that because we span both worlds, it's exactly why you want to deal with us,'' said the Rev. Calvin O. Butts III, the pastor at Abyssinian. ''People in the community are intelligent. They want you to deal with people who have the large dollars. They just don't want you to sell them out.''
Harlem, particularly central Harlem, has changed almost as fast as Clark Kent changed into Superman. It is virtually impossible to spend five minutes in the area generally bounded by 110th and 155th Streets and Fifth and St. Nicholas Avenues without seeing a for-sale sign or construction van. While the boom has made it possible to sip your mocha latte on 125th Street, it has also chased an untold number of the poor and the not-so-poor from the area. Average rents in central Harlem have increased 45 percent in the last two years, some experts say, and the vacancy rate of 3 percent is the lowest in recent history.
The Thurgood Marshall Academy is just the latest project for the development corporation, which has grown as quickly as the neighborhood's real-estate market. Founded in 1989, the development corporation started with a $50,000 grant and a staff of one. It now has a $6.6 million budget and employs more than 60 full-time workers.
Its projects have ranged from the corporate to the communal. It has worked with Forest City Ratner to build the Harlem Center, an $85 million shopping mall on 125th Street with tenants including H&amp;M, Marshalls, CVS and Staples. It has helped to bring a 53,000-square-foot Pathmark to the neighborhood. It has also built millions of dollars worth of housing for the homeless, the elderly and low- to middle-income families.
As Abyssinian has grown, however, so too has the volume of complaints against it. Jeanne Littlejohn, an artist and church parishioner who lives next door to the academy, has sued the corporation in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, saying that construction of the school has ruined her apartment.
''I'm at odds with my own church,'' said Ms. Littlejohn, who added that Dr. Butts had baptized her. ''The church has been a salvation in our community with civil rights and everything, but this is politics and business.''
The corporation has also taken heat from Harlem preservationists like Michael Henry Adams who have lambasted it for building the school in tandem with an International House of Pancakes in the building that Smalls' Paradise, the famous nightclub, once occupied. ''Cultural genocide,'' Mr. Adams has called the loss of any trace of the club.
Beyond these complaints, there are broader concerns among local tenant groups who say they worry that as community developers like Abyssinian get larger, they will forget the people they were originally meant to serve. As a testament to Abyssinian's reputation, no group mentioned the church by name. Still, the message was clear.
''Some community groups have lost their focus,'' said James Lewis, chairman of Harlem Operation Take Back, an advocacy group for Harlem tenants. ''If you want to branch out into business and moderate-income housing, that's cool. But don't forget about the people.''
Sheena Wright, the president and chief executive officer of the development corporation, says she could not possibly forget about the people. She spends a good portion of every day working on community projects like the corporation's Head Start program -- named one of the best in New York State in 2002 -- and its homeless shelter, which houses up to 25 families at any given time.
Her development corporation was also asked in recent weeks to join a citywide campaign to pressure government officials into building more affordable housing. Representatives from the corporation, she said, regularly attend meetings of their local community board, which has asked the group to help create a neighborhood plan for early-childhood education.
If Ms. Wright is somewhat shocked when she hears complaints about Abyssinian, she understands what causes them. Harlem is changing. Abyssinian is taking part in that change. There is great fear in the neighborhood. People are worried that they might be left behind.
''There's a sense that the people who fought the fight for 50 years in Harlem, that their contributions aren't being recognized,'' Ms. Wright said. ''There are people who stayed the course in this neighborhood, who made the contributions, who bled, and some of them are falling through the cracks.''
''That's a tragedy,'' she said.
Abyssinian has powerful political friends -- among them C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, and Randy A. Daniels, New York's secretary of state, both of whom are members of the church -- and that fact has added to the sense that the development corporation has swung too far toward politics and business.
Even local politicians who have spoken out against gentrification in the neighborhood have rallied to the corporation's side. ''It may look like they are selling out, but I maintain they have not at all,'' State Senator David A. Paterson said. ''Sometimes they act like a church, sometimes like a corporation. For the most part, I have been pleased with the way they have tried to structure decent and affordable housing. Actually, if we had more of them, there'd be greater opportunities to create moderate-income-level housing.''
In the face of criticism, Ms. Wright remains an unabashed booster of development in Harlem. If Abyssinian refurbishes brownstones to sell to people in the neighborhoods, that's good, she says. If it renovates the old Renaissance Ballroom for the Classical Theater of Harlem or the Harlem School of the Arts and then builds apartments atop the structure, well, that's good too.
''It's all about wealth creation in the community,'' Ms. Wright said. ''It's all about access to capital.''
She said, for instance, that only 6 percent of the residents of central Harlem own their own homes. ''If you own your home, then you can send your kids to school, you can open a business. The wealth in this community does not exist nearly to the level that it could -- and should.''
Her vision of development reflects a broader vision of black neighborhoods like Harlem throughout New York. The central struggle was once the fight for civil rights, she said. Now it is the fight for economic parity. From activism to equity, that is the progression.
Ms. Wright embodies this progression in her own biography. She is the daughter of Debra Fraser-Howe, the founder of the National Black Leadership Commission on AIDS, and was steeped at birth in the civil rights movement. She grew up in the housing projects of the South Bronx, went to Columbia University at age 16, then on to Columbia Law School. She worked at the law firm Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, then for a smaller firm specializing in private equity investment.
She took over the Abyssinian Development Corporation in July 2002. Now her face graces the cover of the Winter 2003 edition of Harlem World magazine. ''The Right Person at the Right Time,'' the headline says.
''When you talk about preservation and gentrification in Harlem, you're not just talking about bricks and mortars,'' she said. ''You're talking about character, people, culture.
''Still,'' she added, ''there's sometimes a balancing act -- and it's hard -- between doing what's best and doing what's right.''
Correction:  February 13, 2004, Friday  An article and a picture caption on Feb. 2 about the relocation of Thurgood Marshall Academy to a new building in Harlem referred incorrectly to an apartment in a neighboring building owned by Jeanne Littlejohn, who has filed a lawsuit claiming that it was damaged during construction. It was a rental apartment; she does not live in the building.
