HIGHLIGHTS
THEATER: ACCOLADES -- Tony Walton, the Tony-, Oscar- and Emmy Award-winning designer, was named today the first winner of the Robert L. B. Tobin Award for Lifetime Achievement in Theatrical Design. The award, an extension of the lineup of annual Theater Development Fund-Irene Sharaff Awards for theatrical costume design, will be presented at the Hudson Theater on March 26. Anthony Powell, a Tony Award winner for his costume designs for John Gielgud's ''School for Scandal,'' among many productions, was named the winner of the TDF/Irene Sharaff Lifetime Achievement Award. Other winners of this year's TDF/Irene Sharaff Awards are the ''Avenue Q'' costume designer Mirena Rada (Young Master Award); Nino Novellino of Costume Armor Inc., a sculptor whose work can be seen in ''Gypsy'' (Artisan Award); and Lemuel Ayers, the set and costume designer of classics like ''Kismet,'' ''The Pajama Game'' and ''Kiss Me, Kate'' (Posthumous Award). Robert L. B. Tobin, a Texas art collector and patron who died in 2000, was heir to a family fortune derived from aerial surveys used in the oil business.
MARIAH CAREY: DEMURE BUT SEXY -- Responding to concerns that the pop diva Mariah Carey's customary costumes might offend the sensibilities of her audience at a concert on Feb. 14 in Jakarta, the capital of predominantly Muslim Indonesia, a manager has indicated that she would not wear revealing attire but would, nevertheless, look sexy. ''I have consulted the promoters here on what Mariah should wear,'' Tom Hudak, Ms. Carey's production manager, said in a report carried by Agence France-Presse. ''It looks like in Indonesia Mariah will not appear as revealing as she usually does.''
ANYBODY SEEN YODA? -- What do you do when Yoda disappears? File a missing Jedi master report, describing a wizened wise man some 900 years old and about three feet tall? Anyway, it wasn't actually the sage who trained Obi-Wan Kenobi and Luke Skywalker that was reported missing last week; it was a 170-pound limited-edition bronze statue of that ''Star Wars'' stalwart, The Associated Press reported. Valued at $20,000 the statue, commissioned by Lucasfilm Ltd., executed by Lawrence Noble and one of four bolted to the floor of a flatbed truck, was stolen in Pasadena, Calif. Mr. Noble posted a $1,000 reward for its return. ''It's a real high-end collectible,'' he said.
FILM: A U.N. O.K. -- At the United Nations it was no, nyet, nein when Alfred Hitchcock sought permission to film scenes there for his 1959 thriller ''North by Northwest.'' But times change. Reversing course after years of such vetoes, the United Nations gave permission last week to Sydney Pollack, above, the director of films like ''Tootsie'' and ''Out of Africa,'' to use its headquarters as a location for his thriller ''The Interpreter,'' Reuters reported. The film co-stars Sean Penn and Nicole Kidman, playing a Kenyan-born United Nations translator who overhears an assassination plot, becomes a target herself and helps thwart the murder of an African leader addressing the General Assembly. Shashi Tharoor, the United Nations undersecretary-general for public affairs who was instrumental in winning approval for the filming, said, ''It is a way of making the United Nations accessible to people who would not ordinarily think of the U.N.''
GIRL BAND DISBANDS -- Another band from Liverpool is splitting up after selling millions of records. This time it's the Atomic Kittens, whose members -- Jenny Frost, 25, Natasha Hamilton, 21, and Liz McClarnon, 22 -- said they wanted to spend more time with their young families. After a tour of Britain next month, the Kittens will go their separate ways, Reuters reported, but they left open the prospect of reuniting later. The band, which sold seven million records in five years, had three chart-topping singles in Britain: ''Whole Again'' and ''Eternal Flame'' in 2001 and ''The Tide Is High'' in 2002.
EXHIBITION: COFFEE, CHOCOLATE, TEA -- Chocolate, the drink restricted to Aztec kings, priests, warriors and warrior-merchants until encountered by 16th-century Spanish explorers, remained largely unknown in Europe until the 17th century, when coffee, arriving by way of Greece and Turkey, became popular, as did tea, brought to Europe from China by the Portuguese. As a result, fine furniture, silver, porcelain, glass and pottery were developed to serve these new beverages. From tomorrow through July 11, ''Chocolate, Coffee, Tea'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art will illuminate the response of Europe's luxury trades to these drinks.
FOOTNOTES
The highly acclaimed 20-year-old pop-jazz virtuoso Peter Cincotti, left, playing the piano and singing with his quartet, makes his Lincoln Center debut with performances tonight and tomorrow at 8 in the American Songbook series at Alice Tully Hall . . . The opera and theater director Mark Lamos will open to public view the collaboration between director and actors in ''A Director's Perspective'' from 6:30 to 8 tonight at the Kaye Playhouse. In this Shakespeare Society presentation, the stage will become rehearsal room where actors will perform and discuss scenes from ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' . . . Manhattan gets a new jazz room tomorrow night when Howard Stein, the impresario and owner of Au Bar, opens Le Jazz Au Bar at 41 East 58th Street. The opening attraction, through Saturday, is the Grammy and Tony Award-winning Dee Dee Bridgewater. Coming up are Marlena Shaw, from Feb, 11 through 14; and the George Shearing Trio, from Feb. 18 through 21.
