January was busy for Howard Jonas, the founder and chairman of IDT, the telecommunications business that made him a major industry player.
The month began with an appearance on ''The 700 Club'' television show, whose host is the Rev. Pat Robertson, who Mr. Jonas says is one of his best friends. It ended with Mr. Jonas being honored last Thursday in Manhattan at the annual dinner for the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, the influential pro-Israel lobby. Mr. Jonas, an Orthodox Jew, sits on its board of directors.
And the day before the dinner, Mr. Jonas's company said it was buying a 5 percent stake in Archie Comics Entertainment.
The Archie investment is the most recent in a series by Mr. Jonas involving entertainment. After he acquired a string of animation companies, he and Mr. Robertson recently announced the creation of a ''family friendly'' entertainment partnership. In the spring, Mr. Jonas plans to start a conservative talk radio network that he describes as an ''alternative to NPR.'' Mr. Jonas said IDT was also talking with Marvel Comics to create animated characters.
Before he gave a speech to the American Israel committee group last Thursday, Mr. Jonas spoke by phone from his home in Riverdale, the Bronx, describing the links among his various interests, which include sitting on the boards of two dozen charities. His involvement in entertainment ''happened by accident,'' he said, after IDT tried to develop a secure way to deliver video over the Internet, and invested in a video distribution business.
With this latest investment, Mr. Jonas intends to bring the comic book character Archie and his cohorts to life in animated video and film. ''We probably paid less than a million dollars for the right to make movies on any of the Archie characters,'' he said. ''We keep 50 percent of the profit. To me, that's a great deal. It's a tremendous brand name.''
So can the public expect Archie and Jughead to begin displaying politically conservative or pro-Israel leanings? ''I can't imagine any possible way that would happen,'' Mr. Jonas said. ''It's just boys and girls.''
But Mr. Jonas acknowledges that his culturally traditional values will very likely play out in his media efforts. As a baby cried in the background -- he and his wife, Debbie, have nine children -- he said: ''I know this sounds cornball, but I think our good hard-core American values, as American as apple pie -- that is giving a message. It's not a Britney Spears message. You don't get married on a Friday and have it annulled on Monday. If we give people a quality product, the business will take care of itself.''
LISA NAPOLI
