As Vodafone of Britain and NTT DoCoMo of Japan mull bids for AT&amp;T Wireless with an eye toward creating globe-girdling cellular networks, they may want to ask one simple question: Are people like Andrew Cole worth all the trouble?
Mr. Cole, a telecommunications consultant in Boston, is part of a lucrative but relatively rare breed: the fewer than two million frequent international business travelers. He recently received a $550 monthly wireless phone bill because he ran up hefty per-minute fees while he was in Spain and Britain.
If a company like Vodafone added a North American cellphone company to its sizable operations in Europe and Asia, it could become the wireless carrier of choice for the global road warriors of the 21st century.
But even Mr. Cole sometimes wonders whether there will be enough big-spending, cellphone-toting world travelers like him to justify a foreign carrier spending $30 billion or more to buy AT&amp;T Wireless.
Mr. Cole, along with some other experts, recognizes that cost savings could be squeezed from phone makers and network suppliers. And the corporate bragging rights that come with controlling a major cellular operator in the United States are a powerful draw.
Nonetheless, the idea that a worldwide seamless wireless network should be seen as a holy grail strikes some as being driven more by executive ego and the siren song of bankers promising overblown ''synergies'' than by sound economics.
''Whenever an investment banker says a deal is justified on the basis of synergies, I grab my wallet,'' said Raul Katz, director for the telecommunications practice at Booz Allen Hamilton. ''In this case, it's not a big enough justification'' to warrant the development of a global company, he said.
The jockeying for control of AT&amp;T Wireless, the nation's third-largest wireless company, is just beginning. Prospective bidders have until Feb. 13 to put forth formal offers. The company believed to have the most aggressive interest is a decidedly domestic one: Cingular Wireless, the join venture of BellSouth and SBC Communications.
But with the help of an army of high-priced investment bankers, Vodafone, DoCoMo and Nextel are seriously mulling offers themselves, according to executives close to the auction.
Just last week, Arun Sarin, Vodafone's chief executive, hinted during a conference call with analysts that he was considering going after AT&amp;T Wireless. Executives close to the auction said that Deutsche Telekom, which owns T-Mobile, had considered making a bid, but decided against it.
Two major factors are propelling the prospect that an overseas company could bid for AT&amp;T Wireless. One is the falling dollar, which makes it less expensive for a foreign buyer to acquire an American operation. The other is that European and Asian wireless companies face saturated markets on their home turfs, making the faster-growing and less mature United States market look more alluring.
At the same time, some experts look forward to big growth in the United States in the use of phones to transmit data, which is more lucrative than voice. Since data transmission is higher per person in Japan and Europe, overseas companies could conceivably bring home-grown expertise to the United States.
Overseas companies ''would like to be in the U.S.,'' said Nitin Shah, director for the wireless group at RHK, a research and consulting firm in San Francisco, ''because it's profitable and, with potential consolidation, they'll be able to get a much larger share of the market in the future.''
Those who advocate the idea of building one or more global wireless companies say that the virtues are clear. They point to the success of Vodafone, which has 130 million subscribers through investments in companies in Britain, China, France, Germany, Italy and other places. Vodafone also owns 45 percent of Verizon Wireless in the United States, but the interest is financial and does not give it any control over the company's operations.
On the other side of the equation, Cingular may have an even greater incentive than the two foreign carriers to acquire AT&amp;T Wireless. Doing so would enable it to remove a competitor from the overcrowded domestic industry. Vodafone and DoCoMo could not expect to achieve similar cost savings because they do not have much in the way of overlapping operations with AT&amp;T Wireless.
While the advantage of owning networks that span across state lines in the United States or European countries is clear, it is less certain whether such benefits will translate across the Atlantic or Pacific.
Only one major wireless operator has ever taken the trans-Atlantic plunge: Deutsche Telecom, which in 2000 acquired VoiceStream Wireless for $50 billion. It was later renamed T-Mobile USA.
That investment has been an important source of growth for Deutsche Telecom, especially as its own business in Germany has struggled. But T-Mobile has remained essentially a separate operation and has never provided much advantage to global travelers. Indeed, roaming through Europe as a T-Mobile customer is not much cheaper than doing so as a customer of AT&amp;T Wireless, which owns no networks abroad.
T-Mobile charges 99 cents a minute for calls placed or received in most countries in Europe, while AT&amp;T charges the same 99 cents but adds a monthly fee of $5.99. And in some countries, like Greece, AT&amp;T's rates can actually be cheaper than T-Mobile's, depending on how many minutes a customer uses.
Apart from the question of courting international travelers, any company trying operate a network spanning multiple continents faces significant technological challenges. These obstacles, analysts say, limit the advantages of economies of scale.
For instance, Mr. Katz of Booz Allen said, it is one thing to create shared customer service and network centers when two countries are neighbors, but quite another when they are separated by an ocean. Individual nations still need local accounting, regulatory, legal and sales operations.
Even in Europe, where nations are in close proximity and all of them use the same basic technology, the lure of growing across borders has sometimes led to costly mistakes.
Kevin Calabrese, an analyst for Argus Research in New York, said that several companies in Europe had been forced to return to government regulators expensive licenses to operate high-speed mobile data networks. Mr. Calabrese noted, for example, that a joint venture that included France Telecom returned a $10.4 billion license to the German government last year because it could not afford the operation.
Another major justification for Vodafone's interest in buying AT&amp;T Wireless is that both companies base their networks on a technology called GSM, one of the two major software approaches to transmitting mobile calls. But even as some experts see reasons why Vodafone might be able to use even greater scale to drive down the price of GSM equipment, others warn that it might not achieve much additional savings because calls in the United States and Europe are transmitted on different radio frequencies.
In the end, of course, none of these complex calculations may really matter. If either the chief of executive of Vodafone or DoCoMo wants to make a big splash in America, he is probably not going to let a pesky debate over potential cost savings stand in the way.
