Last Sunday the Rev. Al Sharpton preached at the Tabernacle Baptist Church here. There were 700 of Beaufort's most prominent African-Americans in the church, and a handful of whites. He said, ''A Sharpton vote is not a vote thrown away, or if it is, the votes for six of the seven in the upcoming primary will be votes thrown away.'' Judging by the piles on the collection plates, it appeared he collected more that day than the church and its missions combined.
The press may have spent the last few months in Iowa and New Hampshire but, as Mr. Sharpton is betting, we South Carolinians may be the ones whose votes matter most. The primary tomorrow will set the tone for Super Tuesday on March 2. The candidate who comes out of here the winner will have found his presidential footing among mainstream voters. Those who fare poorly won't make it out of February.
Four years ago Al Gore stumbled and barely nipped Bill Bradley in New Hampshire, and John McCain creamed George W. Bush there. But Vice President Gore finished off Mr. Bradley here in the mainstream. Mr. Bush finished off Senator McCain here too, mostly by ringing the bell in the upcountry Bible Belt.
South Carolina may not want to be a bellwether state, but it has worked out that way. This constituency resembles those in other, much larger states. As Mr. Sharpton put it so delicately, ''Iowa and New Hampshire don't reflect the country's diversity.'' The South Carolina results, on the other hand, will provide head-to-head results from which pollsters, pundits, politicians and their patrons can predict how candidates will run against one another among various voting blocs in larger contests.
We have factory workers, farmers, urban dwellers, Hispanics, and poor and middle-class black and white voters here, providing a political microcosm for astute analysts in both parties. There are even enclaves of rich white Republicans living along the coast, some of whom will cross over tomorrow and vote in the Democratic primary. Watching whom they cross over to vote for will tell the Democratic hopefuls, and the White House, which of them might most ably cut into President Bush's base.
Tomorrow's primary, while still early in the game, is late enough that many of the differences between candidates have been distilled, and the weak can begin to be culled from the herd. While we regard ourselves as highly individualistic, the South Carolina primary is called ''the gateway to the South,'' meaning it is likely most other Southern states will go as we go. And in recent times the South has often turned out to be the ''swing'' section of the country.
The one who wins here will not be anyone seen as having been against the war on terrorism. Candidates may say going unilaterally into Iraq was wrong, or just that the mop-up should have been better planned. But the one who wins will have sounded as if he was speaking from experience, because it seems most everyone here has worn the nation's uniform at some time.
The one who wins here won't have told us how he's going to spend our money. He'll have told us how he's going to let us keep it, because we need it. The State of South Carolina faces a $344 million deficit in a $5.1 billion budget. Our very popular Republican governor, Mark Sanford, has sold the state's airplanes and now he's working on its cars and trucks. Our very popular Democratic senior senator, Fritz Hollings, has long pushed for a constitutional amendment requiring a balanced federal budget. Here's the message: we're worried about the money.
There's one more thing, and it's important. The one who wins here will have shown us he's got the stuff to do a job that's gotten immeasurably harder in the last four years. More than most, South Carolinians admire courage -- particularly the personal kind. And it's too late for faking it. The preacher's got it. The senator with the three purple hearts has it. The general may have it. As for the country doctor and the other senators, who knows? But they've all got just one day left to show us.
Op-Ed Contributor Bill Rauch is the mayor of Beaufort, South Carolina. He is a former press secretary for Mayor Ed Koch of New York and the author of the forthcoming ''Politicking.''
