Stephon Marbury is playing so well lately, he could be auditioning for a trip to Los Angeles, where he says he believes he should make the All-Star scene in two weeks. Keith Van Horn is performing like the player his maximum-value contract says he is.
Marbury and Van Horn are easing most of the Knicks' worries with Allan Houston expected to miss another five games.
The Knicks (22-27) appear to be steadying themselves just in time for tomorrow's game against the Pacers, the team with the best record in the Eastern Conference, at 35-13, and the team that fired Isiah Thomas in August.
Yet there is still a current of unrest running through the locker room, coming from some of the players brought in by Thomas's predecessor, Scott Layden. They are frustrated with how the new coach, Lenny Wilkens, and Thomas are communicating their roles.
First, Shandon Anderson was upset. Now, Frank Williams is uncharacteristically angry. Williams, a second-year point guard who is out of the rotation, stopped just short of demanding a trade.
''I just think it's probably a time for an explanation for what's going on,'' Williams said after he did not play in the Knicks' 110-105 victory over Phoenix on Saturday night. ''If no one's talking to you, you never know what's going on, you have no idea. You would like to know something.''
Williams said he planned to go to the gym yesterday to work out and to speak to Wilkens or Thomas. ''Yeah, I wish something would happen,'' he said. ''I wish something would happen real soon.''
When the Knicks were in Atlanta on Jan. 23, Wilkens said he would be inclined to play Williams more as a backup. But the last week, Moochie Norris and even Penny Hardaway supplanted Williams as a backup point guard.
Williams has not played in three of the nine games Wilkens has coached with the Knicks, and that includes only five minutes during garbage time in the rout of Boston on Friday.
''You just got to get confidence in your coaches,'' Williams said. ''You got to get them confident to put you out on the floor. Maybe he hasn't reached it yet. Another could be he likes veterans, you never know.''
Asked if he believed he was being cast aside because he was part of Layden's era, Williams shrugged.
''You never know what's working against you,'' he said. ''You just have to go with what goes on. Move on or stay.''
Referring to the six weeks since Thomas took over, Williams said: ''It's business, everybody knows that now. It's changed, it's changed a lot. Nobody knows.''
Antonio McDyess said he had sensed the same thing just before the Knicks traded him to Phoenix. ''Nobody was talking to me; Isiah didn't say one word to me,'' McDyess said before he came to town with the Suns.
Even after trading Howard Eisley and Charlie Ward to the Suns, Thomas still had a surplus of point guards because he had acquired Norris in a trade with Houston.
Thomas is inclined to trade Williams, according to several officials in the league. He offered Williams earlier last month as part of a package deal to Cleveland for Darius Miles that was rejected.
In his first week as president, Thomas complimented Williams, comparing him to Walt Frazier. Williams started three straight games, averaging 13.3 points, before straining his groin. He has not scored more than 7 points since Marbury and Hardaway joined the team on Jan. 6.
''That's the thing about being young, you have to wait your turn,'' Anderson said.
Anderson, as an eight-year veteran and a proven role player, had more weight behind his complaints over playing time. He learned second-hand that Thomas wanted to place him on injured reserve, even though he was not injured, but Anderson said he would respond professionally.
He started the last two games in place of Houston. ''If you get another chance, by some freak incident,'' Anderson said, ''you got to be ready to play.''
PRO BASKETBALL
