Robert J. Harth, who ran Carnegie Hall, also lived there. Literally. His job as executive and artistic director came with a roomy studio apartment and loft in the adjacent annex on 57th Street. Mr. Harth, 47, was home on Friday night when he died, apparently of a heart attack, a Carnegie Hall spokeswoman said, plunging the staff into grief and stunning audiences and artists who had come to rely on his adventurous leadership and public presence. He attended almost every event presented by Carnegie Hall on its three stages: the main hall, Stern Auditorium; the intimate Weill Recital Hall; and the new underground Zankel Hall, his baby.
Since hearing of his death I keep thinking of one mid-December concert in particular. The astonishing pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard played Messiaen's ecstatic and intensely spiritual piano work, ''Vingt Regards sur L'Enfant-Jésus,'' before a packed house at Zankel Hall. In his customary seat in a side balcony Mr. Harth, like a proud papa, surveyed the whole audience, which included a heartening number of young people. My guess is that many of those in attendance that night had scant idea of what they were in for with this mystical and extraordinary work. But under Mr. Harth the artistic team at Carnegie Hall had made Zankel seem a happening place where musical odysseys awaited. Once the performance began, though, you could see Mr. Harth leaning forward, riveted by the music, no longer the administrator, just another concertgoer.
Mr. Harth began his tenure five days after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and soon proved himself the right man for the right job at the right time. He was brought in to provide steadiness after the brief and contentious tenure of Franz Xaver Ohnesorg, whose autocratic management style provoked a wave of staff resignations and pervasive insecurity among those who remained.
Mr. Ohnesorg, who arrived in 1999 after running the Cologne Philharmonie in Germany, acted as if he had inherited a stodgy institution badly in need of a shake-up. But he never convincingly articulated what the problems were that warranted such an upheaval. Artistically his thinking seemed right in line with that of his predecessor, Judith Arron, who presided over a 12-year period of solid growth than ended with her death in 1998.
Facing a demoralized staff, Mr. Harth fostered collegiality, demystified the director's post and continued with the Carnegie Hall mission: to present the great artists and ensembles of the world, both fledglings and masters; to devise educational offerings; to bring music students to the institution for training workshops; and especially to commission and perform new works. His attitude toward contemporary music was refreshingly free of agenda. Living composers were not some special cause or somber obligation. Rather, it was only natural for anyone interested in the great heritage of classical music to be curious about what's going on today.
The construction of Zankel Hall was under way when Mr. Harth arrived, though the post-9/11 economic downturn forced him to delay its scheduled opening. While he never got too specific, Mr. Harth hinted that he would have done some things differently had he been involved in the hall's planning from the start. Zankel was conceived as a multiuse hall with six configurations of stage and seats. But changing the setup has proved cumbersome; it's not clear that the hall's flexibility will be all that useful.
Still, he thoroughly embraced Ms. Arron's vision of Zankel as a 21st-century space hospitable to world music, jazz and popular styles as well as classical music. Though he had been trained as a violinist, flutist and composer, Mr. Harth could talk with as much insight and enthusiasm about the Orchestra of Fez, which played a program of Judeo-Andalusian music of Morocco this fall at Zankel, as about the Berlin Philharmonic.
Inevitably Mr. Harth's tenure will be associated with the proposal to merge Carnegie Hall with the New York Philharmonic, which was ready to relocate from Lincoln Center. If, as he said several times in interviews, he genuinely supported the idea when it was first broached by his board, then that was his one miscalculation. In any event, fairly soon into the negotiations he turned on the idea. He was willing to alter somewhat the operations of Carnegie Hall to accommodate the Philharmonic, but not to the extent that the institution's very identity would be compromised, which is what this merger would have meant. He even brought around to this position the chairman, Sanford I. Weill, who had been the most outspoken booster of the proposal.
Give Mr. Harth credit, though, for projecting a positive public face about the negotiations even when you sensed he was secretly hoping the whole thing would just go away. There were a few occasions when I bumped into him at concerts just after columns I had written strongly questioning the supposed benefits of the merger had appeared. Though he never offered feedback about what I had written, he would greet me all bearish and affable with a glint in his eye that said it all.
It's awful that Mr. Harth will miss out on the good times that seem to be coming for Carnegie Hall. There is no identity crisis to cope with, as at Lincoln Center; no managerial challenge at the forefront. Zankel is thriving, if they can just work out the kinks in a recalcitrant escalator. There is nothing pressing on the administrative roster other than the stimulating work of planning concerts and conceiving programs.
Whether the next executive and artistic director comes from within or without, this is not a time for institutional soul searching. There are staff members at Carnegie Hall who in the last five years have been through Ms. Arron's death while in office at 56, Mr. Ohnesorg's self-destructive tenure and the loss of Mr. Harth just as Carnegie Hall had rebounded. What's needed now is a leader full of ideas but free of a grand plan.
Tomorrow morning was to have been the annual Carnegie Hall news conference, followed by a buffet luncheon, to announce the new season. Naturally Mr. Harth was going to be host of the event, make the announcements, take questions and circulate among the guests during lunch. He enjoyed the back and forth with critics and the news media. When asked last year if he was going to have to hire more staff members once Zankel Hall opened and all those concerts where added to the calendar, which seemed likely, he answered in a deadpan, ''No, I'm just going to work everyone harder.''
The 2004-5 season will again be intriguingly eclectic, with visiting orchestras, recitals and chamber music galore, jazz artists, world music, pop, even a musical theater production with an extended run. Some 210 events in all. And you can bet that Robert Harth would have been in the audience for most of them.
An Appreciation
