HOW much you enjoyed the commercials CBS ran during Super Bowl XXXVIII last night depends on whether your sense of humor favors Noël Coward or the Three Stooges.
Humor is an element marketers and agencies frequently use to pique viewer interest in their extravagant Super Bowl commercials, along with music, celebrity endorsers, surprise endings and anthropomorphic animals. This time, it seemed, the almost 30 advertisers that bought the 30 minutes of commercial time -- at a record average price of $2.3 million for each 30 seconds -- dialed up the satire, slapstick and silliness, with widely varying results.
By offering viewers a lineup largely composed of light-hearted commercials full of shtick, Madison Avenue could be saying the national mood is improving or that conditions are so bad that America needs to laugh. Or perhaps the message is nothing more complicated than the following: that there is nothing funnier than a knockout, drag-down brawl between Grandma and Grandpa over a bag of potato chips.
That was the belief of one advertiser, the Frito-Lay division of PepsiCo, which used physical comedy so broad it made ''Dude, Where's My Car?'' seem like Molière. In a commercial by the Mexico City office of BBDO Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, Grandpa tripped Grandma with his cane before she could grab the bag of Lay's chips. But Grandpa was foiled when he lost his false teeth, which Grandma waved triumphantly.
Contrast that witless waste of $2.3 million with the wickedly clever parody offered by the American Legacy Foundation, which sponsors the ''Truth'' antismoking campaign. The spot deftly mocked the campaigns from tobacco marketers belatedly conceding the unhealthful effects of cigarettes by presenting an apologist for an imaginary company that makes ice pops laced with shards of glass.
''At Shards O' Glass Freeze Pops, we now agree there's no such thing as a safe glass freeze pop,'' the spokesman says in a smarmy voice. ''The only proven way to reduce health risks from our glass pops is to not eat them.''
The commercial sent viewers to a satiric Web site, shardsoglass.com, and concluded with this smug admonition: ''And remember, Shards O' Glass Freeze Pops are for adults only.'' That humorous high note of the Ad Bowl in the Super Bowl was hit by Arnold Worldwide, part of the Arnold Worldwide Partners division of Havas, and Crispin Porter &amp; Bogusky.
What follows is an assessment of some of the best and worst of other commercials with humorous approaches. The commercials described below are among 24 provided to reporters before the game.
AOL -- Members of the Teutul family, the cast of the popular reality series ''American Chopper,'' spoofed themselves in three commercials promoting a new feature of the America Online service, sold by Time Warner, called Top Speed, which improves the efficiency of regular dial-up service. In the best of the batch, one son, Mikey, attached Top Speed to a car, which sent him back in time; he returned in a cheesy costume, proclaiming he had been ''to the Renaissance.'' Hollywood should keep him in mind if Ashton Kutcher is unavailable for ''The Butterfly Effect, Part 2.'' Agency: Wieden &amp; Kennedy.
Charmin -- Someone in a threadbare bear costume, representing the new bruin brand character for Charmin, marketed by Procter &amp; Gamble, made mischief at a football game by replacing the quarterback's towel with bathroom tissue. Hilarity ensued. Or was supposed to, anyway. Agency: Publicis Worldwide, part of the Publicis Groupe.
FedEx -- In a delightful parody of bad science-fiction films , an alien found a fiendish way to masquerade as a human office worker: No matter what the alien is asked, it dutifully replies, ''Why don't we use FedEx?'' Agency: BBDO New York.
MasterCard -- One way to ensure that a commercial is truly funny is to import sitcom characters, particularly animated ones. That is what MasterCard International did in a new spot in its ''Priceless'' campaign that featured Homer Simpson and cronies from ''The Simpsons.'' But what made the commercial, well, priceless, was an extraordinarily clever script. The highlight was Homer's dudgeon when, parked as usual on his duff at Moe's Tavern, drinking Duff beer, he was admonished twice by an unseen announcer to ''spend more time with your family.'' Homer's reply: ''Yeah, yeah, I heard you the first time. Stupid voiceover.'' Agency: McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
Pepsi-Cola Four commercials for the Pepsi-Cola soft drink sold by PepsiCo ranged from mildly amusing to hilarious. The standout was a cheeky spot, introducing a promotion co-sponsored by the iTunes division of Apple Computer, that smartly teased the recording industry for suing teenagers for illegal file sharing.
Sixteen of the miscreants appeared in the commercial, identified with tongue-in-cheek labels like ''Incriminated,'' ''Accused'' and ''Busted,'' as the soundtrack played ''I Fought the Law (and the Law Won).'' The jest was topped at the end as these words appeared on screen: ''Drink down Pepsi and download music at iTunes. Legally.''
Another Pepsi-Cola commercial offered a wry trip back in time -- sans Top Speed or the Teutuls -- to a fanciful moment in 1953 Seattle when Jimi Hendrix, age 11, made a momentous decision: the guitar or the accordion? The wacky snippet of ''Purple Haze'' played Lawrence Welk-style was worth repeating; perhaps it can be offered by iTunes.
The two other Pepsi spots were centered on sight gags. One commercial, cute but familiar, showed bears dressing up as humans so they could buy a case of Pepsi-Cola; too bad there was no cross-promotion with Charmin. The second commercial, sweet but predictable, presented a mismatch at a diner between a hefty waitress and a skinny customer. Agencies: BBDO New York for the first three and Spike DDB, a joint venture of the director Spike Lee and the DDB Worldwide division of Omnicom, for the diner spot.
Sierra Mist -- Two commercials for the lemon-lime soft drink sold by PepsiCo helped put the ''gag'' in sight gag. In one, special effects were used to depict a man and his dog quenching their thirsts by jumping from a fire escape atop an apartment building into two pitchers of water. The sight of their heads protruding from the pitchers was scarier than the alien in the FedEx commercial.
In the second subpar Sierra Mist spot, a Scotsman in a kilt stood over a grate to experience a cooling moment like Marilyn Monroe's in ''The Seven-Year Itch.'' That amusing premise was ruined with a lame punchline invoking the joke about what is worn under a kilt. Agency: BBDO New York.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
