Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts seems poised to win the bulk of Missouri's 74 delegates, the richest prize in the seven Democratic presidential caucuses and primaries scheduled for Tuesday.
A victory for Mr. Kerry here, foreshadowed by all polls and expected by most local politicians, would bring the senator benefits well beyond the mere continuation of the winning streak he began two weeks ago in Iowa and continued last week in New Hampshire. Even if Senator John Edwards of North Carolina wins in South Carolina, where the race is close, that might be written off by many Democrats as a consequence of his having been born in the state.
Missouri is far from Mr. Kerry's base in Massachusetts. It is also one of the first states on the electoral calendar with large metropolitan areas -- St. Louis and Kansas City and their suburbs will account for nearly three-quarters of the vote -- and populous rural areas, too. It has a sizable African-American minority (11.2 percent) and a growing Hispanic population.
In brief, it has most of the pieces of the American puzzle.
So whoever wins here can claim to have demonstrated the sort of broad appeal that any presidential candidate needs, and done so in a state that is certain to be a battleground this fall. Missouri has been hard-fought for decades, going with the winner in every presidential race in 100 years except 1956. President Bush carried the state over Al Gore by fewer than 80,000 votes in 2000 and has visited it a dozen times since.
Speaking Saturday at the Muehlebach Hotel in Kansas City, where Harry S. Truman rented a suite, Mr. Kerry seemed to be looking past Tuesday to the fall campaign.
''I think they can hear you all the way to Karl Rove's office,'' he told a raucous crowd of 500, referring to Mr. Bush's top political strategist. ''All those lobbyists. All those powerful interests that meet in secret at the White House. They hear us coming.''
But for the state's voters, this is a phantom campaign.
Jay Curtis, 29, a St. Louis bartender, soon to enter law school, said he had ''not the faintest idea of what these guys stand for, and no clue about this election.''
Missouri is an extreme example of the consequences of this year's hyper-condensed primary schedule. The candidates had only a week for campaigning between the voting in New Hampshire and the voting here, and many of them had already committed much of that time to South Carolina when Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri pulled out of the race on Jan. 20. Until then, they had all but ceded the state to Mr. Gephardt as a favorite son.
An effort to organize a debate for Monday night collapsed because of scheduling problems.
Television advertising is relatively inefficient in state elections here, because the coverage area of Kansas City stations extends well into Kansas, and the coverage area of St. Louis stations extends well into Illinois.
Late in the game, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards bought relatively small amounts of television time, with Mr. Edwards allocating $120,000 to the state and Mr. Kerry $80,000, according to preliminary figures supplied by the campaigns. The two other major candidates, Howard Dean and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, elected not to follow suit, and Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, who made fresh buys Friday in several other states, apparently did not do so here in Missouri.
As a result, none of the candidates is very well known or very well organized here, and momentum counts for more than any other factor, including candidates' policy positions.
''In my judgment,'' said John Petrocik, a political scientist at the University of Missouri, ''most people will do what the information flow tells them to do. They've been forming their views when television and the newspapers have been dominated by stories about Kerry winning, Dean stumbling and running into money and managerial problems, and the rest not doing much.''
So far, the polls suggest that Professor Petrocik is right.
A poll by The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, the state's largest newspaper, completed Friday night and published Sunday morning, made it 44 percent for Mr. Kerry to 14 percent for Mr. Edwards, with 19 percent undecided. Other candidates were in single digits. The margin of error was 4.5 percentage points. Two other surveys showed similar results.
Here as elsewhere, Democratic voters express intense interest in finding a candidate -- almost any candidate -- who could defeat Mr. Bush. Typically, Marian Brickner, a University City photographer, told The Post-Dispatch, ''I want to vote for the winner.''
In a state still deeply mired in recession, the economy is a major concern, especially in St. Louis, where the Ford Motor Company announced the layoff of 1,000 assembly-line workers in suburban Hazelwood last week. Cutbacks in aircraft manufacturing have hurt, and the severe slump in air travel has made one entire concourse at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport redundant.
On Wednesday, Mr. Edwards made flying visits to St. Louis and to Springfield, in the southern part of the state, where conservative Democratic allegiances go back to the Civil War. On Saturday evening, he spoke in Kansas City.
Mr. Kerry, also here Wednesday, made a point of reminding his partisan crowd that if he were elected, former Gov. John Ashcroft, an even more polarizing figure in Missouri than in the nation as a whole, would promptly cease to be attorney general. His brief stop in Kansas City Saturday was his last scheduled visit of the campaign in Missouri.
General Clark, who comes from neighboring Arkansas, has not confirmed a Missouri stop, although his local supporters have been talking about an appearance on Monday.
Dr. Dean's strategy perplexes Missouri politicians. He drew an exuberant crowd at the Missouri History Museum here Friday morning, with 400 people packing an auditorium and 250 more watching a television relay. One man in the crowd, echoing the 1948 campaign, yelled, ''Give 'em hell, Howard.''
But his campaign manager here, Richard King, said he would be happy to come in second or third, and the candidate's national strategists have conceded that he may win none of Tuesday's seven contests or even Saturday's two caucuses.
Dr. Dean told supporters here that his goal was to win 15 percent of the vote, a very modest target for someone considered the front-runner until last month. If he does not reach 15 percent, he will be entitled to none of Missouri's 74 elected delegates, although he might get some of its 14 ''superdelegates,'' drawn from the ranks of party leaders.
''He had an energetic group of volunteers here last year and early this year,'' said Jo Mannies, The Post-Dispatch's political correspondent, ''but after Iowa there was no follow-up at all. Nothing. Absolutely nothing.''
With the candidates largely absent, campaigning has consisted mostly of mailings, telephone calls, e-mail and commercials.
Endorsements by local politicians have provided further grist for the political mill, even if they have not changed the basic situation much. Mr. Kerry has won support from former Senators Jean Carnahan and Thomas F. Eagleton (who called him ''the most electable'' candidate), the mayors of Kansas City and St. Louis and two former governors. Mr. Edwards is backed by Lt. Gov. Joe Maxwell and Representative Ike Skelton, among others.
Perhaps more important, Mr. Kerry was able to hire Roy Temple, an experienced Missouri political operative with close ties to Mrs. Carnahan, as state campaign director.
But Mr. Gephardt plans to issue no endorsement at least until after the primary, his aides say. Gov. Bob Holden, a close Gephardt ally, also remains uncommitted. Local television and newspaper coverage has been limited, even in the big cities, and yard signs and bumper stickers are few and far between.
''It's all very low-key,'' said Professor Petrocik. ''You'd think political science students would be following the campaign avidly, but when I tried it on my class this week, a couple of them were unaware of the primary.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MISSOURI
