As it turned out, nothing could distract Roger Federer: not the absence of a coach, not the fireworks display that interrupted his fourth-round match with Lleyton Hewitt, not his rise to No. 1 for the first time, not even the thumping bass from a nearby concert that reverberated ominously through Rod Laver Arena on Sunday as he played his first Australian Open final.
Federer was impervious to it all, carving forehands, slicing backhands, sensing opportunities and reading the flow of play. At Wimbledon last July, he shed tears on court after winning his first Grand Slam singles title. But this time, despite facing a tougher second-week draw, he remained self-contained, smiling politely as the compliments flowed from his observers and opponents, but projecting much more quiet confidence than delight.
Surpassing talent can be a burden as well as a gift, and during his early years on Tour, it weighed heaviest on Federer at the Grand Slam events, which define a player's place in the game. But winning Wimbledon has clearly allowed him to swing more freely, and to watch him bear down and work his way through points and potential trouble in Australia was to watch someone more intent on excelling at his craft than on proving anything to outsiders.
He looked comfortable and calm, offering up only the occasional yelp of frustration or the much more frequent clenched fist of satisfaction.
''I'm not going to start praising myself,'' Federer, a 22-year-old from Switzerland, said on Sunday after beating Marat Safin in straight sets, 7-6 (3), 6-4, 6-2. ''But just for me, the game feels natural. I feel like I'm living the game when I'm out there. I feel when a guy is going to hit the ball. I know exactly with the angles and the spins. I just feel that I've got that figured out, and that is just a huge advantage.''
It certainly seemed so here. He lost only two sets in seven matches and was never pushed to the limit. Though he decided to leave his longtime coach, Peter Lundgren, in the off-season after the finest year of his career, he seemed better than ever tactically in Melbourne, beating Hewitt and David Nalbandian of Argentina, two consistent, tenacious baseliners who have given him fits over the years.
But despite learning from John McEnroe on Sunday that players often went without coaches in previous eras, Federer has no intention of going it alone in the seasons to come.
''It was very difficult to take that decision,'' he said of his parting from Lundgren. ''But looking back, I wouldn't say it was the right one, but it was an important one, because I want to improve. I want to hear new information. I'll look around and hopefully I'll find a coach soon. Because at 22, it's too early not to work with a coach.''
Federer has the game to win all of the Grand Slam titles, a situation that already had him fielding premature questions on Sunday about completing the Grand Slam this year. No man has won all four in the same calendar year since Rod Laver of Australia in 1969, and no man has won the first two in the same year since Jim Courier of the United States in 1992.
Unless Federer finds another gear, it should be a compelling and highly competitive season for the men. Concern about the integrity of drug testing remains a major issue, and the World Anti-Doping Agency is considering whether to reopen proceedings against Bohdan Ulihrach of the Czech Republic and six other unidentified players who were exonerated last May by the ATP after testing positive for the steroid nandrolone. Greg Rusedski of Britain, who has also tested positive for nandrolone, is scheduled to face a hearing later this month in Montreal.
But on the court, there is an appealing balance of young stars like Federer and Andy Roddick and well-established ones like Andre Agassi, who was beaten by Safin in the semifinals.
That match, the best of the tournament, was played on Thursday night, and night matches will now be the rule for the men in the final stages of the Australian Open. As part of a new five-year television agreement, the men's final will be shifted out of its traditional 2 p.m. slot to 7:30 p.m., making it the first men's Grand Slam final to be played in prime time in its host country. The United States Open women's final is already played at night.
The decision means that the men will no longer need to contend with the full force of the Australian summer heat in the last two rounds of the tournament (it was not a factor this year). But the time shift also has consequences for North America. In its current time slot, the broadcast of the men's final began at 10 p.m. Saturday night on the East Coast. Next year, the tournament's centennial year, the men's final will begin at 3:30 a.m. on the East Coast and after midnight on the West Coast.
''It's a balancing act,'' Paul McNamee, the Australian Open tournament director, said. ''We've been sensitive to the U.S. market by keeping the women's final in the daytime. But we're being sensitive to the European market by moving the men's final. We see it as even-handed.''
TENNIS
