No doubt about it: the search site looks an awful lot like Google, with its spare design and brightly colored letters. But the name is Booble, and it is a search engine for sex sites.
Along with the name, another clue to its bawdy nature can be found in the lewd liberties taken with the double O in the logo, which to reprint in a family newspaper would require pasties. Google, claiming trademark infringement, sent a cease and desist letter to the operators of the Booble site.
The parody site struck back by posting a disclaimer that says ''Booble.com is not affiliated with any other search engines'' -- and then adds the zinger -- ''for starters, we have a sense of humor.'' There is also a link to a fake Google search for ''sense of humor'' that ''did not match any Google documents.'' There is also a claim that the site is a parody, and thus receives a measure of protection under copyright and trademark law.
But the letter from Google states, ''We dispute that your assertion that your Web site is a parody.''
Google is no stranger to copyright and trademark issues. The company is being sued in federal court in New York over the sale of advertising that accompanies searches. In the suit, the American Blind &amp; Wallpaper Factory claims that the practice gives competitors a free ride on the company's hard-won name recognition, and is demanding that Google stop selling advertising based on phrases that violate its copyright.
Meanwhile, back at the sex trade, the creator of the Booble site would comment for this article on condition that he be identified as Bob, because he runs a Web site development company that he does not want to be associated with a pornography search engine.
The searches, he said, draw on a database created by his company, which receives some advertising income, ''enough to pay for hosting -- and our lawyers,'' he said.
The site started as a joke, Bob said. But after reports of Google's attempt to shut it down hit the Web news site Slashdot last week, Booble.com started getting a million visitors a day. The operators plan to keep the parody going, with graphics for Valentine's Day that will play off Google's custom of placing heartwarming, playful drawings around its logo letters.
''That's just low-hanging fruit,'' Bob said. ''Our illustrator has come up with some very wicked ideas.''
''One of my partners says, 'It's going to be over in seven days,''' he said, adding that he disagreed. Bob maintains that Booble will have legs as long as ''Google keeps writing to us.''
JOHN SCHWARTZ
