Northern Westchester, with its exclusive neighborhoods and bedroom communities, could hardly be mistaken for Russia.
But there is a certain part of the county that at this time of year seems more like Siberia than suburbia: a frozen lagoon on the Muscoot Reservoir next to Interstate 684 that attracts dozens of men originally from Russia and Eastern Europe.
Driven by homesickness, the men come from Brighton Beach and Kew Gardens and other places in Brooklyn and Queens. The frozen reservoirs up here resemble the cold, icy, lonely expanses of home, where ice fishing is a way of life. Here they can once again huddle in the cold over small holes in the ice, coaxing golden, glistening fish out of the frigid darkness.
Many of them are up in years and can be recognized by their fur hats, weather-beaten faces and thick mustaches. They sip vodka and indulge in nostalgia for their homeland.
On Saturday, with temperatures in the teens, dozens of men gathered in groups and spoke Russian. Sitting on plastic buckets, they worked their fishing lines equipped with good Russian fishing tackle and amassed piles of fish -- bluegills, perch, crappies and sometimes pickerel -- flopping in the snow.
In the relative warmth of the sun, the fishermen seem to gather by former Soviet republics, with the Ukrainians and Georgians closest to the highway. One Eastern bloc of anglers gathered in the shade of the trees near the shore, where it was numbingly cold. One of them, Alexander Berezanskiy, is from Siberia.
''To a Russian, this is nothing,'' said Mr. Berezanskiy, ladling ice chunks out of his fishing hole with a perforated scoop, ''and to one who is from Siberia, it is excellent weather.''
Less hardy fishermen -- the soft, the solvent and the sensible -- fly to warm places and find fish with their wallets, say these men, who relish temporarily spurning American luxury and returning to the icy solitude of their youth.
''When I am here, I feel like I am home,'' said Vladimir Rudia, 43, from Ukraine, who lives in Brooklyn and owns a construction business. ''Here, I don't know any bad friends or any good friends. I know nothing. When I am here, I forget everything. I come out one day a week, and have energy for the rest of the week.''
He added, ''It's crazy, yes, but good crazy.''
For bait, the men use wax worms and light tackle to feel even a small tug at the bait, so the hook can be quickly yanked and set in the fish's mouth. A short fishing rod is used, with a flexible tip from Russia that allows the bait to bob softly in the water, to make it appear that the worm is swimming. Feeling a nibble, Mr. Rudia dropped his rod and pulled up his line, hand over hand.
''This is Russian technology,'' he joked as he pulled a perch up through his narrow ice hole. He was fishing with Jan Zabierek, 71, and Adam Dobrzynski, 52, both Polish immigrants who live in Queens.
Mr. Zabierek, a retired cabinet maker living in Forest Hills, sat on an empty plastic kitty-litter bucket. From one pocket, he proudly pulled a small metal cigar case containing his homemade lures and others brought from Russia. From the other pocket, he pulled a bottle of yellowish, cloudy liquid: 160-proof vodka sweetened with honey. It tasted like sweet fire and banished the cold.
Nearby, three local residents, drinking Budweiser from cans, fished for pickerel. Also nearby, three Ukrainian men from Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, sat in a tight triangle, fishing in silence except to answer their cellphones. Mr. Rudia ignored the Americans catching fat pickerel with their modern American technology and live shiners.
Vladimir Oransky, 74, from Ukraine, and Vladimir Podolsky, 78, from Georgia, said they had come from Queens to sit with friends, share a drink and ice fish like they did in the old country. ''Ice fishing is very important to Russians,'' Mr. Podolsky said.
Mikhail Lepisko, 67, from Brooklyn, a retired welder who moved to New York seven years ago from Volgograd, the former Stalingrad, said, ''Here, everyone is the same age.''
''Fishing used to be my hobby,'' said Mr. Lepisko. ''Now it is my profession.''
Mikhail Berdichevskiy, an 80-year-old Ukrainian immigrant now from Brooklyn, who has had two bypass surgeries, said he has been coming for his health.
''The cold is good for the condition,'' said Mr. Kiev, as he trudged across the lake on Saturday, lugging his equipment.
Nearby, David Israelov, 66, was pulling out fish after fish. Mr. Israelov, who hails from Leningrad, now St. Petersburg, and lives in Queens, buffered himself from the cold with his fur hat, cigarettes and a thermos of hot tea.
Asked his secret, Mr. Israelov said a Russian word for patience. His fishing partner, Denis Kogan, 27, a Brooklynite who grew up in Moscow, said of Mr. Israelov, ''He doesn't speak English fluently, but he catches fish fluently.''
Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  An article on Feb. 2 about Eastern Europeans who gather in northern Westchester County for ice fishing misstated the surname of a fisherman at one point. He is Mikhail Berdichevskiy. (Kiev is the name of his native city.)
