He had failed on two earlier attempts, but this was Adam Vinatieri's time. Two years ago, Vinatieri had kicked a 48-yard field goal as time expired to give the Patriots their first Super Bowl victory. Now, with the score tied Sunday because his two previous attempts had missed, Vinatieri was called on again.
Before this game, Vinatieri had been nearly flawless indoors -- 31 of 33 in his career. Still, he missed a 31-yard attempt wide right when he was too fast on his approach; perhaps, Vinatieri admitted, because he was excited.
A 36-yard attempt later in the first half was blocked when the Panthers put pressure on the kick up the middle, leaving the Patriots with no points despite excellent field position. And leaving Vinatieri shaking his head in bewilderment.
This time, the kick was for 41 yards. And this time, Vinatieri did what he does best. For the 16th time in his eight-year career, he kicked the game-winning field goal in overtime or with less than a minute remaining in regulation. This kick, which gave the Patriots a 32-29 victory over Carolina, will add to Vinatieri's considerable legend as one of the best clutch kickers in National Football League history.
He has become something of a folk hero to fans and other kickers since he made a 45-yard field goal in a blizzard that put the Patriots into overtime against the Raiders in a divisional playoff game two years ago.
That, Vinatieri said earlier this week, was the kick of which he was most proud, better even than the Super Bowl winner he kicked against the Rams. But after Sunday night's kick, he might have to reconsider, particularly considering that the Panthers seemed to have seized the momentum late in the game and Vinatieri would have been the goat if the Patriots had lost.
''It never gets old,'' Vinatieri said. ''It's still the most difficult kick I've had -- the game-tying field goal.
''With this type of venue, the pressure is on, there is never an easy one. You try to block all that out. It doesn't matter if it's the Super Bowl or practice three months from now. I'll cherish this one for a long time.''
Vinatieri had been uncharacteristically erratic this season. He has had back pain and the Patriots have used three long snappers and two holders.
He missed nine field-goal attempts in the regular season and his accuracy rate was 73.5 percent, by far the lowest of his career, well below his career average of 80.6 percent.
Vinatieri had kicked a 28-yard field goal in overtime when the Patriots beat the Texans in Reliant Stadium Nov. 23 -- the last game in which the Patriots trailed until the Panthers took a brief lead late in the game Sunday, and the last game in which Vinatieri had missed two field-goal attempts. He also had kicked the game-winner against Tennessee in a divisional playoff game Jan. 10.
But on Sunday, Vinatieri seemed to revert to his early-season struggles, when he missed four kicks over a three-game span.
''Honestly, you almost have to get those out of the back of your head and move forward and just hope you get an opportunity at the end of the game to make a difference,'' said Vinatieri, a championship T-shirt pulled tight over his shoulder pads.
''I felt like they fought so hard for 59 minutes, it was only fitting. With nine seconds left, the only thing that matters is that kick right there.''
For all of his struggles, it was hard to imagine the Patriots wanting anyone else trying a game-winning kick. Vinatieri, like most of his teammates, changed shoes on his plant foot during halftime, so that he was wearing longer cleats to combat the slick turf.
Coach Bill Belichick has said that Vinatieri is more a football player than a kicker. He works out with his teammates in the off-season and won respect from defensive players when he ran down Herschel Walker from behind on a return when Vinatieri was a rookie.
Rodney Harrison called Vinatieri ''Mr. Clutch.''
''He's a pressure kicker,'' Belichick said. ''Nobody makes all of them, but if you have to have one kick with everything on the line, he's the guy I want kicking it. It was a great kick. That was the game. That's what Adam is here for.''
Vinatieri said he was upset after he missed the first two kicks, but he tried to block that out. As he prepared for the game-winner, his teammates avoided speaking to him, as they usually do. Carolina called a timeout to try to rattle him. Vinatieri doesn't think that works, and he said it gave him the chance to take a few deep breaths.
Finally, with another title on his foot, Vinatieri made the kick. In a moment of excruciating pressure, Vinatieri was in his comfort zone.
''It just came down to rhythm,'' he said. ''And to win this thing and get the heck out of here. Every player has 'X' number of plays. You try to make the best of every opportunity you get.''
PRO FOOTBALL
