A sign welcoming visitors to this faded town proclaims it ''Space City, U.S.A.,'' but even before the shuttle Columbia broke up over Texas last February, the description fit less and less.
True, the town could still count on tourists by the tens of thousands coming to watch shuttle launchings from its restaurants, parks and hotels. But the golden years of the Apollo program, when Titusville was a thriving bedroom community for the still-young Kennedy Space Center, were long gone.
The economic havoc that followed the demise of NASA's lunar landing program in 1972 and the Challenger shuttle explosion in 1986 taught Titusville and the rest of the Space Coast, as this strip of Florida breathlessly christened itself in the 1960's, that the space industry was no bedrock. And so the Space Coast has worked to become much more than its name suggests.
''We've grown up around the space center and there are still a lot of ties,'' said Walt Johnson, executive director of the Space Coast Economic Development Commission, whose aim is to attract new industry though its logo remains a shuttle circling Florida. ''But we've worked diligently to get other businesses into the area that aren't space-related.''
The aerospace industry now employs only 18 percent of the work force here in Brevard County, according to the Brevard Workforce Development Board, compared with 28 percent at the time of the Challenger explosion 18 years ago and 56 percent at the end of the Apollo program in the early 1970's.
The space industry has diversified, too, with launchings of commercial and military satellites now far more common than those of exploratory spacecraft like the shuttles, which made 113 missions over 22 years before being grounded after the Columbia disintegrated re-entering the atmosphere last Feb. 1. The space center has also been busy, even hiring several hundred workers to help overhaul the aging shuttle fleet and meet other recommendations made by an independent board that investigated the Columbia accident.
Layoffs, which plagued many NASA contractors after the Challenger disaster, were minimal after the Columbia's breakup, Mr. Johnson and others who monitor the region's economy said.
Still, people here are longing for the day a soaring shuttle again stirs awe from places like Paul's Smokehouse, a restaurant in Titusville, just across the Intracoastal Waterway from the space center. This is, after all, a region whose residents lobbied successfully in the 1990's to get the nation's first vanity area code, 321, as in countdown.
''When it was going, this place was packed,'' said Rusty Williams, the host at Paul's, describing how customers would line up at the door up to five hours before a final countdown, eager to see, hear and feel the liftoff. ''We'd charge just to get in.''
Business is not bad now, Mr. Williams said, but nothing comes close to a day with a shuttle launching.
With President Bush's proposal in January to send astronauts back to the Moon by 2020, and eventually to Mars, and the two Mars rovers' current mission, there is new optimism. Daniel LeBlanc, chief operating officer of the space center's visitor complex, said it had twice its usual 2,000 to 3,000 visitors on each day of the rovers' launchings last summer. And even if the next shuttle is not launched on Sept. 12, as NASA's tentative plan goes, there are unmanned missions to Saturn and Mercury to follow this year.
''Cool things are happening right now,'' Mr. LeBlanc said. ''It's definitely energizing.''
Still, some small companies that provide services to the National Aeronautics and Space Administration are hurting. Russell L. Gray, president of Precision Fabricating and Cleaning of Cocoa Beach, which performs maintenance on shuttle launching pads, said he had laid off 30 of his 75 employees in the past year.
''It has been very tough for all the companies in my position,'' Mr. Gray said. ''We need work.''
Businesses like Paul's sorely miss the tourists -- up to 150,000 pour into the region for each launching, tourism officials estimate. But most people interviewed said the Columbia disaster's impact on the economy was not nearly as bad as they had feared, because there were some positive things to offset it and the region is less reliant on the space program than it once was.
The frenetic growth of the Orlando area is reverberating here, as development spreads toward the coast. In fact, for the first time since the Apollo era, Mr. Johnson said, Titusville is experiencing a small housing boom. Last year 373 homes were built here, compared with just 60 in 1998.
Melbourne, in southern Brevard County, has capitalized on the region's reputation for a highly educated and scientifically inclined work force to attract technology and military-related companies. And Cocoa Beach, a few miles south of the space center, has aggressively promoted itself as the surfing capital of the East Coast and the closest beach to Disney World.
Tourism at the Kennedy Space Center remains far below the 2.8 million people who the Orlando/Orange County Convention and Visitors Bureau said visited in 1998. In 2002 and 2003, about 1.5 million people visited, according to Mr. LeBlanc, who said the dropoff was more a factor of the terrorist attacks and the war in Iraq than of the grounding of the shuttle fleet.
To combat the downturn, Kennedy's tourism operation has done its own diversifying, adding attractions like daily question-and-answer sessions with astronauts and a daylong astronaut training camp for teenagers and adults. The effort may be paying off: this Christmas season was the Kennedy visitor complex's best in years, Mr. LeBlanc said.
Brenda Mulberry, who owns Space Shirts, a T-shirt store outside the space center, said the recent fascination with Mars was a rare bright spot in a few years of decline. Paradoxically, the Columbia disaster gave her business a lift two months last year, she said, as people hungered for commemorative items.
But the store suffered last Easter, usually the area's busiest season for tourism, because of the war, Ms. Mulberry said, adding that business had not boomed since 1998, when John Glenn returned to space. One of her shirt designs is of a rocket taking off against the backdrop of an American flag, with the words, ''Return to Flight'' and ''Keep the Dream Alive!''
Like many others who live and work near the space center, Ms. Mulberry said she was skeptical that there really would be a September shuttle launching.
''I don't see things happening now that would be happening if it were really getting ready to go,'' she said.
Yet while the center's empty viewing stands and darkened countdown clock had the look of relics one recent day, a construction site for a new operations building was bustling, as was work on one of the launching pads. In one hangar, technicians buzzed around the Atlantis, the next shuttle to go up. A sign overhead read ''83 Days to Roll Out,'' referring to the time for the Atlantis to move to a more final stage of preparation.
Despite Ms. Mulberry's doubts about a launching date, she and others expressed confidence that the shuttles would return to space in the not-too-distant future, and that when it came time to build the new manned space vehicle proposed by Mr. Bush, Kennedy would thrive again.
''The president's announcement put a time frame on it,'' said Mr. Johnson, of the economic development commission. ''Everything we hear and know from every source is it's a when, not an if.''
When someone delivered the latest issue of a Space Coast tourism guide to Ms. Mulberry's shop recently, she brightened to see the cover photo: a shuttle blasting off. The previous issue's cover was of a beach scene, which she said could have been anywhere in the Sunshine State.
''It's one thing we have that no one else has,'' said Mr. Johnson, whose office building sits next to a rusting mock-up rocket from the Apollo era. ''We can look out our windows and see launches, and it can be so inspiring.''
Though NASA has a much larger presence in Houston, where Mission Control takes over supervision of shuttles as soon as they clear the launching pad, people here think of their region's role as equally important, and more poetic. Mr. LeBlanc, from the Kennedy visitor's complex, grew dreamy when he spoke of it, saying: ''It's the only place on Earth that man ever left this planet to set foot on another celestial body.''
