Person-to-person transmission of avian influenza is ''one possible explanation'' for some cases of the viral respiratory disease that occurred among family members who attended a wedding in Vietnam in early January, an official of the World Health Organization said Sunday.
The groom, 31, and two of his younger sisters died. The bride became ill but recovered and was the only survivor in this cluster, said the official, Dr. Klaus Stöhr.
If additional studies confirm the explanation, it will be the first known case of person-to-person spread of the virus during the current outbreak of avian influenza, or bird flu, that has affected at least eight Asian countries. The virus has decimated poultry flocks in Asia and has prompted the killing of more than 25 million birds.
But an extensive epidemiological investigation has found no evidence of further transmissions from the family group to other people and no respiratory illness among people in the village, said Dr. Stöhr, an influenza expert at the W.H.O., a Geneva-based United Nations health agency.
Because the virus apparently ''vanished'' after causing the cluster of infections, Dr. Stöhr said, his agency does not consider the possible person-to-person spread a major public health threat. Similar transmission, limited to a short chain of people and with a definite end, occurred in earlier avian influenza outbreaks in Hong Kong, he said.
However, health officials fear that if the virus is not eliminated it may swap genes with a human influenza virus, causing a new virus that could cause a worldwide epidemic.
The cluster brings to 10 the number of human infections in Vietnam from the A(H5N1) strain of avian influenza. Eight have died. A ninth has recovered. The tenth is in a hospital. [The deputy director of the Tropical Disease Hospital in Ho Chi Minh City, Tran Tinh Hien, said Monday that an 18-year-old patient there, the 11th case in Vietnam, had died of bird flu, Agence France-Presse reported.] Vietnamese health officials have linked all human cases there, except possibly for some in the family group, to contact with infected poultry.
[In Thailand, a 58-year-old woman has become the third confirmed death from bird flu, the director of the disease control department, Charal Trinvuthipong, said Monday, the French news agency also reported.]
Vietnam was the first country where bird flu was detected this winter. Tests showed that the A(H5N1) strain had mutated from the one that caused outbreaks in Hong Kong in 1997 and 2003. The disease, which is spread mainly in feces but also in saliva and respiratory secretions, is widespread in Vietnam.
After their investigation of the cluster, Vietnamese and World Health Organization epidemiologists found a link between two of the cases and contact with chickens or ducks, but not for all four cases.
With no other explanation, health officials could not exclude the possibility of person-to-person transmission for two of the cases, Dr. Stöhr said in a telephone interview.
Members of the Vietnamese family gathered in late December to prepare for the wedding on Jan. 4 in a village in Thai Binh province, southeast of Hanoi.
The groom became ill with severe respiratory symptoms on Jan. 6, was admitted to a hospital in Hanoi in Jan. 7 and died there on Jan. 12. Doctors did not test him for bird flu.
Meanwhile, one sister and the bride developed similar respiratory symptoms on Jan. 10. The second sister became ill on Jan. 11.
The sisters, ages 30 and 23, were admitted to a hospital in Hanoi on Jan. 13 and died on Jan. 23.
Tests performed in Vietnam for evidence of the A(H5N1) virus were inconclusive, W.H.O. said, but confirmation of avian influenza came on Saturday from extensive testing in Hong Kong at a laboratory in the W.H.O. influenza network.
Epidemiologists learned that the groom and one sister handled ducks before their illness. But the scientists found no evidence that the second sister and the wife had had contact with poultry, Dr. Stöhr said. He also said the investigation team found no evidence of illness among poultry in the victims' village.
Epidemiologists have collected blood samples from many other people, including neighbors in the village and those who did not attend the wedding. .
Scientists are also analyzing the molecular structure of the virus isolated from the cluster to determine if it differs from that found among other cases in Vietnam. If small changes were found, Dr. Stöhr said, they would be of interest to virologists but would be unlikely to have public health significance. But if the virus has picked up genes from a human flu virus, it will be of concern to health officials everywhere.
