A man with a long criminal record was arrested on Saturday and charged with terrorizing the Upper East Side last week in a string of sexual assaults and robberies that victimized three women and a man, police officials said yesterday.
The police arrested the man, Kevin White, 34, in Union City, N.J., after the victims identified him in a lineup. He was charged with three counts of sexual abuse, two counts of sodomy and four counts of robbery, among other charges, said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for the Manhattan district attorney's office. The police have also charged Mr. White in connection with an Oct. 16 attack on a man in the East Village.
In a seven-day rampage beginning Jan. 24, Mr. White robbed and then sexually assaulted two women, 19 and 24, and a 25-year-old man, and robbed another woman who managed to escape, the police said. In each case, Mr. White told the victims that he had a gun, the police said, and two of the sexual assaults occurred after he had followed them into their apartments. The police said they never recovered a weapon and did not know whether he had used one.
''Thank God they got him,'' said Saead Zokari, a clerk at the 92nd Street Gourmet Deli and Grocery, where the police say Mr. White forced one of his victims to withdraw money from an A.T.M. on Tuesday before assaulting her at her apartment nearby. Three of the attacks took place on East 92nd Street.
Mr. White's last known address is a house in Queens where neighbors said his father lived, though the police said they believed that Mr. White had been staying with a woman in Union City.
Mr. White has a lengthy criminal history: from 1990 through 2002, he was convicted on 25 charges, from disorderly conduct to possession of a weapon and selling marijuana. In one case, he was arrested on a rape charge, but was convicted on a lesser charge, the police said, though they did not release details about that case. Correction Department officials did not release information yesterday about whether Mr. White had served time in prison. Mr. White was not on parole at the time of his latest arrest, the police said.
The police are investigating whether Mr. White was involved in other crimes, they said.
Before Mr. White's recent crime spate, he robbed and tried to sexually assault a 32-year-old man in the East Village on Oct. 16, Ms. Thompson said. The police did not release details about the incident, but said it happened at 4:45 a.m. in the 200 block of East Second Street.
Then, on Jan. 24, Mr. White approached a 23-year-old woman on East 92nd Street between Park and Madison Avenues and told her he had a gun, the police said. The woman gave him $30, and he tried to take her to an unspecified location, the police said. She refused, pointing at someone standing nearby and telling Mr. White that the person was waiting for her, the police said.
On Jan. 27, Mr. White approached a 19-year-old woman on East 92nd Street as she was entering her apartment building around 4 a.m., the police said, then slipped in behind her and said he had a weapon. He then forced her to walk to the 92nd Street Gourmet Deli, at the northeast corner of East 92nd Street and Second Avenue.
The victim withdrew $120 and then left the store with Mr. White, who forced her back into her apartment and sexually assaulted her, the police said.
On Jan. 29, Mr. White followed a 25-year-old man into his apartment on East 85th Street at 3 a.m. and demanded money, the police said. He tied up the victim and sodomized him using a pair of scissors, the police said.
While the victim was still tied up, Mr. White took the man's money and A.T.M. card and left the apartment to try to withdraw money, the police said. After failing to do so, he returned to the apartment, untied the victim and then forced him to walk to a nearby A.T.M., where the victim withdrew $340, the police said.
On Jan. 30, a 24-year-old woman left her apartment on East 92nd Street to see who was ringing her bell outside the building. When she turned to go back into her apartment, Mr. White approached her, grabbed her purse, threw her to the ground and groped her, the police said. She fought him off, and he fled without her purse, the police said.
The police traced Mr. White to an address in Union City.
''The department reacted very quickly using excellent detective work,'' said Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly.
Several women on the Upper East Side said yesterday that the attacks had made them more wary of walking alone on the street at night.
''I think there's too many of these A.T.M.'s in all these bodegas,'' said Brigid Mackey, 22, as she picked up a can of iced tea within feet of the A.T.M. at the deli where one of the victims had been forced to withdraw money.
Others expressed relief that a suspect had been arrested.
''I'm glad they apprehended him,'' said Tony Jean, 27, who has lived on East 83rd Street for three years. ''That's one less bad guy on the streets.''
