The New York City police sergeant who died on Saturday afternoon after chasing a man selling fake brand-name watches was a healthy man who traveled the world, but his brother said yesterday that the sergeant's travels could have contributed to his death.
The sergeant, Keith Ferguson, 38, of Brooklyn, had returned a day earlier from a trip to Australia that ended with an 18-hour flight home, said his brother, Laird Ferguson. He said he suspected that a blot clot formed during the flight and was dislodged when his brother gave chase in SoHo.
An autopsy has not been completed, but Laird Ferguson said he suspected his brother died from a pulmonary embolism, an aneurysm or a heart attack. Such deaths gained more attention after a television reporter, David Bloom, died in Iraq in April of a pulmonary embolism after spending long stretches of time in cramped conditions.
''We don't know,'' Laird Ferguson said of his brother's death. ''It's a mystery.''
Yesterday, Sergeant Ferguson's father, a retired police officer who lives in Queens, and his mother, who came to New York from her home in Texas, joined Laird to prepare for Sergeant Ferguson's funeral. In between condolence calls and trips to the airport to pick up relatives, they remembered a steadfast man who had wanted nothing more in his life than to be a police officer.
A 17-year veteran of the force, he supervised one of the elite Hercules Unit counterterrorism teams that patrol the city. He had been a member of the Emergency Service Unit since 1998. Officers in the 75th Precinct in Brooklyn, where he was based, said Sergeant Ferguson exemplified professionalism. He had not been out sick in more than 10 years, Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly said on Saturday.
From his childhood in the Bronx, Keith Ferguson learned about the life of a police officer. His father, Victor, a New York City officer for 21 years, would take his sons down to the Midtown South station house, where he was assigned, to look around, but never pushed either Keith or Laird toward becoming a police officer, Laird Ferguson said.
For Sergeant Ferguson, the drive toward the police force seemed genetic, according to his brother.
He attended a boarding school and college in Pennsylvania on track and swimming scholarships, but he always wanted to return to New York, so he came home to attend John Jay College of Criminal Justice, from which he graduated, his brother said.
''He's a New Yorker,'' Laird Ferguson. ''He's a Brooklyn guy. He was a good cop, and he loved doing it.''
After joining the police force, Sergeant Ferguson was quickly promoted to detective, then sergeant, his brother said. He relished working in Brooklyn, but his relatives could talk about his love for the job only in abstract terms because, they said, Sergeant Ferguson left his war stories at work. Though Laird, a stockbroker, settled in Manhattan, Sergeant Ferguson preferred his two-bedroom co-op in Brooklyn. Laird Ferguson said he had to drag his brother above 14th Street.
At the 75th Precinct station house, in East New York, Sgt. Eddie DaSilva and Sergeant Ferguson used adjoining lockers. Sergeant DaSilva said Sergeant Ferguson was carefree and easygoing, often talking about the latest trip he was taking.
Sergeant Ferguson had gone to Australia with other officers he met in Bosnia in the early 1990's as part of a program to train Bosnian police officers, Laird Ferguson said. The trip to Australia was their reunion.
Sergeant Ferguson was with his Hercules Unit in Lower Manhattan on Saturday, at Lafayette and Grand Streets, when an officer called for assistance to chase down a dealer who had been spotted selling counterfeit designer sunglasses, the police said. The officers had caught the dealer moments before Sergeant Ferguson ran over and collapsed without a word.
