Adam Vinatieri, the New England Patriots' place-kicker, kept his head down and swung his right leg, lifting the football high above the outstretched arms of the Carolina Panthers. It was the final salvo in a taut battle of the National Football League's best teams on Sunday night.
When the ball went between the uprights from 41 yards out with four seconds remaining in Super Bowl XXXVIII, the Patriots had defeated the Panthers, 32-29, giving New England its second National Football League title in three seasons.
Vinatieri also won the 2002 Super Bowl with a game-ending field goal, and this kick concluded a frantic finish. After New England went ahead by 21-10, the lead changed hands three times in the final 6 minutes 53 seconds.
Patriots quarterback Tom Brady was the game's most valuable player for the second time. He completed 32 for 48 passes for 354 yards, with 3 touchdowns and an interception, and guided the minute-long drive to set up Vinatieri's winning kick.
The game's dramatic finish came after two unexpectedly dramatic incidents at halftime. First, Janet Jackson's right breast was exposed at the end of her duet with Justin Timberlake when he pulled off part of her top. [Page D4.] Then, the start of the second half was delayed when a streaker took the field.
The game was slow to build to its drama. But in the end, the Patriots, who concluded the season on a 15-game winning streak, took several big shots from the Panthers and refused to submit.
Vinatieri may have been the most resilient of all. He missed a 31-yard attempt in the first quarter and had a 36-yard attempt blocked by Shane Burton in the second quarter.
But Vinatieri's final attempt split the uprights and sank Carolina.
''I just looked up and it was going down the middle,'' Vinatieri said. ''It just seemed fitting.'
Brady, at 26, the youngest starting quarterback with more than one Super Bowl title, said, ''To win the way we did is incredible.'
Under the direction of Coach Bill Belichick, the former Giants and Jets defensive coordinator, New England has forged the makings of a dynasty in a salary-cap era designed to create competition in the N.F.L., not legacies.
But Carolina, which went 1-15 two years ago, almost stole the game from the Patriots.
Holding a 21-16 lead with 7:38 left, the Patriots were at the Carolina 10-yard line and driving with precision. But Brady's bad pass into the end zone was intercepted by Panthers cornerback Reggie Howard, giving the Panthers life.
''He made a big play on it,'' Brady said of Howard. ''It is one of those things that you wish you had back.''
Facing third-and-10 from his own 15, Carolina quarterback Jake Delhomme escaped pressure to his left and unfurled a deep pass down the left sideline toward the veteran receiver Muhsin Muhammad and the rookie cornerback Eugene Wilson.
The Panthers had the matchup they were looking for. Muhammad came down with the ball, pushed Wilson away and sprinted into the end zone for an 85-yard touchdown, the longest touchdown completion in Super Bowl history. After the 2-point conversion failed, Carolina led, 22-21.
From there, Brady directed the Patriots to the Carolina 1. Brady then hit linebacker Mike Vrabel, inserted into the goal-line offense, for a touchdown with 2:51 remaining. Running back Kevin Faulk scored on the 2-point conversion, giving New England a 29-22 lead.
''We were just trying to keep our poise,'' Brady said. ''You realize, in games like this, that you've got to play for 60 minutes.''
But Carolina continued to scrap. The Panthers marched behind Delhomme, who completed 16 of 33 passes for 323 yards and 3 touchdowns. He hit Ricky Proehl for 30 yards, then found him again from the 12 for a touchdown pass that tied the score at 29-29 with 1:08 to play.
The drive, like the Panthers' season, seemed improbable. Just a few years ago, Carolina was cursed with bad teams and bad luck. The team had become so dismal that fans had begged the owner to change its mascot, an oversized black cat.
But those days disappeared with Coach John Fox, another former defensive coordinator for the Giants, at the helm. In his first season, one year after a 1-15 mark, Carolina went 7-9. This season, with a fearless efficiency and sturdy running game, the Panthers advanced to the Super Bowl and did not wilt in front of a crowd of 71,525 at Reliant Stadium.
But they also did not win.
After Proehl's tying score, John Kasay accidentally sent the kickoff out of bounds. The Patriots took over at their 40-yard line with 1:08 to play.
''I caught it a little late,'' Kasay said of his kickoff. ''I was trying to make a really good kick. I got a little high and a little outside on the ball. We needed a really good kick and I didn't get it done.'
Given unexpectedly good field position, Brady steadily marched the Patriots into Panthers territory, and Vinatieri ended it.
''I'm very proud of our football team,'' Fox said. ''We just couldn't win the last one. But we have a young football team that I think is going to be around for a while.'
The Panthers proved to be a fearless foe in the biggest game in their history. With Carolina down by 21-10 early in the fourth quarter, Panthers running back DeShaun Foster broke free around left end for a 33-yard touchdown run with 12:39 left, trimming New England's lead to 21-16 when the 2-point conversion failed.
The teams combined for 37 points in the fourth quarter after struggling to move the ball at all early in the game.
The scoreless first quarter was only the fifth in Super Bowl history. When Patriots receiver Deion Branch scored the game's first points on a 5-yard pass from Brady with 3:05 left in the first half, no Super Bowl game had gone so long -- 26:55 seconds -- without a point.
Branch proved to be a reliable target for Brady, finishing with 10 catches for 143 yards.
The touchdown loosened the reins for both squads.
On Carolina's next possession, Delhomme found Steve Smith down the left sideline in single coverage against cornerback Tyrone Poole for a 39-yard score, making it 7-7.
Instead of letting the final minute of the half run out, New England kept its foot on the gas. Brady threw over the middle to David Givens for a 5-yard touchdown and a 14-7 lead. The drive covered 80 yards in 49 seconds.
But Carolina recovered Vinatieri's poor squib kick at its 47 with 18 seconds left. Davis ran up the middle for 21 yards, setting up Kasay for a 50-yard field goal on the final play, and the Patriots led, 14-10, at halftime.
The teams had posted 24 points in the final three minutes of the half after going scoreless for 27 minutes.
New England pressured Delhomme often, chasing him, spinning him around and knocking him down. The Patriots hit him so hard on one play that his left shoulder pad popped out of his jersey.
By the end of the game, the Patriots' defense had sacked Delhomme four times. They had held Carolina running back Stephen Davis to 49 yards rushing on 13 carries.
On the game's final play, Vinatieri kicked off to Carolina's Rod Smart, the player also known when he played in the XFL as He Hate Me. Smart, under a barrage of tacklers, crumpled to the ground.
Confetti showered the Patriots sideline as they replayed their victory scene from two years ago, hugging one another, dancing in the light of flashing bulbs, racing to touch the Vince Lombardi trophy once again.
Patriots 32, Panthers 29
