''Just Another Story,'' which has its premiere on Showtime tonight, recalls the early work of Barton Fink, but that's not all bad.
True, the accusations of self-righteous sentimentalism leveled at fake grit -- the kind the Coen brothers savaged in ''Barton Fink'' -- come to mind while you watch ''Just Another Story.'' (How about that self-effacing 40's title?) But the efforts by left-wingers to conjure street stories seem innocuous in hindsight.
Maybe in the day certain Marxist playwrights didn't know the real common man as well as we did, but they still wrote big monologues about how dirty money is, and these continue to bring out the best in American actors and impel audiences to their feet.
In that spirit, ''Just Another Story'' -- with its speechifying and stylization of, oh yes, the common man -- is a pleasant but slight movie even as it inspires more than one cringe with its labored ebonics, images of broken chain link and insistent references to cool street themes of the 50's like sex and getting high.
Written and directed by the hip-hop artist and playwright GQ, who also stars in the movie, ''Just Another Story'' takes place over one weekend. During that time GQ's character, Stix, a hip-hop artist, must decide how much of his dignity he'll forfeit for dough. If Clifford Odets were in charge, Stix would have had to fix a fight or rat someone out. But in GQ's moral order Stix's charge is to appear in a bunny costume in a drag show. Which might get him teased.
At the same time Stix is trying to fall in love and come to terms with a marital misdemeanor by his mother that seems to involve the neighbors. He also wants to break away from his father's mournful legacy as a milkman and become a rap star. (American stardom doesn't come in for critique in this quasi-realist parable. Is that a sign of the times?)
Stix, who is white, is nonetheless down. In a teenage-comedy subplot, however, he lacks a car to get to a big party. He ends up coercing a nerd -- Chester (Nate Mooney), who is genuinely unpleasant -- into driving, and with Stix's homeboy Rami (Omar Scroggins) and girls aplenty they get to the party and then to the beach, where they camp out.
In the course of the film everyone's eyes are opened, ''Ferris Bueller''-style, to the possibilities of love and, naturally, the wisdom of a picturesque hobo who joins them. After nightfall at the beach Stix initiates a sententious dialogue with the hobo, the first four lines of which gives a sense of GQ's Arthur Millerism:
''Can't sleep?''
''Not for the past 30 years.''
''Insomnia?''
''Regrets.''
Alerted by the exchange to the misery that might befall him unless he gets a big recording contact, GQ takes pains to get square with his family and give his music all he's got. Chester is born again into sexuality and lust for life, Rami learns a lesson about sleeping around, and Stix stumbles into a solution to his drag-show bunny-costume quandary. All the girls (especially Mylika Davis, who's very sweet as Lexi) go home satisfied.
''Just Another Story,'' unlike Fink's lefty hard-luck tales, is a comedy, and it's not skeptical -- but entirely credulous -- about what honesty and hard work might do for a man in our commercial world. It also has enough rap interludes that Showtime calls it a musical. But it's simultaneously styled as a window on the life of city people with regional accents. (Lenny Clarke as Jelly, Stix's father, brings a bit of Boston to Brooklyn.)
''It is all about keeping it real,'' reads Showtime's publicity materials for this movie, suggesting a silly but inoffensive dramatic school of keeping-it-realism whose fate is uncertain.
JUST ANOTHER STORY  Showtime, tonight at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time
Written and directed by GQ; Michael Hogan, John N. Hart and Jeffrey Sharp, executive producers; Robert Kessel and Caroline Jaczko, producers.
WITH: GQ (Stix), Omar Scroggins (Rami), Nate Mooney (Chester), Jaclyn DeSantis (Baby), Mylika Davis (Lexi), Fay Wolf (Jewels), Mimi Lieber (Gracie), Lenny Clarke (Jelly), Joanna Merlin (Sadie), Elliot Korte (Mac), Mark Hammer (Bottle), Joe Wilson Jr. (Lookey), Irma St. Paule (Grams).
TELEVISION REVIEW
