The malicious software program known as MyDoom did what it was created to do yesterday, sending tens of thousands of computers around the world into a frenzy and crashing the Web site of the SCO Group.
The company, which is based in Lindon, Utah, issued a statement yesterday that the attack had rendered its Web site ''completely unavailable.''
SCO has angered users and fans of the Linux operating system and other open source software because the company has claimed in court that Linux violates its licensing rights for the Unix operating system.
A spokesman for SCO said the company expected to have defenses in place that would allow people to reach the site by Monday morning, and to remain accessible for the duration of the programmed attacks, which are set to last until Feb. 12.
Blake Stowell, the director for public relations at SCO, declined to give details of those preparations, saying that his information technology department ''would hang me in effigy if I divulged what we had in place or didn't have in place.'' The company has offered a $250,000 bounty for information leading to the author of MyDoom; Microsoft has made a similar offer.
The MyDoom virus has spread rapidly across the Internet, infecting nearly a half-million machines by some estimates. Those computers then become ''zombies,'' which can be used to attack other computer networks by flooding them with data, or for other nefarious purposes. The virus is activated when recipients of an e-mail message, which claims to be notification of an e-mail message problem, click on the attachment.
The virus affects computers running the Microsoft Windows operating system, though users of all operating systems have been annoyed by the flood of e-mail messages generated by the program.
Although a half-million machines have been infected with the program worldwide, fewer than 200,000 of them were probably turned on and able to mount an attack over the weekend, said Craig Schmugar, virus research manager at Network Associates, a security firm. And because of a program flaw, only a quarter of the infected machines actually could begin their attacks, he said.
