TOM BRADY knew what had to be done by the Patriots' offense to win. Block the Panthers' determined defensive linemen and roving linebackers. Outmuscle and outmaneuver their defensive backs. Convert on third down in order to control the ball and the clock. When in the red zone, score a touchdown rather than settle for a field goal. And no costly turnovers.
Quite simply, do what any National Football League offensive unit usually has to do to win any game, not just last night's Super Bowl XXXVIII.
And with only 68 seconds remaining, Brady knew precisely what he had to do to break a tie with the Carolina Panthers: move the Patriots into field-goal range. He did just that, picking up 37 yards in five plays, and when Adam Vinatieri's 41-yard field goal soared between the goal posts with four seconds remaining for a 32-29 victory, the Patriots won the Super Bowl for the second time in three seasons.
''We have confidence we can do it,'' Brady said later, ''but it's unbelievable to do it the way we did it.''
Brady's use of the word ''it'' was interesting. In assessing Brady's skill as a quarterback, Charlie Weis, the Patriots' offensive coordinator, also used the word ''it'' early last week in a different context.
''You've heard the expression, a guy's got 'it,' '' Weis said. ''Well, Tom Brady got 'it.' ''
Never was that ''it'' more on display than last night, as Brady completed four passes in the last minute -- two to receiver Troy Brown for 20 and 13 yards, one to tight end Daniel Graham for 4 yards and a third-and-3 with 14 seconds left to receiver Deion Branch for 17 yards to the Panthers' 23.
That's when Vinatieri, who had missed a 31-yarder earlier and had a 36-yarder blocked, booted a Super Bowl-winning field goal, just as he did two years ago with a 48-yarder for the Patriots' 20-17 triumph over the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXVI at the Louisiana Superdome.
''If you want a guy to kick it when everything's on the line,'' Coach Bill Belichick said later, ''he's the guy you want to kick it.''
Vinatieri merely did what Brady put him into position to do with that last-minute drive after the Panthers had tied the score, just as Brady did in the Super Bowl two years ago after the Rams had tied it.
But last night, Brady almost sabotaged the Patriots, throwing an off-balance pass that Panthers cornerback Reggie Howard intercepted in the end zone with 7:38 left, when a touchdown would have opened a 26-16 lead.
That was Brady's only serious mistake as he completed 32 of 48 yards for 354 yards and 3 touchdowns in earning his second Super Bowl Most Valuable Player award.
''Tom's moving up the ladder among the best N.F.L. quarterbacks,'' Belichick said. ''He's going to be mentioned with all the best quarterbacks. Tom's a winner. He does that as well as anybody.''
Brady now has a 6-0 record in postseason games. Troy Aikman, the Dallas Cowboys' quarterback in three Super Bowl victories, had a 7-0 record as a starter before losing the 1994 National Football Conference championship game in San Francisco.
With last night's victory, the Patriots completed this campaign with a 15-game winning streak for a 17-2 overall record, joining the 1986 Giants, the 1989 49ers and the 1998 Broncos. Only the 1972 Dolphins (17-0), the 1984 49ers and the 1985 Bears (each 18-1) and the 1976 Raiders (16-1) have had a better winning percentage.
Brady knew what to expect from the Panthers, beginning with the front four of Mike Rucker, Kris Jenkins, Brentson Buckner and Julius Peppers.
''Their size, their strength, their speed,'' Brady had said. ''They're relentless. They are as tough as any D-line we have faced.''
But last night Brady was never sacked.
''Their corners,'' Brady said, ''do a great job of forcing receivers into different releases. Most of the time our receivers are going to be fighting through some press techniques and they have to be able to get open whether it's man coverage or zone coverage when they're up there bumping.''
Yet last night Brady completed 23 passes to his wide receivers, including 10 to Branch for 143 yards, 8 to Brown for 76 yards, and 5 to David Givens for 69 yards.
''If you don't run the ball, you don't control the clock,'' Brady said. ''If your running game is going, it's discouraging for the defense. When you're forced into passing situations and when you have a great defensive line like Carolina does, those guys can just tee off on the quarterback.''
In the Patriots' 24-14 triumph over the Indianapolis Colts for the American Football Conference title, they inside the 20-yard line seven times but produced only one touchdown -- Brady's 7-yard pass to Givens.
''One for seven isn't going to get it done against Carolina,'' Brady said during the week. ''
But last night the Patriots were in the red zone seven times and scored four touchdowns. The other three ended with Vinatieri's missed and blocked field goals and Howard's end-zone interception.
''The more you play, the more comfortable you are with your offense,'' Brady had said. ''I know all the plays, all the reads, all the protections, and I'm able to change the protections and modify some of the reads. I feel far more comfortable now than I did two years ago.''
And last night Tom Brady, the ''it'' quarterback, felt more comfortable than ever.
Sports of The Times
