In two weeks' time, Panthers cornerback Ricky Manning Jr.'s world turned completely around. After Carolina's drubbing of the Eagles to reach the Super Bowl, Manning was the darling of the defense for grabbing three interceptions and leaving the field in Philadelphia with a lion's share of the credit for lifting the Panthers to a most unlikely chance at a championship.
In Super Bowl XXXVIII on Sunday, Manning and the Panthers' defensive backs were on the wrong side of two huge New England drives in the fourth quarter. Worse, their strategy of bumping the Patriots' receivers to knock them off their routes backfired.
On the critical play before Adam Vinatieri's winning field goal, Patriots receiver Deion Branch shook off defensive back Terry Cousin and found an open spot in the zone defense for a 17-yard reception from Tom Brady that made all the difference.
''Should have had that,'' Manning said after the game, sitting at his locker, contemplating just how his fortunes had swung in two weeks. ''We were picking and choosing, where to make plays. We just made the wrong choices. It was just bad timing.''
The Patriots' winning drive, which began with 1 minutes 8 seconds remaining, came against a defense that had largely carried the Panthers to this point in the postseason. Carolina had a fierce pass rush, solid play up the middle and a group of defensive backs who fashioned themselves as tough customers. They roughed up the Eagles' receivers in the Panthers' 14-3 victory in the National Football Conference championship game, leading to Manning's three interceptions. The defensive backs talked for two weeks about doing the same thing to the Patriots' receivers.
The Patriots' receivers said they had been chafing at that talk, particularly from Manning. They were ready for the bumping at the line and often gave as good as they got. Near the end of the game, with the Panthers' defense tiring, the Patriots won the final battles.
''The receivers got off the jam pretty good,'' Charlie Weis, the Patriots' offensive coordinator, said. ''Not bad for a bunch of bums who aren't any good and can't play.''
In the end, the Patriots compiled 481 total yards against the Panthers' defense. Brady threw for 354 of them.
''You have to give them credit,'' Mike Minter said. ''They made some big plays, some tough catches.''
Minter was the safety who wound up chasing Branch at the end of his big play before the field goal. He watched as his cornerback lost his individual battle but was too late to go over and break up the pass. He hit Branch after the catch.
Branch said he did not know who was trying to cover him on that play, but he was smiling when he said it. ''I was just running my route,'' he said.
The pattern for the Patriots' victory had been set much earlier in the game. First, the Panthers' defense was stuck on the field for much of the first half. With their offense unable to stay on the field for any length of time, the Panthers needed their defense to keep them close. Fatigue began to set in late in the game.
With six and a half minutes left and Carolina finally grabbing a 22-21 lead, the Patriots' offense took the field on their 32 and drove for a go-ahead touchdown. In that drive, Manning was beaten for a 24-yard catch by receiver David Givens, who not only escaped Manning's bump, but also threw Manning to the ground.
On the winning drive, receiver Troy Brown was flagged for offensive pass interference in one of those collisions, giving the Patriots a first-and-20 on their 43-yard line. Brown redeemed himself on the next play with a 13-yard catch. Two plays later, Brady surveyed the Panthers' defense and saw they were in a cover-2 zone. If Branch got away from the bump, he should be open before the safety arrived.
''There's only so much the safety can do,'' Minter said. Asked if Manning had made a mistake on the play, Minter said, ''I don't need to talk about that.''
Brady said the play shaped up just as he expected.
''I think we had the perfect play called for that coverage,'' he said. ''I think we were really anticipating what they were going to do.''
They had been put in a particularly difficult spot when John Kasay's kickoff went out of bounds, meaning the Patriots started their drive at their 40, but the Panthers did not want to hear that. ''It doesn't matter where they get the ball,'' defensive end Mike Rucker said. ''We're supposed to stop them.''
The loss was tough for the Panthers' defense to swallow. This team was all about defense, built by Coach John Fox, the Giants' former defensive coordinator who was hired two years ago to turn around a 1-15 team. He started with what he knows, defense.
Carolina played valiantly early in the game, with the offense contributing nothing to the cause until the fourth quarter. But the Panthers will be remembered for giving up those two big drives late in the game. Their pass rushers did not sack Brady and their defensive backs lost those last battles that mattered.
PRO FOOTBALL
