Menbere Waldi Tzadik and her husband slipped into Israel from Ethiopia on tourist visas eight years ago and lived here in the shadows as illegal workers. They cleaned houses and sent home the small sums they saved to support two children they had not seen since leaving Ethiopia.
Ms. Tzadik, 35, ached to see her daughter and son, now ages 14 and 12, and was planning to leave Israel for good within a month. Instead, she is to be buried this week in Jerusalem, one of 11 people killed Thursday on a crowded bus by a Palestinian suicide bomber.
Ms. Tzadik's body was so badly shattered, and her family's status in Israel so tenuous, that it took almost two days before the Israeli authorities were able to confirm that she was one of the victims.
''We haven't seen the children in so long,'' Ms. Tzadik's husband, Takalign, said Sunday through an interpreter. ''She was planning to leave soon, and I was going to join her later.'' He sat on a couch, wrapped in a white blanket, saying little and appearing drained of emotion as friends made condolence visits.
After more than 100 suicide bombings in the past three years, Israel has developed a remarkably efficient response network. It includes the fleets of ambulances that descend on the scene almost instantly, as well as ultra-Orthodox Jewish volunteers from the group ZAKA, who exhaustively comb the scene to recover human remains for proper Jewish burials.
Identifying the dead from the Thursday blast was complicated by the sheer power of the 15-pound bomb, the police said. It sent body parts flying through windows and into homes along Gaza Street, just a block from the official residence of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon.
''The bomb was very, very powerful,'' said Gil Kleiman, a police spokesman. ''At the beginning, we couldn't even determine whether the bomber was a man or a woman.''
The police initially listed the toll as 10 dead plus the bomber. But members of ZAKA believed that an additional victim had been among the broken bodies they collected. The group delivered dozens of body parts to Israel's forensic laboratory near Tel Aviv, which confirmed an additional death, a woman.
But her identity was a mystery because no one immediately claimed her remains, something virtually unheard of in Israel.
Mr. Tzadik, 36, had left for work before his wife on Thursday morning, and he did not suspect that she had been harmed in the bombing shortly before 9 a.m. Only that night did he begin searching for her when she did not return home.
With his illegal status, he did not want to call the police, and he thought the most likely explanation was that his wife had been detained as part of an Israeli crackdown on illegal workers.
The fear of arrest and deportation was so great that Ms. Tzadik had changed her commuting schedule, friends said. She used to take an early morning bus with few passengers, but she thought that made her stand out, and more liable to be detained.
Recently, she took buses during rush hour in the belief she would more easily blend in. But Palestinian bombers have worked on that same premise and have often chosen crowded buses to inflict the greatest number of casualties.
The Thursday bombing, carried out by a Palestinian policeman from the West Bank town of Bethlehem, also wounded more than 40 people, about 20 of whom remained hospitalized Sunday.
Mr. Tzadik did not contact the police until Friday morning. Ms. Tzadik's brother, Birhano Berhu, who also lives in Jerusalem, then gave a DNA sample. The family's worst fears were realized when the lab reports came in during the early hours of Saturday.
''The Ethiopians here work hard at difficult jobs,'' said Dejene Tessema, a post-doctoral chemistry student at Hebrew University, and a friend of the Tzadiks. ''They make very little money and they have nothing to do with politics.''
The Tzadiks ''knew each other since high school,'' Mr. Tessema said. ''They came here because they thought they could find a better life.''
On Sunday, Ms. Tzadik's brother was trying to arrange a funeral in Jerusalem that would reunite her far-flung family -- one sister is in the United States, another is in Britain and her two children are in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital.
Mr. Tzadik said Sunday that a government social worker had visited to see if he needed help. It was unclear whether the Israeli government would take action to deport him.
More than 60,000 Ethiopian Jews have immigrated to Israel since the early 1990's and have received citizenship. But some illegal immigrants, like the Tzadiks, who are Christians, have also been coming.
In a country populated by immigrants, many of those killed in the suicide bombings are recent arrivals. The dead in the attack on Thursday included Israeli citizens who had come in the past decade from Russia, Georgia, France, Canada and Romania.
