FOR all 11 years of a journeyman's career, he swore he would never come to the Super Bowl unless he earned his way down to the field. Then Jake Delhomme was on the line, barking out an audible, making the call.
''I have two tickets for you and your son,'' Delhomme told his old friend and former teammate Billy Joe Tolliver.
''Naw, Jake, this is your day,'' Tolliver replied. ''Use them for your family.''
But here was the point Tolliver wanted to make about Delhomme of the Panthers, who lost the Super Bowl last night to the New England Patriots at Reliant Stadium but won America's hearts: It was no accident, no serendipitous bounce of fate, that Delhomme, at 29, had evolved from career scrub to the man who nearly undressed the defensive genius Bill Belichick on the game's grandest stage.
''Jake didn't ask me to come, he told me,'' Tolliver said. ''He's not a guy who takes no for answer.''
When they were saying on television that Delhomme was playing in what looked like one of the all-time Super Bowl stinkers, when the Panthers couldn't get a first down because the Patriots were beating the whiskers off them at the line of scrimmage, Delhomme stood up and showed there were answers in his right arm, his head and his heart.
Against the pressure, against the penalties, against all odds, he shredded Belichick's vaunted defense for 323 yards and 3 touchdowns, all in a little more than a half. He completed the longest play in Super Bowl history, an 85-yard touchdown pass for the fourth-quarter lead. He drove his team 80 yards in the closing minutes to forge a tie. He was everything you'd want in a championship quarterback, but Tom Brady had the last shot and didn't miss.
''I know one thing about Jake,'' Tolliver had said before Adam Vinatieri's 41-yard field goal beat the Panthers, 32-29. ''This game will not be too big for him.''
They spent most of two seasons together in New Orleans, Delhomme and Tolliver, Cajun and Texan, mostly in the film room and the weight room, and waiting on the sideline. Mike Ditka, then the Saints' head coach, made Tolliver the starter during a typically woeful Ditka-era season, 1998. He cut Delhomme the same day, another body blow during Delhomme's six-year bout with himself and the football world to keep his career upright.
He played behind so many quarterbacks, but ask Delhomme to name his mentor, the quarterback who most encouraged him to not surrender to the sadness of Sunday inactivity, and he does not hesitate for a moment.
''By far, Billy Joe Tolliver,'' Delhomme said. ''When I was first in New Orleans, I was lucky enough that he took me under his wing, and I just tried to learn from him how to be a true professional.''
It was just the veteran looking out for the youngster, Tolliver said, the way Marino once slipped him a phone number with the invitation to call anytime.
''With Jake, you couldn't help but like him, and I'll tell you why,'' Tolliver said. ''With all the guys they played ahead of him in New Orleans, I never once heard him say, 'Man, what was he thinking when he threw that pass?' Some guys just root for the guy ahead of them to fail.
''There were times when he said, 'What am I doing?' But I'd tell him, 'Jake, you'll be a starter in this league.' People always say about quarterbacks, 'He's got it,' but they don't know what 'it' is. I do. You could always see Jake had that unique ability to make people want to follow him.''
This, of course, is what is said about Brady, and with good reason.
''I don't know him from Adam,'' Delhomme said of Brady with respect, not awe, late last night. ''But you can see what a leader he is.''
Some quarterbacks just carry themselves as if they were born to win the Super Bowl. Brady, at 26 the youngest to win two, threw a fourth-quarter interception when the Patriots were about the put the Panthers away.
But when he had to get the lead back, Brady did. When he had a minute to win the game against a Panthers defense that was exhausted by the sheer weight of time spent on the field, he put Vinatieri in range, just as he did against St. Louis two years ago.
Brady threw 48 passes, completed 32, as he and Delhomme turned what was supposed to be a soccer match between the former defensive coordinators Belichick and John Fox into some kind of show. Brady lifted another most valuable player trophy, but Tolliver, waiting in the parking lot for Delhomme to call him, couldn't stop talking about how his guy had carried himself like a champion.
''Jake was pretty much what I expected,'' Tolliver said. ''He's just got it. He makes big throws in big situations.''
Delhomme stepped onto the field last night as an inspiration to every scholastic player riding the bench, every youngster cut from a travel team, every professional career knockabout like Tolliver, who watched from the stands with his 15-year-old son, Austin, and said: ''It was like watching my own child. That's how much I love this kid.''
The old quarterback, soon to be 38 and living in Shreveport, La., took the tickets, drove the four hours and saw his friend nearly steal the Super Bowl. It was Brady at the finish, but Delhomme was just warming up in the fourth quarter of a game that was almost a microcosm of his career. The bench is behind him now.
Billy Joe Tolliver was right. This game was not too big for Jake Delhomme.
Sports of The Times
