The Rev. Al Sharpton was in prime form, whipping off the kind of politically potent one-liners that have come to define his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination. The crowd was smiling, clapping, people jumping to their feet. It seemed so easy, like so many votes in the bag, when Hosea Wheeler got up to ask a question.
Mr. Wheeler is 43 years old, a lifelong resident of this area, black and until Sunday pretty certain he was going to vote for Mr. Sharpton. But first he wanted to know how the candidate stood on the issues of gay marriage and abortion.
''I do not believe that I have the right to impose my beliefs on anybody,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''I believe in what I believe. What me and my family practice is my business, but I don't have the right to make you do what I want.''
Mr. Wheeler, who said he was opposed to gay marriage and abortion, seemed to sink into his knees as he walked off.
Mr. Sharpton has worked this state like no other candidate, packing churches, reaching out to small, often overlooked groups of predominantly black voters. But as Mr. Wheeler demonstrated at a town meeting in the Smith Hazel Recreation Center here, Mr. Sharpton cannot be certain that blacks will accept his message.
''I'm just not satisfied with what he said,'' Mr. Wheeler said later, now uncertain whom he will vote for. ''He talked about improving education, withdrawing troops from Iraq, the economy. What is that if it is not imposing his beliefs on others?''
In a state where as many as half the registered primary voters are black, Mr. Sharpton chose to make his stand here, hoping a solid showing on Tuesday will elevate his status from vanity candidate to a credible leader within the Democratic Party.
He has honed his stump speech, seeming to appropriate a bit from Howard Dean. Like Dr. Dean, for example, Mr. Sharpton is now talking about how free trade agreements do not guarantee human rights for foreign workers. But he also stuck with an overarching theme that he hopes will define his candidacy; he says voters cannot lose if they vote for him, because even if he does not get the nomination, with enough delegates he will have a voice in helping to reshape the party.
''They say if you move the party to the left you'll kill the party,'' Mr. Sharpton told the audience. ''First of all, today we stand where the White House is controlled by the Republicans, the U.S. Senate is controlled by the Republicans, the U.S. Congress is controlled by the Republicans. How can I kill a party that is already dead? At best I can help bring about the resurrection.''
Mr. Sharpton says he is confident that he has chosen the right strategy and that by the time Super Tuesday comes around on March 2, he could have as many delegates as any of the so-called front-runners. But he also knows appealing to black voters does not ensure their support.
''We are not monolithic,'' said Glenda Suber, a political science professor at Benedict College and a resident of Columbia, S.C., who supports Mr. Sharpton. ''You won't have this mass bloc of voters supporting Sharpton. But I do think you have a group of African-Americans who are going to vote for Sharpton because they don't feel comfortable voting for the other candidates.''
From the beginning of his candidacy, Mr. Sharpton's goal has been to collect enough votes -- and enough delegates -- to command the same status at the Democratic National Convention in Boston this summer as the Rev. Jesse Jackson did when he ran for president in 1984 and in 1988. It has been less about winning the nomination than about proving himself the legitimate heir to the legacy of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
''This is Johnnie Cochran,'' goes one of Mr. Sharpton's radio spots playing around the state. ''There's one candidate for president who is fighting to keep Dr. King's dream alive -- Rev. Al Sharpton. A candidate with the boldness of Adam Clayton Powell, the courage of Rosa Parks and the commitment of Robert Kennedy.''
Kevin Gray, a black political activist and strategist here who once worked as Mr. Sharpton's statewide coordinator, said the appeal of voting for a black candidate -- even one who articulates his issues as eloquently as he said Mr. Sharpton does -- may be offset by the desire to pick a candidate who can actually win.
''There are people who are going to vote for him because of race,'' Mr. Gray said, ''and there are people who are asking, 'Is he electable?' Older black folk are saying they don't want to waste their vote.''
But Mr. Sharpton is working to counter that way of thinking as well. In another radio spot, a South Carolina legislator tells listeners, ''I'm not wasting my vote -- I'm voting for Rev. Al Sharpton.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MINISTER
