For those who watch sports on high-definition television, the Super Bowl has become a regular attraction in the wide-screen format. And on Feb. 15, NBC will show the Daytona 500, Nascar's stock car Super Bowl, in HDTV for the first time.
While a major focus of networks has been on televising current sports in HDTV, a start-up network called INHD, seeking to go beyond pay-per-view movies and events, has schussed back in time to convert Olympic films dating to 1948 to the new video configuration. A weekly series that began last month will continue through the summer and includes the film of the 1980 Summer Games in Moscow, which the United States boycotted.
In Technicolor, Dick Button is not the venerated figure skating commentator for ABC Sports; in the 1948 British film made by Castleton Knight, Mr. Button is an 18-year-old Harvard freshman skating across the outdoor rink in St. Moritz, Switzerland, leaping, jumping and gliding on the wide screen en route to the gold medal at the Winter Games. Judges hold up the scores from the ice's edge.
The films come from the International Olympic Committee, which began to build its archive of television and film coverage (including outtakes) of the Olympics in the last century. The project, which has grown to 50,000 hours, is as much about preservation as it is about selling the film on DVD's.
The committee has spent millions of dollars to buy or assert legal ownership of the films and video, suing in Australian court for the rights to the official film of the 1956 Summer Games in Melbourne, Australia, and negotiating with the German government to secure Leni Riefenstahl's film of the 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin that was widely viewed as propaganda for Adolf Hitler.
''This is our heritage; the history of the Olympics is so much a part of the DNA of the Olympic brand,'' said Michael Payne, director for global broadcast and media rights of the Olympic committee, said. ''We had to get it all back.''
''Sports is going through a rebirth in home viewing,'' Mr. Payne added. ''The growth of home entertainment in Europe is astonishing.''
For INHD, a subsidiary of InDemand Networks, which provides pay-per-view and video-on-demand programming to cable systems, the Olympic films provide something to its 500,000 subscribers that its competitors -- which include HDTV-only networks like Espnhd, an ESPN spinoff, and HDNet -- do not. The cost of INHD ranges from $5 to $7 a month.
''Because this is the Olympics, we think that in itself makes it important,'' said Rob Jacobson, the chief operating officer of INHD. ''The quality and resolution of some of the old stuff is so dramatic, it's a treat.''
In the United States, an estimated nine million households had HDTV sets at the end of 2003, but only 3.2 million can receive high-definition programming, according to research by the Yankee Group. It also reported that the second-most popular programming in HDTV households is sports, after movies.
''My feeling,'' Mr. Jacobson said, ''is that with better programs, HD growth will be stimulated.''
The films trace the postwar history of the Olympics from 1948 to 1992 through the visions of filmmakers like Bud Greenspan, an American who has made seven official Olympic films including the 1984 Summer Games in Los Angeles; Hans Schubert of Germany (the 1960 and 1964 Winter Games); Tony Maylam and Michael Samuelson of England (the 1976 Winter Games); Masahiro Shinoda (the 1972 Sapporo, Japan, Winter Games); and Mr. Knight.
The element of film that makes it so rich -- the resolution created by the amount of information on each frame -- makes it a better candidate than video for high-definition.
''Film is the best resolution, higher resolution than HD,'' said Paul Bellerose, chief sales officer of Vision Globale, the Montreal postproduction house that transferred the Olympic films to high definition. ''But HD is the highest quality possible on video.''
The Olympic films and negatives were transported by courier from Geneva to Vision Globale last September. Reels were run through a film-to-HD transfer machine; the color was corrected, and, in the most time-consuming process, each frame was restored to remove scratches, abrasions and dirt. Converting all the films will take another few months.
''We got some good quality film,'' Mr. Bellerose said, ''although the older ones needed more restoration because the splices were drier.''
The restored film of the 1948 Summer Games in London seems almost pristine, thought more of a travelogue than a documentary. In one sequence, the American runner Harrison Dillard and five other racers prepare for the 100-meter dash. They run, filmed in slow-motion, and the announcer declares a photo-finish. Barney Ewell, an American like Dillard, celebrates, believing he won. But he beaten by Dillard, who ties the Olympic record of 10.3 seconds.
MEDIA
