John Edwards had finished describing his mill worker father and growing up in North Carolina when he brought up, as he almost always does these days, ''Real Solutions for America,'' his 61-page booklet detailing what he would do as president. Mr. Edwards spotted someone in his audience with a copy the other day, and asked him to hold it up for the crowd and the cameras.
''This is not pie-in-the-sky rhetoric,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I have laid out a very specific set of ideas for how we bring about these changes together.''
In truth, though, Mr. Edwards, a former trial lawyer and first-term senator from North Carolina, is much more likely to show that booklet than to slog through the details in its pages. As he campaigns across the nation, drawing a portrait of an Edwards presidency, his has become a candidacy of broad brush strokes and biography, drawing attention more for his distinctive style than for substance .
As Mr. Edwards described it in campaign appearances and in an interview on his campaign bus on Sunday afternoon, that presidency would change the nation's tax system to move the burden away from the earned income of the middle and lower middle class and to the unearned income of the wealthy. He would expand the nation's health care system to guarantee coverage for all children. He would create a new Homeland Intelligence Agency to guard against intelligence shortcomings that he argued have left Americans at risk.
But to spend time with Mr. Edwards as he moves through South Carolina, toward a primary on Tuesday that his aides say will determine whether he remains in the presidential race this year, is to hear a candidate whom many Democrats describe as the most compelling politician in the field. He is able to use vivid language and big themes to move his audiences in a way that none of his opponents, except perhaps for Howard Dean, have been able to do.
It is one reason, many Democrats say, that should Mr. Edwards survive the primary here on Tuesday and show some strength elsewhere, he may emerge as the only Democrat with a shot at stopping Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts after his wins in Iowa and New Hampshire.
''I'm talking about 35 million Americans who live in poverty every day,'' Mr. Edwards said Sunday, after attending services at a Baptist church, his voice cracking as he battled bronchitis. ''I know why the politicians don't talk about it: because for the most part, these folks don't vote. I'll tell you why we should do something about it: it is wrong. You and I have a moral responsibility to lift these families out of poverty.''
Later, here in this town in the woods of southeastern South Carolina, he presented the case for his candidacy in the personal, biographical framework that has come to obscure the details of the proposals in the booklet he put out.
''Listen to me: you are looking at someone who has lived this,'' he said to one of the relatively small crowds he has addressed in recent days. ''This is not for me some talking point on a piece of paper. This is something I have lived with.''
His audiences have responded with receptions ranging from warm to enthusiastic.
''I like the fact he is from a small town, that he wasn't raised in wealth, and he worked hard,'' said Linda Anaya, a firefighter from Santa Fe who heard him speak in Albuquerque on Saturday. ''I think he has the passion, and hearing him speak he has a lot of compassion.''
Mr. Edwards said Sunday that he had improved markedly as a candidate this year, a tribute, he added, to the nation's presidential nominating system, and an assessment that is widely shared in the camps of his opponents. He moved from behind in the polls to coming in second in Iowa, though third in New Hampshire.
If he wins here on Tuesday, and polls say that seems likely though hardly certain, he might soon be the only Democrat standing beside Mr. Kerry. ''I think we're very close to a two-person race, depending what happens Tuesday,'' Mr. Edwards said.
Still, for those looking to gauge from his campaign what kind of president Mr. Edwards might be, the candidate remains something of an enigma.
Asked on Sunday for his priorities in the White House, he responded quickly and succinctly. ''Strengthen and expand the middle class, lifting millions of Americans out of poverty, and becoming personally engaged in rehabilitating our relationships around the world,'' he said.
Mr. Edwards said that he would seek to run a White House as free as possible of the encumbrances of the presidency, saying, for example, that he would institute regular town hall meetings, like the ones that have become a central part of his candidacy. ''No ticketing,'' he said, meaning they would be open to all.
But after a series of major speeches on tax reform, health care and job creation, Mr. Edwards is more likely to talk about having specific ideas about what he would do as president than to say what they are. That has proved to be particularly true here in South Carolina, where he has returned with even more force to the details of his personal life, and where voters, unaccustomed to having such an important, early primary, do not push their candidates with the kind of detailed questions that Mr. Edwards and his competitors heard often in Iowa and New Hampshire.
He displays flashes of irritation at suggestions that he might be too young or insubstantial to be the leader of the nation. Yet there are times when he clearly seems more comfortable with the sweeping arc of his speeches than with the gritty details of the presidency.
Asked the other day on a bus in New Hampshire to describe his most significant legislative accomplishment during his five years in the Senate -- a not unusual query for candidates -- Mr. Edwards rubbed his eyes and searched for an answer.
''Well, there are lots of things that I helped lead the way with,'' he said. ''Especially in the Senate, one person doesn't do anything. They always do it in groups. The investigation of September 11th, there are a number of provisions.''
''I myself wrote some of the provisions into the laws that were a response to September the 11th,'' he paused, then added, sighing, ''Hate getting asked these questions.''
His wife, Elizabeth, seated across from him, chimed in, ''Campaign finance reform.''
''There are a bunch of things,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''My Senate office will have all the stuff I debated on the floor and passed.''
In the Senate, Mr. Edwards used the skills he learned in the courtroom after he was quickly chosen to depose witnesses and make arguments for the Democrats in the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton. ''He's very genuine,'' said Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana, who used to jog with Mr. Edwards. ''I don't think there is much artifice about John, and that's refreshing.''
Mr. Edwards's record at actually passing legislation, though, was less striking, and he rarely talks about his work in the Senate on the campaign trail, with the exception of a bill on patients' rights. In that case, members of the Senate said, he proved adept at putting together a compromise, but final passage was blocked in the House by Republicans. It was the closest Senator Edwards came to getting a major piece of legislation passed with his name on it.
Similar luck met many of Senator Edwards's other legislative efforts. In 2002, he crafted a bill with Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, aimed at pushing down the cost of prescription drugs by allowing more competition from makers of generic drugs. It passed the Senate but died in a joint conference committee.
Early in his term, he wrote several bills on domestic security and was one of the first members of Congress to call for a new agency to take the responsibility of stopping terrorism away from the F.B.I. None of his bills passed.
Mr. Edwards has also put himself in the somewhat tricky position of being a wealthy lawyer from Georgetown -- that would be the neighborhood in Washington, not where he spoke today -- who portrays a nation divided along economic lines.
At a forum in Columbia the other day, a questioner pressed him sharply on the disparity, asking how a lawyer ''who made millions'' could possibly understand the troubles of the poor and middle class of this state. The audience burst into cheers that appeared to stun Mr. Edwards, but only for a moment. He quietly returned to his biography, speaking of being born in a small mill town in this state, of becoming a trial lawyer bringing cases against big corporations, of being elected to the Senate before he turned 50.
''The answer is, the life I have lived is the dream that is being shut off for so many Americans every day,'' he said earnestly, the former trial lawyer talking to a hall filled with thousands of people, most of them African-American. ''I grew up the way you grew up. I come from the same place. I spent 20 years in courts fighting for you against big corporate America, against big insurance companies. I will never forget where I came from -- and you can take that to the bank.''
With that, the audience was on his side, cheering even louder at his answer than at the question, as Mr. Edwards exited the stage in triumph.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
