Aside from being mostly a real pleasure to sit through during four evenings, the Wagner ''Ring des Nibelungen'' cycles presented by Valery Gergiev and his Kirov Opera at the Festspielhaus here were historically significant. Epochal, even. They confirmed the strength of the Kirov company outside Russian repertory, opened up a sudden new reservoir of Wagner singers and helped establish the five-year-old Festspielhaus as a real player on the German opera scene.
In July 2001 Mr. Gergiev and the Kirov Opera presented six Verdi operas and the Requiem in London. By all accounts the performances were underprepared, undercast and unidiomatic. Then one heard tales of the Kirov's stumbling efforts to stage the ''Ring'': productions by German directors of ''Das Rheingold'' and ''Die Walküre'' scrapped and exploratory discussions with still other stage directors.
Mr. Gergiev has proved himself a sure Wagnerian at the Metropolitan Opera, where he is principal guest conductor, and elsewhere. But even with some positive reports from the cycle's inauguration in June in St. Petersburg, who knew quite what to expect?
The performances from Jan. 22 to 27, which involved some cast changes from those in December and some tweaking of the stage direction, were not to every taste. One dyspeptic British critic would concede only that at its best the cycle rose to something ''almost like a performance.'' But for me, and I was not alone, this was a ''Ring'' to match the four or five most important stagings since the middle of the last century.
Not least, it established Mr. Gergiev as not just a competent but a masterly Wagner conductor, and his Kirov Orchestra as the equal of any other in this music. The pacing and phrasing were deeply satisfying but always original (sometimes a little too original, as in the breakneck speeds for the hero's impetuousness in ''Siegfried''). Mr. Gergiev rose to the heights -- all of ''Die Walküre'' and Siegfried's Funeral March and the Immolation Scene from ''Götterdämmerung'' especially -- with rare nobility. And the orchestra's rich sweet strings, dark-hued brass and dazzling solos (the horn calls in ''Siegfried'') gave rare pleasure.
Remarkably the singers were all Russian, and every one was heretofore unheard (outside of the two previous cycles) in this music. Most were first rate, ready to leap into any top-level cast in the world. And an amazing number were under the age of 30. Their German was generally excellent, trained by the diction coach of the Bayreuth Festival.
For singers and orchestra, there was a continuous sense of the music being discovered fresh. Sometimes, for all the coaching, this led to heavily accented German and uncomfortable phrasing. But more often it suggested the thrill of the new.
No one was downright bad, but there were standouts. The Sieglinde of Mlada Khudolei; the Siegmund of Oleg Balashov; the three Brünnhildes of Olga Savova (also the eloquent Waltraute in ''Götterdämmerung''), Larissa Gogolevskaya and Olga Sergeeva; the young Siegfried of Leonid Zakhozheev and the older Siegfried of Sergei Liadov; the Fasolt and Wanderer of Yevgeny Nikitin; the Fafner and Hagen of Mikhail Petrenko; and the 16 full-throated Valkyries deserve special mention. It was as if a whole new world of Wagner singing had suddenly opened up.
And then there was the look of this ''Ring.'' After his experience with German directors, Mr. Gergiev changed course. Instead of proving that the Kirov could do yet another modern-day German ''Ring,'' he decided to make something unique to his company and country: an archaic Russian ''Ring.''
His collaborator was the stage designer George Tsypin, who was born in Kazakhstan, trained in Moscow and has been long resident in the United States. Together they created primordial, magical stage pictures, reminiscent of the look of the Diaghilev-era stagings still in the Kirov repertory. They drew on Russian, Caucasian and especially Scythian folk mythology; Mr. Gergiev himself comes from Ossetia in the Caucasus.
Central to the imagery are four giant figures, like gods, overlooking the action of the puny mortals and the puny Wagnerian gods. But there are also little figures like African mud men, with sticks and roots sprouting from their heads; Americans of a certain age might think of shmoos. All of these creatures, large and small, were made of translucent fiberglass and had hearts that glowed red or white from within.
There were dancers in Day-Glo hair (orange for fire, green for water) and glow-from-within rocks, all lighted with fantastical purples and greens and yellows by Gleb Filschtinsky. It was wild, delirious, with even a whiff of Matthew Barney's weirdness. Yet the cross-cultural archetypes worked freshly with Wagner's Germano-Icelandic inspirations.
But -- there's always a but -- the stage direction wasn't very inventive, or even consistent, or even sometimes existent. Siegmund's sword wasn't broken, then appeared later in pieces, then was reforged into something shaped entirely differently. The Tarnhelm in ''Das Rheingold'' was not the same Tarnhelm as later on. Tatiana Noginova's costumes were usually striking but sometimes peculiar and wildly heterogeneous. And some of the staging, as when dancers clumsily enacted Siegfried's sword-forging scene while he stood there flexing his muscles, looked downright silly.
''Directors are not so important,'' Mr. Gergiev said backstage, and for him, they are clearly not. Two were credited, Julia Pevzner for the first two operas and Vladimir Mirzoev for the second two, but this was a visual ''Ring,'' not a directed one. Sometimes -- as in ''Die Walküre'' -- the singers interacted intensely. Sometimes they seemed left to their own devices. Nowhere, for better or worse, was there any kind of German Konzept to be seen.
As such the Kirov ''Ring'' amounted to a rejection of the entire Germanic postwar operatic scene, in which stage directors have seized control. This was not an old-fashioned stand-and-sing ''Ring,'' but it did not concern itself overmuch with directorial niceties, either. Yet most of the important German newspaper critics seemed to enjoy themselves; perhaps directorial excesses have provoked their own reaction, even in Germany.
For the Baden-Baden Festspielhaus, privately supported and often mocked for its supposed commerciality, the Kirov ''Ring'' has put it on the map. And there is more Wagner to come this season, with two nights of excerpts conducted by Christian Thielemann, a staged ''Parsifal'' with Kent Nagano and an original-instruments ''Rheingold'' conducted by Simon Rattle.
For the Kirov company the ''Ring'' is a continuing proposition, to be seen again at home and in Tokyo and, who knows, in the United States and still other countries. It has won its German imprimatur, which is as important as had Mr. Gergiev taken his Verdi festival to Italy and triumphed. Yes, more tweaking is necessary; directors aren't so unimportant after all. But this was already a pretty extraordinary experience.
OPERA REVIEW
