In Albany, the equivalent of taking a Rorschach test these days is defining the meaning of a ''sound basic education.''
The interpretation of those words holds serious ramifications, not just politically, but also financially, for New York, its elected officials and schoolchildren in urban, suburban and rural districts.
A chorus of Republicans, including the governor and the Senate majority leader, say New York already has an expensive education system; their job is changing it to make sure the existing money is spent wisely before adding one more dime.
Some Senate Republicans have gone further. In their view, they need figure only the cost of a good education, which may be no more than what the state already pays per pupil, and devise a plan to provide it. Some in the Senate have also raised the possibility that beyond what the governor has already proposed in his budget there will be no new money this year to satisfy a Court of Appeals order that the state provide children a sound basic education.
Democrats in the Assembly are insisting that the ruling means a cash bonanza for New York City, its 1.1 million students and others in needy school districts.
They have made no loud calls to change the school financing system. The way they see it, the cost of a sound basic education has already been studied repeatedly and determined, and therefore, more money must be placed in the next state budget in time for September.
Whether the Republicans and the Democrats can meet is an open question. Aides to Gov. George E. Pataki say he is walking a tightrope, trying to be the middleman. But the debate is shaping up as a prime sticking point for lawmakers in passing an on-time budget, as promised, or falling into their familiar routine of lateness, inertia and blame.
''I see, definitely, different opinions about what needs to be done in this year's budget, and clearly that is going to have to get resolved over the next few months,'' said Karen Scharff, co-chairwoman of the board of the Alliance for Quality Education, a statewide coalition of parents, teachers and education advocates. ''There is not agreement yet between the governor and the Assembly and the Senate on how to proceed with this year's budget on education.''
So far, Albany's power trio - Mr. Pataki and the state's two top legislative leaders - agree it is better to find a political solution than to allow a Supreme Court judge in Manhattan to take over, as has been threatened. The Court of Appeals has set a July 30 deadline, and all sides are scrambling to avoid embarrassment -- especially in a year when legislators will be asking voters to send them back for another term.
But none of them seem to know exactly what to do. Not yet, at least.
Back on June 26, when the court decided the case - Campaign for Fiscal Equity v. The State of New York - education advocates, New York City officials and the plaintiffs believed it was a mandate for large increases in state education funding.
Indeed, to prove that city school children had been denied their constitutional guarantee to a good education, the plaintiffs established that more money generally translates into a better all-around education.
''The trial court reasoned that the necessary 'causal link,' between the present funding system and the poor performance of city schools could be established by showing that increased funding can provide better teachers, facilities and instrumentalities of learning,'' Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye wrote in her majority opinion. ''We agree that this showing, together with evidence that such improved inputs yield better student performance, constituted plaintiffs' prima facie case, which plaintiffs established.''
The opinion spelled out three directives. It ordered the state to ''ascertain the actual cost of providing a sound basic education in New York City.'' It ordered that reforms to the state's system of financing and managing schools ensure that every city school would get the necessary resources for providing that education. And it said the new scheme should ensure a system of accountability to measure whether the reforms were meeting the students' needs.
The court also said the state ''should have until July 30, 2004, to implement the necessary measures.'' But those seemingly simple words have been interpreted in vastly different ways in the State Capitol.
On Jan. 13, Joseph L. Bruno, the leader of the Republican majority in the State Senate, said he thought the order had been misinterpreted. He said he expected the state to pass a budget, by April 1, without addressing a solution to the school equity issue. He said an ultimate solution should be found by the legislative session's end, on June 22, though he and his Republican members also differ on whether it will include new money by then. In an op-ed piece published in The Times Union, an Albany newspaper, on Jan. 18, Senator Stephen M. Saland, a Republican from Poughkeepsie and the chairman of the Education Committee, wrote that state officials l were required only to determine the costs of a good education for New York City students and come up with an ''accounting mechanism,'' to ensure that they get it. ''Accomplishing these ends would constitute fulfilling the court's order,'' he wrote.
Senator Eric T. Schneiderman, a Manhattan Democrat, said he was stunned that the court order was being defined so narrowly. ''The Senate Republicans are trying to sell an interpretation of the C.F.E. decision that is wholly unsupported by the record in the case,'' he said.
At a Jan. 20 news conference, Mr. Pataki, who has said money alone is not the answer, tried to thread the needle between his Republican Senate colleagues and the Assembly Democrats.
''What the court said is by July 30 we had to do an analysis as to what the cost of a sound basic education was in districts across the state,'' he said, ''and I have no doubt that if we work cooperatively by that date, or hopefully before that date, we can not only determine the cost but determine the resources to meet those costs.''
The governor addressed part of the issue in his $99.8 billion budget, pressing legislators to change the way they dole out school aid and increasing education aid statewide by $147 million, to $14.6 billion (though Assembly Democrats and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg have asserted that the governor actually reduced aid to New York City, a charge the Pataki administration denies).
Mr. Pataki also pledged revenues from state-run gambling sites to support a special school fund to answer the court order -- $325 million this year from video lottery terminals at eight racetracks around the state, growing to $2 billion, or more, in five years after eight new gambling sites, including up to five in New York City, are added, he said.
''We put forward a foundation that does not drive the parties apart on one of the most difficult issues of our times,'' said Joseph E. Conway, a spokesman for Mr. Pataki. ''And it actually charts a course to bring everyone together to get this done this year as part of the budget process.''
So far, education advocates have not laced into the governor. Neither has Mr. Bloomberg, who was soft-spoken in his criticisms, even though he was seeking an immediate infusion of state cash into the city schools and is generally critical of using gambling as a source of revenue.
But Assembly Democrats called the governor's moves rhetoric with no substance. With the Senate, they are examining the governor's budget, trying to find any hidden revenue and come up with an alternate plan.
"The governor has clearly designed his strategy to stall,'' said Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat. ''And one day he is going to have egg on his face because I believe that this court will see this guy's stalling and say: 'Hey, we have a court order out there. You're not moving to satisfy that court order, and we are going to appoint someone, a master, who will issue a judgment as to how you comply.'''
Others agree that, ultimately, the solution will come from the courts.
Eric A. Hanushek, a senior fellow at the Hoover Institution of Stanford University and an expert on school financing issues , said, ''The way the discussion has gone almost ensures that this battle will stay in the courts for a long time because the discussion has not been about improving the schools, it has been about how much money do we put in the schools, and no matter how much we put in, someone will be unhappy.''
