But, Gee, the Gym Is a Miniature Graceland
Of all the new-generation celebrities at Teen People's What's Next celebration on Tuesday night, among the most elated were PHIL MARGERA and his wife, APRIL. In ''Viva La Bam'' they are objects of the ridicule of their son, BAM, skateboarder and alumnus of MTV's ''Jackass.''
Mr. Margera the elder, a baker who resembles Falstaff, and Mrs. Margera, who resembles a middle-aged KIRSTEN DUNST, are the forever-patient parents. In Episode 2, Bam and his compatriots declare a ''Don't Feed Phil'' Day in an experiment to see whether the rotund Mr. Margera the elder can get by for 24 hours on water only. The merry crew empties not only pantries and refrigerators, but also persuades nearby bars and restaurants to prevent him from getting food. Through it all, Mr. and Mrs. Margera demonstrate their signature patience. Why? Are the financial benefits from MTV such a good thing, our Boldface correspondent asked.
In unison, Bam and his mother replied, ''Oh yeah, sponsorship is a VERY good thing!'' How so, we pressed. Well, the Margeras have moved into a new house, Mrs. Margera explained: ''It is a castle.'' Mr. Margera the elder, a longtime Elvis fan, elaborated: ''It's 14 acres; it's a miniature Graceland.''
Meanwhile, more of the new generation trooped by: LINDSAY LOHAN; ADAM LEVINE and his band, Maroon 5; Q-TIP; and the host of the evening, PHARRELL WILLIAMS. Bringing up the rear was one of the men who pay the bills, RICHARD PARSONS, chairman of Time Warner.
Is he looking forward to moving into the new Brobdingnagian Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle? Yes, replied the very tall Mr. Parsons, but he is keeping his old furniture from Rockefeller Center.
Is Mr. Parsons going to join the complex's new gymnasium, E at Equinox? Are you implying something, laughed the thickening Mr. Parsons. It costs only $28,500 in fees, we informed him. The up-to-now affable Mr. Parsons bolted up, looked our correspondent straight in the eye, and said, ''In that case, NO. That answer would be NO.''
The Time Warner Guy Showed Up, at Least
For fans of the ''Lord of the Rings'' film trilogy, a chance to see the director PETER JACKSON in the flesh would be only one step in ecstasy below sipping sherry with the late J.R.R. Tolkien himself.
So, when the announcement went out in October that not only would the Film Society of Lincoln Center and New Line Cinema sponsor a weekend extravaganza of all three films but also that the screening of ''The Return of the King'' and the discussion of the films would be attended by Mr. Jackson, Hobbitheads beat a path to the box office. (Tickets cost $50 and $100.)
Then, disaster. It was announced over the weekend that Mr. Jackson wouldn't show up and that he was detained in Wellington, New Zealand, working on the DVD of the final film.
Some tickets were surely canceled and some words were surely exchanged with hapless ticket vendors at Centercharge.
But when our Boldface correspondent, a perspicacious Hobbit-head herself, arrived at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday anticipating mass grumbling and pitchforks, she noticed only anticipation and a scattering of empty seats in the 1,000-seat auditorium.
''Thank you for allowing my pixels to appear,'' said Mr. Jackson, his Ewok-like head appearing on a giant television screen. Cheers, laughter, applause, wailing, almost the cresting ecstatic consternation of fans seeing the Beatles at the Ed Sullivan Theater. Inside jokes whizzed by, but everyone noticed digs at Mr. Jackson's lax attention to attire. He was wearing a wrinkled blue polo shirt.
''Nice shirt, Peter,'' cracked ELIJAH WOOD, who plays Frodo. Mr. Jackson, his ghostly pixels looming, replied, ''I wear the stripey one on SPECIAL occasions.'' Shot back Mr. Wood: ''You seem to have a lot of them lately.'' Giggles, titters. Look, you had to be there.
with Kari Haskell and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
