When a shout came from the sparse Knicks coaching staff last night to argue a call, Referee Jack Nies angrily moved toward the bench and confronted the assistant coach Mike Malone.
''Who are you?'' Nies shouted.
The question might have been based more in reality than venom. Malone made the move to the front row of the team's bench for the first time yesterday, on a night when he might have wished to be anywhere else.
It had been a painful and difficult day for Malone and Herb Williams, who were left to man the bench when the coach who had hired them, Don Chaney, was fired. The other casualties of the day were the assistants Lon Kruger and Brendan Malone, Mike's father.
Williams, who was named head coach for the night, until Lenny Wilkens's scheduled arrival today, stepped between the referee and Malone as they shouted at each other, averting an ejection that could have left Williams alone on the sideline. Williams and Malone then completed the task, guiding the Knicks to a 120-110 victory over the Orlando Magic with a game plan conceived in the morning before the purge of the coaching staff.
It was a hard victory to find solace in, particularly for the younger Malone, who had to watch his father walk out of Madison Square Garden with his mother, sister and nephew while he went to work.
''It's bittersweet,'' Mike Malone said. ''I don't think anybody would want to go through anything like that. Having been around basketball my whole life, understanding what a business it is, nothing really surprises you.
''It's unfortunate. Don Chaney has been very good to me and my family. To see all those guys go tonight was hard.''
Brendan and Mike Malone spoke briefly, then moved on. After the game, Mike Malone planned to see his father.
''Folks who know me, I'm a very competitive person, stubborn,'' he said. ''But seeing him have to go was hard. At the same time, they're asking me to stay to do a job tonight. You do it.''
Even for Williams, the feelings were mixed.
''Don hired me,'' Williams said. ''He's a close friend. I respect him a lot. I learned a lot from him. Changes needed to be made and they made changes.
''People that know me know that I always want to win. It doesn't matter what I'm doing or where I'm at, I always want to win games.''
In the closing minute, the fans who still remained started to rise, cheering for Williams, who was placed in the spotlight on a night when most would have preferred to remain in the shadows. It was a pleasant sound in an arena that has been filled with so many harsh chants and angry shouts lately.
''It felt great,'' said Williams, who played for the Knicks as a backup center for Patrick Ewing in the 1990's. ''Especially to get the win and to hear the crowd cheer. A little bit like old days.''
PRO BASKETBALL
