A majority of the judges on a federal appeals court panel expressed skepticism on Wednesday about a central element of the government plan to bury radioactive waste in the Nevada desert about 90 miles from Las Vegas.
In an unusual three-and-a-half-hour hearing that combined 12 lawsuits and a web of issues, the judges seemed to side with opponents of the site, Yucca Mountain, on the issue of how long a repository should have to retain the waste. Two of the three judges of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit indicated through their questions that the Environmental Protection Agency had erred when it said the Department of Energy would have to be concerned with leakage for only the first 10,000 years.
The judges noted that the National Academy of Sciences had estimated that the time of peak release of radioactive materials would probably come hundreds of thousands of years later.
''Ten thousand years is incorrect,'' Judge Harry T. Edwards told a lawyer from the Justice Department, saying the environmental agency had not obeyed instructions by Congress to follow the academy's advice in setting standards. The federal government argued that 10,000 years was commonly used in other kinds of hazardous waste disposal.
Judge David S. Tatel joined Judge Edwards in close questioning of government lawyers on that point. The third judge on the panel, Karen LeCraft Henderson, asked few questions.
Opponents and proponents alike described this as Yucca Mountain's big day in court. The consolidated case being argued is the major legal challenge to the government's multibillion-dollar, multidecade plan for storing thousands of tons of spent reactor fuel and nuclear bomb waste. Hundreds of lawyers, government officials and others began lining up before 6 a.m. for seats.
The parties said they hoped the judges would rule later this year.
On Wednesday, the panel seemed to reject many arguments brought by Yucca Mountain's opponents, including the State of Nevada, the unwilling host of the repository, and various environmental groups.
Nevada contended that the federal government could not force the repository on a state because it had not proved its assertion that there was anything special about the site's geology. The state said the Energy Department's own plan said that the natural geology of the site would play only a minor role in its performance for 10,000 years, because the metal casks planned by engineers would take care of most of the problem.
Judges Tatel and Edwards suggested that the fairness of the department's choice was now moot, because its recommendation had been endorsed by both houses of Congress in a bill signed by President Bush in 2002.
A court could still find the site selection unconstitutional, but the two judges seemed unsympathetic. Rather, their questions indicated that they sided with a government argument that it had the right to build there because it owned the land. The mountain is on the edge of the Nevada Test Site, where the Atomic Energy Commission and later the Energy Department exploded hundreds of nuclear bombs.
Nevada argued that the laws Congress passed on establishment of the repository required that the geology of whatever site was chosen form the primary barrier to the spread of radiation. The rock is too permeable in Yucca Mountain's case, they argued. One lawyer, Geoffrey Fettus of the Natural Resources Defense Council, describing the department's design as a ''septic field'' in which radioactive particles, carried by rain water into the underground water flows, would spread over a broad area, diluted enough at the border to meet radiation exposure standards.
But supporters of the project said that while Congress made geology a criterion, it did not specify that natural features had to be the most important factor once the site was chosen.
The balance between the importance of the rock versus the man-made features is linked to the 10,000-year question. If the department must prove that the mountain will hold the radioactive material for hundreds of thousands of years, it will be difficult or impossible to argue that the containers will remain intact.
Judge Edwards listened to a lawyer for Nevada, Antonio Rossmann, argue that the standard should be for 300,000 years or longer and then asked, ''Is this a backdoor way to say the focus should be on geology, and not engineered barriers?''
''It's our front door,'' Mr. Rossmann replied.
