Larry Lazin checks his computer regularly to see how the dollar is doing on the currency exchanges of London, New York and Tokyo. Every week, he calls his currency trader in California from his office in a New York suburb to buy euros, capitalizing on the later West Coast closing to search all day and into the evening for the best deal.
Mr. Lazin is not a banker, a hedge-fund manager or a day trader speculating from his spare room. He sells lighting fixtures to architects and interior designers, and like a lot of small-business owners he has become painfully aware of how the dollar's weakness resonates on his bottom line.
Since hitting its lowest point in October 2000, the euro has shot up by more than 50 percent against the dollar, effectively raising the prices that American businesses pay for European goods -- from Portuguese cork and French oak barrels to English antiques or Italian machine tools -- by about as much in dollars.
Similar gains have occurred with the currencies of America's other major trading partners, notably Canada and Britain. And with domestic inflation low, American businesses find it difficult to pass along the extra cost to their customers.
''For small little companies like us, that is a hard quest,'' Mr. Lazin said in a telephone interview from his business, Global Lighting Inc., in Irvington, N.Y. ''You can't raise prices as much or as often as you need to.''
He figures his profit will shrink at least 10 percent this year, even after he raised prices.
Small businesses that export their goods, meanwhile, are benefiting almost as much as importers are suffering because the dollar's weakness tends to make their goods significantly cheaper and more competitive abroad. That presents an opportunity not seen for decades, said Harvey D. Bronstein, senior international economist at the Small Business Administration.
''It's a great time to be an exporter,'' Mr. Bronstein said in a telephone interview. ''If you're an exporter to Canada or Europe, you have had the effect of putting your goods for sale at a 40 percent discount without taking a hit on your profit.''
More than 212,000 small businesses, with fewer than 100 employees, exported goods in 2001, the latest year for which the Commerce Department has data. Another 18,000 midsize companies -- with 100 to 500 employees -- also sent products abroad that year. Together, they accounted for $182 billion in trade, or 29 percent of all exports.
There are no comparable reports on importers, said Howard Schreier of the Office of Trade and Economic Analysis at the Commerce Department. The change has become more acute since last summer, with the euro and the British pound climbing 18 percent since September; since the end of July, the Japanese yen has risen 13 percent and the Canadian dollar 11 percent.
The cost of imports from China, the United States' fastest-growing trading partner, has not gone up significantly because Beijing pegs its currency, the yuan, to the dollar.
Yet that exchange parity has added to the pain of some American small-business owners who import goods from Europe and elsewhere that compete with Chinese-made products. Complicating matters, China has come under international pressure to revalue the yuan, and any relaxation of its policy could suddenly make its goods more expensive to Americans, too.
Small and midsize importers are scrambling to find a way to weather the weak dollar.
''Some of the little guys are stung pretty bad by it,'' said Paul W. Vierck, a vice president in the Oakland, Calif., office of Commonwealth Foreign Exchange. ''They call and say, 'What can I do about the exchange rate?' I say, 'Not much. It's a trillion-dollar-a-day market.'''
One thing small businesses can do is lock in a rate now if they expect the dollar to weaken further. Companies like Commonwealth sell ''dollar forward'' contracts in which an importer agrees to buy a certain amount of euros, yen or some other currency at a specific date in the future -- or over a specified period -- for a price agreed upon now.
Such contracts are a gamble. If the dollar strengthens, buyers could lose money. But if the dollar continues to weaken, they can avoid a loss. Companies that buy forward contracts at least lock in an exchange rate, which makes it easier to see the profitability of a particular transaction.
Many small importers would welcome the chance to reduce the risk of the dollar weakening further, particularly if they were caught unprepared for the rapid swing of the last six months.
''Some are taking drastic measures -- raising prices when they can, burning through inventory or delaying payment to their suppliers,'' said Mr. Vierck, whose company, based in Providence, R.I., specializes in trading currencies for software developers and other midsize companies as well as smaller businesses like art galleries, spice merchants and wine importers.
Often, he said, ''suppliers overseas have been pretty sympathetic'' to long-term customers who are delaying payment.
Mr. Lazin, who imports lamps and other lighting fixtures from three companies in Spain and one in Italy, said he had not postponed paying his suppliers. But he has had to innovate and act fast to stay in the black.
Like many small-business owners importing from Europe, Mr. Lazin made some assumptions about what the euro would be worth against the dollar after the European Union introduced the currency in 1999. Soon after the European Union began using the euro in banking transactions, its value against the dollar fell, padding the profits of small-business exporters like Mr. Lazin.
After bottoming out toward the end of 2000, however, the euro flattened and then began to climb steadily against the dollar in 2002. It took a while for it to reach the value -- the peg -- that Mr. Lazin said he had assumed in 1999. ''When it passed that peg,'' he said, ''I knew I was in trouble.''
Economists give several reasons for the dollar's weakness, but the chief ones are historically low American interest rates, which discourage foreign investments, and the country's ballooning trade deficits, which create unwanted dollar surpluses overseas.
''From a macroeconomic perspective, this country has been importing too much and exporting too little,'' Mr. Bronstein said. ''People overseas are tired of taking pieces of paper with pictures of dead presidents in exchange for Lexus cars and mozzarella cheese.''
Scrambling to stay ahead of the falling dollar, Mr. Lazin offered to pay suppliers sooner than was customary if they offered a discount, usually 2 percent; they agreed. That had the added benefit of letting him avoid some of the dollar's slide in the time between early payment and the usual invoice date.
He has also adjusted the volume discounts that he offers his clients, as well as the commissions he pays his representatives across the United States and Canada. Product lines with thin profit margins were weeded out, he added, and a year ago he widened the profit on the fixtures he kept. ''It's a lot more work, a lot more confusing,'' he said of business today.
Customers have not always welcomed higher prices and narrower product lines. ''Some of them don't understand'' about exchange rates, he said, especially if they also buy goods from China, which had lower prices to begin with. ''Not everyone can work with us on prices,'' he said.
Mr. Lazin has also developed his own approach to reducing his risk. Once a week, he buys a fraction of the total amount of euros he estimates he will need during the year. It is a form of cost averaging, of spreading out the risk of a price move in either direction.
The strategy has not completely insulated him from the weak dollar, he said, but ''it makes it very easy at the end of the year to see what your costs were.''
That, he added, has helped him plan better and take a longer view of his business.
''In importing,'' he said, ''you have to look at how you do over three years because there is too much movement in the currency.''
SMALL BUSINESS
