The legislature will form a committee to consider whether to impeach Gov. John G. Rowland, House Speaker Moira K. Lyons announced on Wednesday.
The committee, consisting of about 10 House members, will be evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans and will have subpoena powers, Ms. Lyons said after a 45-minute private meeting with the governor. It will be appointed in a special session that could take place as early as next week, she added.
''What the governor did was wrong,'' Ms. Lyons said at a news conference in the Capitol. ''The question for the committee is, are the actions impeachable?''
Mr. Rowland, a Republican who was elected to a third term in 2002, admitted a month ago that he had lied when he denied receiving free work on his private cottage from people who did business with the state. Many of those people are now subjects of a broad federal corruption investigation.
After Ms. Lyons's announcement, Mr. Rowland also spoke briefly, saying he commended the legislature for ''setting up this very fair and deliberative process.'' He added, ''I will continue to do this job, to the best of my abilities, each and every day.''
Although Ms. Lyons's announcement was expected, she and other legislators seemed awed by the prospect of the first impeachment inquiry of a sitting governor in state history.
Last week, Mr. Rowland resisted an impeachment inquiry, saying it would ''suck the oxygen out of the building'' at the statehouse. On Tuesday evening he changed course, releasing a statement saying he welcomed the inquiry.
Dean Pagani, a spokesman for Mr. Rowland, said the governor had concluded that a committee would be fairer than the recent flurry of news reports and polls about the scandal involving his administration.
Two leading Republican lawmakers, Representative Robert M. Ward and Senator Louis C. DeLuca, said Wednesday that they supported the decision to begin an impeachment inquiry.
After Ms. Lyons's announcement, Senator Martin M. Looney, a Democrat, called on Mr. Rowland to stop meeting with state senators to discuss the scandal, saying the practice could make impartial judgment difficult in an impeachment trial. Mr. Pagani said the governor had no meetings planned now but would not rule out more in the future.
No schedule has been set for the committee to reach its conclusions, Ms. Lyons said, but legislators said they expected the process to take several months. The State Constitution does not clearly spell out the criteria for impeaching a governor. If the committee does determine that impeachment is warranted, it would draw up articles of impeachment, which would then be voted on by the full House, legislators say. The case would then go to the Senate for trial.
It is also not clear how broad the scope of the committee's investigation will be, but Representative Michael Lawlor, a Democrat who several leading lawmakers said would almost certainly be on the committee, said it should include everything from the governor's first day in office in 1995. ''Each of the things he has admitted to is not individually enough for impeachment, so you have to look at it all together,'' he said.
The governor and his aides have repeatedly said he has done nothing illegal. Last week he became the first sitting governor in state history to be served with a subpoena for personal records, as part of the federal corruption investigation.
On Tuesday, the executive director of the State Ethics Commission released a draft opinion saying public officials are forbidden by state law to accept expensive gifts from subordinates or state contractors.
Mr. Rowland's legal counsel, Ross H. Garber, released a statement Tuesday evening saying he disagreed with that opinion, which relates to the governor's acceptance of free gifts and work on his private cottage in Litchfield.
Democratic lawmakers angrily disputed Mr. Garber's view yesterday. ''This is something Saddam would have received,'' the House majority leader, James A. Amann, said of the gifts to Mr. Rowland. ''It's ludicrous.''
