After being faulted by the state for the deaths of two patients in the last three years, Westchester Medical Center is grappling with charges that it mishandled pain medication, leading to the death of a 12-year-old boy from a prominent New York family.
A year ago today, Michael T. Fisher, a seventh grader at Horace Mann School in Riverdale who was fluent in five languages and an heir to the Fisher Brothers real estate empire, had such a severe headache that his family decided to take him to the hospital.
He was taken first to White Plains Hospital Center but was soon sent to Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y., his family said. He died there a day and a half later.
In legal papers filed yesterday, the family charged that Michael had received no tests, but instead had been given a lethal cocktail of painkillers without proper monitoring. The official cause of death was acute mixed drug intoxication.
The boy's parents, Steven and Elissa Fisher, who live in Armonk with their three younger children, are seeking millions of dollars in damages from the financially troubled medical center.
''This was an extraordinarily gifted kid with unlimited potential and unlimited opportunities who was basically put to death at Westchester Medical Center,'' said John Q. Kelly, a lawyer representing the boy's estate and family.
But the hospital contended yesterday that the parents had thwarted the treatment of their son. John J. Corgan, a lawyer for the medical center, said, ''There was substantial, extraordinary parental interference that severely impeded the medical staff's ability to do their jobs.''
He said the hospital staff was ''repeatedly prevented from doing basic examinations and ordered to stop standard procedures on multiple occasions.'' Mr. Corgan added that the family's ''attempt to pin blame on the medical center in order to extract a huge financial payment is unconscionable.''
Mr. Kelly disputed the hospital's account. ''That's patently, demonstrably false,'' he said.
The circumstances surrounding the widely publicized death of a 6-year-old boy in 2000 were less murky. The boy was killed during a magnetic resonance imaging test when a metal oxygen tank that was mistakenly brought into the room flew through the air, attracted by the machine's magnetic field, and hit his head. The medical center immediately admitted its error, and the New York State Department of Health fined it $22,000 and cited it for 11 safety violations in the boy's death.
Last summer, a 27-year-old man with multiple health problems who complained of difficulty breathing, as well as a toothache, died while waiting in the emergency room. The state recently faulted the center for delaying treatment in the case, citing several deficiencies. The hospital responded that its care was not the cause of death.
Mr. Fisher, the boy's father, is a third-generation partner of Fisher Brothers in Manhattan, one of the nation's leading real estate firms. Along with such prominent real estate families as the Rudins, the Dursts and the Tishmans, the Fishers helped fashion the Manhattan skyline, erecting some of New York's most recognizable corporate towers.
Members of the Fisher family have also been active in philanthropy, contributing to charities, police organizations and the military. The family helped save the Intrepid, the World War II aircraft carrier, and turn it into the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, anchored in the Hudson River on the West Side.
Yesterday, the boy's estate and his parents filed a notice of claim , which alerts the hospital that a lawsuit will be forthcoming unless damages of $100 million are paid; the notice had to be filed within 90 days of the appointment of an administrator of the boy's estate. The deadline for filing was Jan. 21.
The New York State Department of Health is investigating the death, a spokesman for the department said. The Westchester County medical examiner's office in Valhalla confirmed yesterday that the cause of death was ''acute mixed drug intoxication,'' adding that the levels of two painkillers, morphine and fentanyl, were ''very high.'' The office said autopsies, as in this case, typically do not reveal the source of headaches.
Mr. Kelly, the family's lawyer, said the boy was not monitored with a pulse oximeter, a device that attaches to the finger or earlobe and measures oxygen in the blood. If the oxygen level falls, an alarm goes off.
Mr. Kelly said the boy was first given Demerol at White Plains Hospital Center and then morphine and fentanyl at Westchester Medical Center. Such drugs, he said, are not typically given to children.
But Dr. Eric D. Collins, a professor at the College of Physicians and Surgeons at Columbia who specializes in opiate addiction, said yesterday that powerful pain killers like morphine and fentanyl are routinely given to children. Stressing that he had no knowledge of the case at Westchester Medical Center, Dr. Collins, an assistant professor of clinical psychiatry, said that ''if used correctly, these drugs are safe and appropriate for the management of acute and severe pain, even in children and sometimes in combination.''
The accusations by the Fisher family could not have come at a worse time for the medical center; last year, it laid off hundreds of employees, and hospital officials now estimate its deficit to be $100 million.
