Gen. Wesley K. Clark is trying to transcend politics.
''I'm running for president because America needs a higher standard of leadership,'' he says as he races across New Hampshire, the first primary state.
''We need a leadership that puts the national interest above special interests,'' he says. ''One that looks beyond the next election to what's good for America. One that sets measurable goals and doesn't mind being held accountable.''
The phrases are aimed at President Bush, who himself once promised ''to restore honor and dignity'' to the White House.
But General Clark is also trying to set himself apart from the rest of the Democratic field, most particularly Howard Dean, who has risen in the polls by channeling the anti-Bush anger of the Democratic base.
''I'm not running to bash George Bush,'' the retired general says. ''I'm running to replace him.''
At other times, he says outright: ''I am not a politician. I'm a leader.''
But if General Clark's military persona is his biggest strength, it is also in some ways his handicap.
A Democrat for little more than three months, he is still finding that he needs to introduce himself to party primary voters, to explain why a candidate who has never stood for elected office and who voted for Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan is the best qualified Democrat to run against Mr. Bush.
Again he turns to his defining attribute, his 34-year military career. It will not make him sure-footed just at national security he says. He portrays himself as an executive with credentials on a par with those of any elected official, one who has long had to grapple with domestic issues.
''Some people think generals just fight battles,'' he said recently in Somersworth, N.H. ''But to be honest with you, most of the battles I've fought were to make sure that our troops had the tools and equipment they need, that our families were living in decent houses, that our school kids in the military were going to good schools, that the mess halls served good food.''
He does not apologize for voting for Republicans in the past. He says that as a soldier he wanted a president who was strong on defense. And much like another son of Arkansas, Bill Clinton, he treads firmly onto terrain that is sometimes claimed by Republicans as he defines his campaign in terms of values.
In his case, he speaks of patriotism, faith, family and inclusiveness. ''To me patriotism is about serving your country,'' he tells crowds, after which he usually asks all of the veterans in the audience to raise their hands or to stand. ''Thank you for your service,'' he says, and applause usually begins to drown him out.
Then, he takes the thought a step further, in a jab at Mr. Bush.
''To me, patriotism is not dressing up in a flight suit and prancing around on the deck of an aircraft carrier,'' General Clark says, a reference to the president's appearance on the aircraft carrier Abraham Lincoln in May to announce the end of major military action in Iraq.
Sometimes, with an American flag as a backdrop, he tells supporters that dissent, even in wartime, is part of democracy, and that no political party had cornered the market on patriotism. ''I served under this flag,'' he says. ''I fought for this flag. I saw brave men and women buried under it. And no Tom DeLay, John Ashcroft or George W. Bush is going to be able to take that flag away from this party and this country.''
To discuss faith, he tells of being born to a Jewish father and a Methodist mother, of attending a Baptist church in Arkansas, marrying a Catholic woman and converting to Catholicism in Vietnam, and now attending services at a Presbyterian church in Little Rock, his hometown. ''Every religion I've ever studied,'' he says, ''has one thing in common: if you're more fortunate in life, you help those who are less fortunate. There's only one party that does that, and that's the Democratic Party.''
When it comes to family values, he lays out his policy ideas: to provide health insurance to all children up to age 22; to improve education by raising teacher pay and cutting dependence on standardized testing; and to enforce environmental laws.
He argues that his definition of family values differs from that of the Republicans. ''I hear that other party using this term, family values,'' he says. ''But they use it as a way of dividing people, grading people, sorting them out. There's these good people over here, they're the family value people, and over here there's these other people, they're not the family value people. It's a way of separating people.''
General Clark then closes his speeches with a plea for inclusiveness, one that again draws on his Arkansas roots. ''Some of us in Little Rock were a little hardheaded,'' he said recently in Nashua, N.H. ''It took the 101st Airborne Division to convince us that everybody ought to be treated equally.''
The reference, of course, is to President Dwight D. Eisenhower's dispatch of troops there in 1957 to enforce a federal school integration order. It is an event General Clark draws on to introduce his experience as a champion of affirmative action in the military.
The general is clearly growing more comfortable on the stump. But he still seems to have difficulty navigating between formal speeches and more informal discussions of his proposals and ideas. When he stands behind a lectern with a prepared text, he is as stiff as a well-starched dress uniform. But as soon as he steps off the podium and begins to engage the audience in a question-and-answer session, the starched general dissolves into a more approachable candidate.
He acknowledges as much. ''It's true,'' he said in a recent interview. ''I just prefer to have conversations with people.''
These days, he has gathered a stock of applause lines. Speaking of the 2000 campaign, he reminds listeners that Mr. Bush once introduced his economic plan by saying, ''I know what to do with a surplus.'' General Clark, notes, as a way to emphasize that the nation's budget is in deficit, ''And that's one promise he kept.''
And when he talks of cities he has visited, he speaks of lost jobs, of the toll taken on average Americans and, more recently, of how an upturn in economic statistics was not registering with people who had seen their jobs leave for distant shores. ''Under George W. Bush,'' General Clark says, ''America's greatest export has been American jobs.''
In his stump speech, General Clark usually speaks only fleetingly of the war in Iraq or Saddam Hussein or Osama bin Laden or Al Qaeda. After all, he has defined himself by his opposition to the war in Iraq, and he can be relatively confident that those topics will be raised by the audiences that come to hear an anti-war general. When asked, he is highly critical of what he calls ''a world-class bait-and-switch'' in which President Bush promised to get the terrorists responsible for the Sept. 11 attacks but then sent the armed forces to Iraq. He suggests that the president is looking to the past, finishing up his father's war.
''This president seems to think America's best days are behind us,'' he says. ''I think our best days are still to come.''
This article is the third in a series looking at the basic campaign speeches of the presidential candidates.
The Stump Speech
