Reflecting Absence is a plea for calm. Tranquillity has been in short supply in Lower Manhattan. Perhaps the city is ready to let this quality rise to the surface for a time.
Designed by Michael Arad, Reflecting Absence is the winning entry in the competition to design a memorial to the victims of 9/11. First presented last month with seven other finalists at the Winter Garden of the World Financial Center, the proposal is being redesigned by Mr. Arad and the landscape architect Peter Walker. The version unveiled yesterday is still a work in progress.
One major shortcoming has been addressed. Instead of hard paving, picturesque parkland now surrounds the two pools of water where the twin towers once stood. Mr. Walker's landscape design contributes more than prettiness: it confers meaning. It signifies the abundance that sometimes follows a rupture in the natural order of things.
The landscaping helps to clarify the strength of Mr. Arad's proposal. It brings more vividly to mind why ground zero was worth treating as an architectural subject. Contemporary urban renewal is an art of consciousness. Reflecting Absence revives New York's civic identity by embracing stoic ideals.
Unlike the other finalists in the competition, the design does not impose superfluous forms onto the site. Rather, it uncovers the depth of feeling that has come to be associated with the two empty squares once occupied by the towers. Only God creates, George Balanchine used to say; the artist reveals. Reflecting Absence has the potential to be art in this sense.
Indeed, of the designs officially adopted for the site so far, this is the only one that approaches artistic stature. That is partly because of the work's intrinsic merits, partly because of the process through which it came to be selected. Much has been said about the need for spirituality at ground zero. Secular creature that I am, I equate the sacred with integrity. Judged by this standard, the memorial competition was conducted on the side of the angels.
In renderings, the design recalls a fairly standard modern use of pure geometric form. But the location, shape and size of the two pools adhere strictly to the foundations of the towers. Sept. 11 happened here, not just on that day, but in the weeks and months that followed, as the footprints became the bifurcated center of public attention.
This blurring of realism and abstraction is emphasized by water. Cascades of it, falling into the pools, will evoke for many the Gothic tracery of steel in which the architect Minoru Yamasaki encased the twin towers. In effect, visitors looking into the pools will see watery reflections of the buildings that no longer tower above.
Doubling is the motif throughout. Water plunges down where the towers thrust up. Deep below ground, the cascades convey three-dimensional impressions of the towers turned inside out. But the essential doubling of this psychologically sophisticated design is the pairing of our inner and outer worlds. The water transposes the usual relationship between these spheres.
''You walk close to your dreams,'' Eleanor Clark observed in her classic essay on the fountains of Rome. Clark saw water as a medium through which the individual subconscious passed into the waking life of the living city. The most conspicuous virtue of Reflecting Absence is its exemplary use of that medium. By tapping into our emotional architecture it will provide a public, social space.
The effect is similar to that achieved by Maya Lin in the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, with its reflective surfaces of dark, polished stone. Memorials are for the dead and the living. They reflect ourselves in the act of remembering.
That is why if I were to describe this project as Narcissus and his Double, I would intend it as praise. Meaning is in the eye of the beholder. If I favored Reflecting Absence over the other finalists, it is partly because the minimalist design encouraged the maximum range of individual reflection.
''I can't go on. I'll go on.'' Survivors of staggering loss often face this painful conflict. It may not be resolvable. Still, it is helpful to know that others have faced it. I can't claim to be a fan of the rage for memorials that has overtaken the United States in the years since Maya Lin's masterpiece was completed. But in a society like ours, where the idea of death is shunned, it is hard to fault public reminders of it.
Reflecting Absence puts us in mind of societies where birth and death were understood to be aspects of life. That is its signal virtue. Though it outlines the specifics of a contemporary tragedy, the design draws deeply upon historical memory.
This gazer into Mr. Arad's pool sees the reflections of a usable myth. Artists like Frank Gehry and Twyla Tharp nudged me in this direction in late 2001.
Mr. Gehry urged me to read Seneca, but Marcus Aurelius proved more helpful. Where have we come from? Where are we going? What is the nature of this place? Ms. Tharp boxed my ears until I admitted that continuity matters more than rupture, especially at times when rupture isn't hard to find. She suggested reading Carl Kerenyi's ''Eleusis,'' a Jungian study of the religious center of ancient Athens. Subtitled ''Archetypal Image of Mother and Daughter,'' the book characterizes the Eleusian mysteries, which were initiated by Demeter's search for Persephone, as a quest for identity.
This seemed like an accurate way to describe what New York was going through as it began to fantasize its future. But where might that quest lead?
It led me to question whether New York still practices the Western arts of self-renewal. It has been decades since the city's cultural institutions have exercised leadership in this regard. The erosion of that leadership is part of the twin towers' story. Never was this clearer than in the weeks following 9/11, when the city's rear-guard activists began clamoring for the restoration of Ye Olde New York street patterns to the World Trade Center's superblock site.
I could understand the archaeological impulse. But why stop with Olde New York? Why not keep digging and digging until we get to the dark, archaic bottom of things? To Eleusis itself, for example, and to the Callichoron, the Well of the Beautiful Dances. According to legend, Demeter came and sat by the well to mourn the loss of Persephone, her daughter, to the underworld.
The women of Eleusis gathered round to comfort her, an event later ritualized in dance as part of the Eleusian mysteries. For two millennia, Athenians went there to be initiated into the belief that death is a blessing, not a curse. Separation, reunion, abundance: that was the eternal Mediterranean cycle, for cities as for crops. Remembering follows dismemberment. You go down into the earth to be separated. You return to be reunited and to flower. Mr. Walker's deciduous trees will keep the city mindful of change.
If we are a Western city, and if we believe that Western values are worth fighting for overseas, the peaceful struggle must be conducted here at home. A Western identity, even a hybrid one, cannot be taken for granted. It must be earned anew, by redescribing it, on civic occasions, in terms that acknowledge changing times. T.S. Eliot urged modern audiences to be conscious of the pastness of the past as well as of its presence. That consciousness is what Mr. Arad and Mr. Walker have made.
More than that, the two have set a standard by which other designs for ground zero will be judged. They have struck a balance between the private and the public, and revealed a social space where the two can merge.
Correction:  January 17, 2004, Saturday  Because of a production error, a picture on Thursday showing the Callichoron well in Greece (a site of ancient mourning rituals), with an appraisal of the plan for the ground zero memorial known as Reflecting Absence, was reproduced in mirror image. The wall in the background should have appeared at the left of the well, not the right.
