GORDON CONWAY, the president of the Rockefeller Foundation, who recently announced he would retire at year's end, looks somewhat startled by the question: How would he describe himself? But why, suggests his pained expression.
Mr. Conway, a 65-year-old Briton, is known for speaking his mind as the head of one of the country's most prestigious and oldest foundations. This is the man who publicly chided the Monsanto Corporation, the biotechnology company, over the sale of seeds that become sterile after a generation. The company later abandoned plans for use of that gene technology. Yet Mr. Conway, an agricultural ecologist, is also well known for his enthusiastic support of genetically modified products to benefit developing countries.
Suffice it, then, to say he sees the nuances of things.
''What I usually like is telling people that life is more complicated than it appears to be,'' he says.
He sits in his large, airy office at the foundation's elegant Fifth Avenue headquarters, which was designed with artistic guidance from Maya Lin. Mr. Conway, who has a medium build and sharp blue eyes, is thoughtful, charming, even irreverent at times during a long conversation, with musings wandering from globalization to Siberian vodka.
Mr. Conway is the first non-American to lead the foundation, and says he wants to spend more time with his family in London, where his wife, Susan Conway, is a textile historian and an artist. A father of three grown children, he laments that there is one grandchild he hasn't seen in two years.
So what does Mr. Conway hope to accomplish in his last year at the foundation? Since his appointment in 1998, he has focused the institution more intently on the poor and their frequent exclusion from the benefits of globalization. Among the initiatives he has championed are a continentwide program in Africa to bring antiretroviral drugs to H.I.V.-positive mothers and a program to increase low-income housing and commercial development in poor areas of American cities.
''I want to speak out much more on the big issues,'' he says. ''I need to be much more public about them. In all good foundations, what they do is experimental, and you have to wait awhile to see your programs mature. It's all coming together. We're getting evidence and I'm feeling much more confident about them.''
As an example, he cites the Africa H.I.V. program. ''The message is that this is all doable and we should now be scaling up these ideas,'' he says. ''It's rarely said, but you can hear a kind of implicit comment that it's hopeless in Africa. You can sense people saying that it's a waste of money, that health services are so bad, the governments are so bad, and in any case, Africans won't take the pills. What this is all showing is that is malarkey!''
THE foundation, endowed by John D. Rockefeller in 1913, is not huge by today's standards. It has assets of about $2.7 billion and is far surpassed by institutions like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Ford Foundation. But its size belies its stature. It has served as a kind of tutor to some emerging philanthropists, and works in partnerships with organizations, including the Gates Foundation, to create bigger pools of money for projects.
''In the old days, we could do things like get the 'green revolution' going, fund schools of public health and develop a vaccine against yellow fever,'' he says. ''We could do it on our own and be a major force of change, of change on our own. That is not true so much anymore. Things are much more complicated.''
Mr. Conway, who was born in Birmingham, England, became fascinated by the world at a young age. His father was a mechanical engineer who worked on the invention of the jet engine, and his mother was a geography teacher who loved to travel.
He has worked in developing countries for 35 years, including a stint as the Ford Foundation's representative in India. Before the Rockefeller Foundation, he was vice chancellor of the University of Sussex near Brighton, England.
Early in his career, he became an important player in the search for ways to increase food production. He pioneered a type of pest management, which he conceived as an ecologist in North Borneo in 1960. His job was to tackle the insects and worms invading cocoa plants. While spraying plants, he concluded that pesticides were killing not only crop pests, but also the natural predators that feed on the pests, resulting in crop losses.
''We stopped spraying, and the pests came under natural control,'' he says.
In the 1980's, Mr. Conway was one of the first to define the concept of sustainable agriculture, an approach that is seen as critical to the development of poor countries. It involves controlling pests and increasing crop yields without a huge reliance on chemicals.
As he talks animatedly about food, Mr. Conway clearly gets into his own world. Let's venture closer to home now. What does he like to eat? He says a bit sheepishly that the refrigerator in his Westchester County house is nearly bare. It contains some English marmalade and, of course, Marmite, that brown, very British spread. ''It's terribly important,'' he says. His face lights up as he describes a delectable snack; Marmite on toast with vodka, served neat and at room temperature.
PUBLIC LIVES
