Word that the entrepreneur Strive Masiyiwa would soon announce that he was selling half his Johannesburg-based telecommunications business, Econet Wireless, to Allied Technologies came as little surprise to industry watchers.
The expected $70 million deal, reported by Reuters earlier this week, would give both companies what they need, analysts said. The closely held Econet, which focuses on Africa and has several new cellular licenses that it has been unable to fully finance, will get a well-financed partner.
The Johannesburg-based Allied Technologies, an electronics, telecommunications and information technology investment holding company that has been sitting on more than 1.2 billion rand ($167 million) in cash, will get access to five of Econet's six cellular businesses and one of its two satellite companies.
Alllied Technologies, known as Altech and controlled by the Allied Electronics Corporation, also of Johannesburg, confirmed that talks were under way but declined further comment..
''A deal between the two would make sense,'' said Joseph Vibetti, an equity research analyst at Andisa Securities in Johannesburg. ''Altech has a strong telecommunications arm that would be investing in a company that needs cash.'' The question is, he added, whether it is a good deal at the price.
Mr. Vibetti and other analysts say Altech is taking a gamble, albeit a calculated one, in teaming with Econet and the charismatic and controversial Mr. Masiyiwa, whose rapidly expanding operations are under siege on several fronts.
Mr. Masiyiwa is fending off a legal challenge from a losing bidder to his recently acquired Kenyan cellular license as well as threats by the Zimbabwean government to cancel his cellular operating licenses there after being accused of foreign currency violations.
More important, he is in a bitter fight to regain control of his company's crown jewel, a stake in Nigeria's second-largest cellular network, Econet Wireless Nigeria, amid a takeover bid by Vodacom, a cellular giant owned by South Africa's government-owned telephone company, Telkom S.A.; the Vodafone Group of Britain; and the South African investment firm VenFin.
Considered a maverick in investment and telecommunications circles, Mr. Masiyiwa, 42, built Econet Wireless on smooth talk, big ambitions and tenacity.
The company now spans eight nations. In addition to the Zimbabwe operations (not part of the Altech deal, according to Reuters), the contested Nigeria holding and the Kenya license, it has stakes in cellular networks in Botswana and Lesotho, a new cellular license in New Zealand and satellite businesses in Britain and Morocco (the latter also said to not be part of an Altech deal).
Econet is estimated to be worth about $100 million without its Zimbabwe assets, which are hard to value given the unstable economic climate there.
But Mr. Masiyiwa, a native of Zimbabwe who lives in self-imposed exile in a high-security complex outside Johannesburg and drives a bulletproof car, has made enemies for his politics and his confrontational tactics, as well as for his failure in Nigeria and elsewhere to come up with financing to pay for and build the networks for which he has won licenses.
He has also been accused by Nigerian partners of mismanagement and cronyism, accusations he says are attempts to discredit him.
The British-educated son of a middle-class Zimbabwean couple, Mr. Masiyiwa was trained as an engineer and was employed for a short time by Zimbabwe's government-owned phone company after returning home in 1984. But he chafed at the restrictions of working for the government, so in 1986 he founded an engineering firm, Retrofit.
In 1994, intrigued with the idea of wireless telecommunications, he sold Retrofit, by then worth about $10 million, to finance what became an almost five-year legal battle against the telecommunication's monopoly of the Zimbabwe government.
''I decided I want to be in it at any cost,'' he said at a recent interview in a boardroom at his Johannesburg offices, wistfully recalling the Mercedes he gave up to help pay for the legal battle. Smiling at the memory, he added: ''And it almost became that.''
The battle catapulted Mr. Masiyiwa into the international spotlight. Along with the subsequent use of the network by members of the political opposition in Zimbabwe to send text messages drumming up support in a 1999 referendum, it earned Mr. Masiyiwa the lasting enmity of President Robert Mugabe.
Mr. Masiyiwa further antagonized the government by financing the antigovernment newspaper, The Daily News, first by lending the newspaper enough cash to stay afloat during crucial parliamentary elections in 2000 and later, after the paper reorganized under the banner of the Associated Newspapers of Zimbabwe, by becoming its chairman and major shareholder.
The Daily News and a sister paper were shut down by the government in September for failing to register under strict new media laws, but they are fighting to resume publication.
Zimbabwean analysts say Mr. Masiyiwa's support for The Daily News is largely responsible for recent threats by the government to revoke Econet Wireless license in the country.
The political and economic turmoil that has embroiled the country has taken a toll on Econet's well-established Zimbabwe operation, forcing him to cut back services and staff. In 2000, fearing for the safety of his family, he moved the parent company to Johannesburg and has not been home since.
But standing up to Mr. Mugabe made him a popular figure in Zimbabwe.
''He's respected as a little guy who takes on the big man,'' said Trevor Ncube, the publisher of Zimbabwe's two independent weekly newspapers. ''He's sharp, he's daring. I've been very impressed by him.''
He is also deeply spiritual, Mr. Ncube said, his actions influenced by his Christian faith and a sense of social responsibility.
This view of Mr. Masiyiwa surprises many business associates at Econet Wireless Nigeria, who are trying to oust Mr. Masiyiwa and sell a controlling stake of the company to Vodacom for $250 million.
The cellular industry in Nigeria, a country with a population of 130 million with one of the continent's worst traditional telecommunications infrastructures, is considered to be Africa's biggest telecommunications prize. And Econet Wireless Nigeria, Mr. Masiyiwa's most valuable asset.
But EWN needs a large influx of cash to expand and keep up with competition, largely from the MTN Group, the South African company that controls Nigeria's largest network and that is Vodacom's biggest rival.
Mr. Masiyiwa was a founding partner of EWN, which now has about 850,000, or 35 percent, of the country's cellular subscribers. Through Econet Wireless, he held a 5 percent equity stake and had a management contract -- worth 3 percent of the company's revenue -- to run the Nigerian operation. He was also vice chairman of the company's board.
But in October, directors voted to strip him of all three. They said that when Mr. Masiyiwa failed to acquire promised financing for the license and start-up costs, they reduced his planned stake to 5 percent in return for operating the network. But they said he abused his management contract by placing in lucrative positions unqualified friends and relatives who were fleeing Zimbabwe's turmoil.
Mr. Masiyiwa, who is challenging the board's actions through a series of lawsuits in Nigeria, South Africa and the United Nations Permanent Court of Arbitration in Paris, wants more than reinstatement of the previous status quo.
Like Vodacom, he is interested only in networks over which he has operational control. He claims he has the right to increase his stake in Econet Wireless Nigeria, and says he has raised $150 million to raise his interest to about 33 percent.
He has also sued Vodacom for $1.5 billion, accusing the company of inducing EWN's board to breech its contract with him.
Vodacom declined to comment.
Econet Wireless Nigeria directors said Mr. Masiyiwa was trying to wear down Vodacom. Legal bombardment, they point out, is strategy he used before, when fighting for his first license in Zimbabwe.
One board member, who asked not to be named while litigation was pending, said: ''Everybody saw Strive as another young African like themselves, whom they could work with, and they were very, very delighted to meet him and work with him. But unfortunately, from Day 1, what we've had is a catalog of lies and half truths.''
Mr. Masiyiwa acknowledged that he had been unable to secure financing for the network, saying the slump in the global telecommunication market was the reason.
But now an Altech deal is in the works and $150 million in financing is lined up for Nigeria. Mr. Masiyiwa said he was certain that he would emerge victorious in the Nigeria battle. Analysts say the expected price of the Econet-Altech deal is an indication that Altech thinks he will.
Mr. Masiyiwa dismissed the Nigeria fight with Vodacom as an annoyance and a delay, but nothing more. ''We've taken on Goliaths before,'' he said. ''I think Mugabe was a bigger threat than Vodacom.''
Correction:  January 20, 2004, Tuesday  An article in World Business on Thursday about Strive Masiyiwa, a telecommunications executive in Zimbabwe, referred incorrectly to his security measures. He does not drive a bulletproof car.
