''Taboo'' was the first, but it won't be the last.
That was the consensus around Broadway yesterday after the winter's first unexpected casualty, ''Taboo,'' announced that it would close on Feb. 8 because of disappointing ticket sales with no sign of improvement. It was the first Broadway show produced by Rosie O'Donnell, who invested $10 million of her own money in it, bringing the music of the 1980's pop star Boy George to the stage, not to mention Boy George himself in a leading role.
Winter on Broadway usually means a winnowing of shows as tourists leave town after the holidays and the audience in the New York region tends to stay home. Several shows, like ''Cabaret,'' closed in early January in expectation of the long, fallow cold months. But the first weeks of this winter, after a fall season crowded with money losers and critical pariahs, look a bit grimmer than usual because of bitter weather and continued doubts about the economy and tourism.
Jed Bernstein, the president of the League of American Theaters and Producers, Broadway's leading trade group, cautioned that it was far too early to be worried but allowed that ''a little warmer weather wouldn't hurt.''
Beyond ''Taboo,'' ticket sales last week for several other big-budget musicals, including ''Gypsy,'' ''42nd Street'' and ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' (winner of the 2002 Tony Award for best musical), fell by more than $300,000 each from the giddy receipts of the week before, which included the usually lucrative New Year's holiday. The new dance musical ''Never Gonna Dance,'' which opened in December, had an even tougher time, recording only $350,000 in sales last week, which shows a significant weekly loss. Things have been more harrowing for Broadway productions of straight plays, which had a terrible fall, with one closing in previews (''Bobbi Boland'') and another (''The Oldest Living Confederate Widow Tells All'') closing after opening night.
A production of the Pulitzer Prize-winning drama ''Anna in the Tropics'' by Nilo Cruz has particularly struggled. The play, which received mostly positive reviews after opening in November, played to a mere 41 percent of its capacity last week at the Royale Theater. Another new play, William Nicholson's ''Retreat From Moscow,'' starring John Lithgow, Eileen Atkins and Ben Chaplin, was playing to only 55 percent at the Booth.
The negative climate for plays may be beginning to have a chilling effect on other potential productions. The playwright Neil LaBute (''The Mercy Seat,'' ''The Shape of Things'') said last week that though some producers had expressed interest in his newest play, ''This Is How It Goes,'' a drama about a troubled marriage, it would probably not be seen on Broadway because of the commercial risks of staging new dramatic work.
And the producer Roy Gabay said on Tuesday that he would not try to bring Amy Freed's Shakespearean comedy, ''The Beard of Avon,'' to Broadway, dashing speculation that the play, a hit Off Broadway at the New York Theater Workshop, might make the transfer. ''With what's happening to plays on Broadway -- good plays with stars like 'The Retreat From Moscow,' 'Anna in the Tropics' -- producers are getting nervous,'' Mr. Gabay said.
Producers who have committed to Broadway, meanwhile, are working hard just to keep their shows afloat. Daryl Roth, a producer of ''Anna'' -- a tale of Latino tobacco workers with an all-Latino cast, led by Jimmy Smits -- said yesterday that the production had invested in a new advertising campaign.
Other shows are facing challenges unrelated to the weather or the calendar, including the inevitable attrition of original cast members. ''Thoroughly Modern Millie,'' for example, which opened in 2002, is losing its original leading lady on Feb. 16, when Susan Egan takes over for Sutton Foster. Ms. Foster won a Tony for her performance as the show's puckish title character.
Industry leaders were also expressing hope that Broadway's popular Season of Savings campaign, which offers discounts to shows, would once again help sales. Mr. Bernstein said he also hoped that the weak dollar might encourage more foreign tourists to visit the United States.
Not all Broadway shows are suffering. ''The Producers,'' with the return of its original stars, Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick, broke Broadway box office records this month and continues to bring in more than $1.3 million a week. At least one new musical, Stephen Schwartz's ''Wizard of Oz'' tale, ''Wicked,'' seems to have struck a chord with ticket buyers, grossing more than $1 million a week since Thanksgiving.
As for new plays, one small surprise has been the increasing success of ''I Am My Own Wife,'' the one-man show starring Jefferson Mays at the Lyceum. It played to nearly 80 percent of capacity last week, helped by discounted tickets but still a strong improvement over its sales last month.
''It's a little too soon to declare anything, one way or another,'' Mr. Bernstein said. ''We have not had a rash of closings. And the next opening is only four or five weeks away.''
