When J.P. Morgan Chase acquires Bank One, probably sometime later this year, the city of Chicago seems all but certain to lose its last major banking headquarters. Indeed, people here are already lamenting the deal as one more step toward the demise of Chicago as a major financial center.
''Emotionally, it's upsetting,'' said Paul O'Connor, executive director of World Business Chicago, a nonprofit economic development corporation for the city. ''In my line of work, headquarter pelts are prized, but the economic impact is the real question.''
And that has some here worried. In recent years, this city -- built on steel, railroads, chewing gum, ad jingles and pork bellies -- has been steadily eclipsed as a financial and corporate center, experts say.
The Chicago Board of Trade, once the world's biggest futures exchange, is now ranked No.4 or No.5 depending on how you count, having lost ground to electronic trading, European futures exchanges like Eurex, and even its own next-door neighbor, the fast-growing Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
And a string of big companies, long identified with Chicago, have through merger or acquisition seen their independence, or their Chicago headquarters, disappear in recent years. The list includes the phone company Ameritech, now part of SBC Communications of San Antonio; the oil company Amoco, now part of BP of Britain; the department store doyenne Marshall Field's, subsumed into the Target Corporation of Minneapolis; the salt maker Morton International, which for the most part was folded into the Philadelphia-based Rohm &amp; Haas Company; and the advertising agency Leo Burnett, creator of the Jolly Green Giant, now a unit of the Publicis Groupe of France.
Sears, United Airlines, McDonald's and Motorola are among the companies that still have headquarters in the region, but they all have had serious sales and profit woes in recent years. And while Chicago managed to lure Boeing in 2001, the company has only known bad news since then.
''Chicago sealed its fate 20 years ago,'' said Anil Kashyap, a professor of economics and finance at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. ''The state had very restrictive banking laws. So, many banks moved to places like North Carolina. And that's proved to be irreversible. Chicago is no longer a major banking center.''
Four big banks once graced the Lasalle Street area of downtown Chicago, their line of march bounding along both sides of the street toward the majestic Chicago Board of Trade building. Bank One is the last to stand on its own.
Continental Illinois Bank, once a national titan, collapsed in 1984, largely because of huge loans to the energy industry. After a government bailout, it re-emerged as part of Bank of America.
Harris Bank was acquired by the Bank of Montreal in 1984. Lasalle Bank, still a major force here, is now a subsidiary of ABN Amro Bank, which is based in the Netherlands.
First National became First Chicago and then, in 1998, merged with Bank One of Columbus, Ohio, which at the time was gobbling up regional banks on the way to becoming the nation's fourth-largest bank holding company. It moved its headquarters to Chicago, but kept its geography-free name.
Assuming that Bank One is absorbed into Wall Street's J.P. Morgan Chase, Northern Trust, which specializes in asset management, will be the only sizable bank with headquarters here.
Leo Melamed, chairman emeritus of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and a pioneer of Chicago futures trading, insisted in a telephone interview on Wednesday that while Chicago may no longer be a banking center, it remains a force in the financial world, by virtue of its role in risk management.
''I'm still with the Merc, and all the major banks work with us,'' he said. ''We don't care where they're located. We're still the capital of the futures market and risk management.''
BANKING GIANT: THE HOMETOWN
