The conductor Wolfgang Sawallisch, 80, who has been suffering from chronic health problems, seemed to defy time on Tuesday night in an extraordinary performance of Bruckner's daunting 80-minute Symphony No. 5 in B Flat. Mr. Sawallisch seemed at his artistic peak, delivering a luminous and probing account of an elusive and complex work.
Last May, when he made his farewell appearance at Carnegie Hall as the music director of the Philadelphia Orchestra, he had been suffering from fatigue and dizziness and looked frail. Mr. Sawallisch rallied to give vibrant readings of symphonies by Beethoven and Schumann that night. Still, it was hard to avoid wondering if we were seeing his last performance in New York. As it turned out, he was not able to conduct the remaining concerts on a farewell tour with the orchestra he led with distinction for 10 years.
So it was heartening to have Mr. Sawallisch back with the Philadelphians on Tuesday night for this uncompromising program, consisting of only the Bruckner.
Sitting on a tall stool that kept his back upright, Mr. Sawallisch seemed more commanding a figure than ever, conducting with elegantly economical gestures and projecting calm authority. If was as if he were not just performing the symphony but also channeling Bruckner.
Listening to this shimmering account of the score it was hard to understand why Bruckner's orchestration was considered so curiously austere that Franz Schalk, who conducted the premiere performance in 1894 (Bruckner was too ill to attend) in Graz, Austria, boldly reorchestrated long passages, giving it more Wagnerian heft. Mr. Sawallisch conducted the original version, which is now accepted. Even in subdued passages he drew such uncannily balanced, warm and enveloping tones from the orchestra, especially the rich string section, that you would have thought the Carnegie Hall stage floor had turned into the sound board of some gargantuan cello.
Mr. Sawallisch had the simple opening of the first movement -- just a soft, plucked descending and ascending unison scale motif -- seeming like the most significant initial statement of any 19th-century symphony. As the ruminative movement evolved, he captured all its stately beauty: for example, the passage when a recurring chorale tune played in pizzicato lower strings is commented upon by a discursive melody in the violins.
The plaintive slow movement flowed by inexorably. The deceptively genial third movement seemed here a gripping apotheosis of the Ländler, a slowly waltzing Austrian dance. And the sprawling Finale, which can easily come across as rambling, sounded organic and inevitable. He made riveting drama of the pauses between the halting phrases that lead up to the final fugue, then caught you off guard by sneakily slipping into that complex fugue, executed with restrained intensity until the triumphant final flourishes.
That the ovation went on and on was no surprise. With its dynamic new music director, Christoph Eschenbach, in place and Mr. Sawallisch, one hopes, on the mend and able to continue as conductor laureate, the Philadelphia Orchestra is in great shape.
MUSIC REVIEW
