NATO troops conducted raids this week close to Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in an attempt to track down a leading war-crimes suspect, Radovan Karadzic.
In the latest operation, early Tuesday morning, American, British and Italian soldiers, some equipped with sniffer dogs, surrounded and searched a house in Pale, the former wartime capital of the Bosnian Serbs.
The building was used by Dr. Karadzic, the former leader of Bosnian Serbs, during the 1992-95 war, which tore the country apart and left as many as 200,000 people dead.
Along with the former Bosnian Serb military commander, Gen. Ratko Mladic, Dr. Karadzic is on the top of the list of suspects sought by the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague. He is wanted for 16 counts of genocide and crimes against humanity during the war.
A NATO spokesman said the raids began on Saturday with a tip that Dr. Karadzic, 58, was seeking medical attention in Pale.
Hundreds of troops combed the area and searched the home of Dr. Karadzic's wife, as well as a local hospital and church.
One man, whom peacekeeping troops said was part of the network used by the fugitive to hide from NATO peacekeepers, was detained for questioning. Documents were also seized, and military officials said those papers prompted Tuesday's search.
NATO is under growing pressure to arrest Dr. Karadzic before its withdrawal from Bosnia, which is planned for the end of this year.
The arrest of war crimes suspects is also a condition for joining NATO's partnership program, for which Bosnia has applied. The program is regarded as a first step toward full membership.
''We are getting closer than ever,'' said Capt. David Sullivan, spokesman for the peacekeepers, speaking by telephone from Sarajevo.
He stressed that co-operation with the Bosnian Serb authorities, which have been accused in the past of helping to hide Dr. Karadzic, had been ''outstanding.''
Bosnia has been split into two entities, the Serb-controlled Republika Srpska and a Muslim-Croat Federation, since the end of the war.
Bosnian Serb officials have barely hidden their reluctance to help track down their former leader, but admit to being under increased pressure to co-operate.
Dragan Kalinic, the speaker of Parliament in Republika Srpska, was quoted Monday by Agence France-Presse as telling journalists that the Serb-run part of Bosnia had been threatened with unspecified sanctions if cooperation was not forthcoming.
In early December, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld announced at NATO headquarters in Brussels that American forces would assist in peacekeepers' efforts to arrest Dr. Karadzic and other indicted suspects in the coming year.
''I believe that there is a concern that it would be shameful to leave without capturing him,'' said Senad Slatina, an analyst with the International Crisis Group in Sarajevo.
Most previous attempts to detain Dr. Karadzic have centered in southern Bosnia, around Foca.
Mr. Slatina said many Bosnians still doubted any outsiders' commitment to finding Dr. Karadzic.
''With just 10 men, 8 years and the resources of the strongest military alliance in the world, I would guarantee that by now I would have $5 million in my pocket,'' he said referring to the reward offered in exchange for information leading to Dr. Karadzic's arrest.
