With the Devils in a monthlong slump, it could be argued that there might be no better time for the Rangers to face the Devils than tonight at Madison Square Garden. The Rangers have had little success against the Devils, winning just 2 of their last 35 regular-season meetings.
Bobby Holik, who played 10 seasons with the Devils before joining the Rangers after the 2001-2 season, does not see it that way.
''Almost the worst thing for us is that they had such a bad game their last game,'' Holik said, referring to the Devils' 4-0 loss to Ottawa on Tuesday night. The Devils, the defending Stanley Cup champions, are 2-5-1-0 over their last eight games. ''The Devils are a team that, believe me, doesn't have two bad games in a row. They'll be ready for us.''
A much better question, Holik said, is whether the Rangers will be ready for the Devils, who beat the Rangers, 5-0, in New Jersey on Nov. 15, their only previous meeting this season.
''It doesn't matter what they're doing,'' Holik said in a telephone interview yesterday afternoon, after a brief practice session at the Rangers' training facilities in Greenburgh, N.Y. ''As we've learned, what matters is what we do. Them struggling doesn't really matter. We have to approach it as though we're playing against one of the best hockey teams in the National Hockey League, which they are. Otherwise, there will be a letdown. And we are famous for that.''
The Rangers are coming off one of their most satisfying victories of the season, a 4-1 drubbing of the Islanders at the Garden on Tuesday night.
The Devils' regular-season dominance of the Rangers dates to Feb. 17, 1997. Since then, the Devils are 21-1-12-1 against the Rangers. The last time they defeated the Devils was Oct. 17, 2001, with a 4-3 overtime victory at the Garden.
Tonight, Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur is expected to make his 50th consecutive regular-season start against the Rangers, dating to Dec. 26, 1993. For his career, Brodeur is 26-10-14 against the Rangers in the regular season, with a 2.13 goals against average, a .914 save percentage and 5 shutouts.
Mike Dunham, Brodeur's former backup, will probably be his opposition in the Rangers' goal. Dunham has never had much success against the Devils.
For his career, Dunham is 1-8-2 against the Devils with a 3.04 goals against average, a .910 save percentage and no shutouts. With the Rangers, Dunham is 0-3-2 against the Devils, with a 2.92 goals against average.
HOCKEY
