The game seemed almost incidental to the day, but not to the last two coaches sitting on the bench or to the players who were put out on the floor to be the brave face of the Knicks' organization on a muddled day. Once on the court against the Orlando Magic, away from the chaos and the questions, the Knicks were able to push aside the bizarre occurrences, the blaring headlines, and just play.
Stephon Marbury led the way last night with 26 points, 11 in the fourth quarter, and 10 assists. Allan Houston had 23 points and Keith Van Horn added 22 in the Knicks' 120-110 victory over the Magic.
Marbury dropped in a 3-pointer with 2 minutes 31 seconds remaining, his hand held in the air to soak in the applause as he brought the Knicks' lead to 111-103. But on the other end, Houston fouled out, sending Lee Nailon to the line, where he cut the gap to 6 points with 2:16 left. But the Knicks held on.
Amid the shouts from the crowd at Madison Square Garden, there were no cries of ''Fire Layden'' or ''Fire Chaney.'' The cheers came for the Knicks' performance on the court in a day of chaos.
On the bench, the assistant coach Herb Williams took over the head-coaching duties for the game until the Knicks can introduce Lenny Wilkens as their new coach today. Sitting beside Williams was only one assistant coach, Mike Malone, who remained even though his father, Brendan, was among the casualties of the awkward afternoon purge.
Shadowed by rumors and uncertainty, Chaney, Brendan Malone and another assistant coach, Lon Kruger, arrived for the game and were then escorted out of the building after receiving the news that they would be let go. That left Williams and the younger Malone to run the show and the players to pick up the pieces from a tumultuous day.
''It does calm things down,'' Marbury said. ''We don't have to hear 'Fire Chaney' when we're playing. And in the papers you guys don't have write about that. You can write about another story. So it'll make things a lot easier now.
''I mean, it's a tough situation. This is the N.B.A. We've still got a game to play and we've still got to win. Despite everything that's been going on, we've got to put that aside and go out and play the way we know how.''
Marbury was playing for his fourth head coach of the season. The Knicks have already been attempting to assimilate Marbury, Penny Hardaway and Cezary Trybanski, who arrived after the eight-player trade last week with Phoenix, as well as Moochie Norris, who came from Houston in the first trade of Isiah Thomas's reign. While those players frantically tried to learn Chaney's system, they, as well as the rest of the team, will now have to shift gears and soak up the teachings of Wilkens.
''I expect our players to be resilient,'' Thomas said before the game. ''I expect them to be professional and I expect them to come out and perform at a very high level because this is a performance business. This is not a business where you're rewarded for your demeanor, your personality or anything else. This is a business where you're rewarded for wins and losses and I expect our players to come out and try to win the game.''
Houston said the approach was the same as every day.
''You only have so much room for thought in your head at one time anyway,'' he said. ''So all you can do is try to make yourself think about the task at hand and think about what we have to do and getting a win. Everybody wants to win, so that's what you really have to focus on.''
''It's very tough,'' Marbury said, ''but obviously the feeling here is that he can come in here and he can make changes. The only thing we can do is go forward.''
The Knicks did last night, playing with the look of a team pieced together by the first five guys to arrive at the playground. There was little defense, which conveniently fit in well with the presence of the league's worst team, the Magic. In the first half, the Knicks led, 64-57, with Marbury, Houston, Van Horn, Kurt Thomas and Hardaway all contributing.
The only players on the roster who have played for Wilkens were Dikembe Mutombo, who was a part of Wilkens's Atlanta Hawks teams, and Hardaway, who won a gold medal under Wilkens in the 1996 Olympics.
''He's a guy that played the game,'' Hardaway said. ''He understands the game really well.''
PRO BASKETBALL
