Hollywood packed up its parkas and sheepskin boots on Wednesday to head to Park City, Utah, for the 20th annual Sundance Film Festival, which will start on Thursday. For the first time, its opening film is a documentary.
That film, ''Riding Giants,'' is a fast-moving look at the origins of surfing by Stacy Peralta, who made his mark at the festival in 2001 with his first film, ''Dogtown and Z-Boys,'' about skateboarding in Southern California.
The festival will include 137 full-length films -- 91 features and 46 documentaries -- and 88 shorts. Another 30 short films can be seen at www.sundance.org, an online version of the festival.
Festival programmers said they were optimistic about this year's slate, buoyed by the success of many of last year's entries, among them ''American Splendor'' and ''The Station Agent,'' which were acquired by distributors and have gone on to critical acclaim and recognition during the current awards season.
''The success of the films that were in the festival last year was very high,'' said John Cooper, the festival's director of programming. ''That has us coming into this year on a high.''
Mr. Cooper noted a number of films this year that deal with memory and time, among them ''The Machinist,'' ''November'' and ''Trauma.'' He also observed that many of the entries experiment with nontraditional filmmaking techniques, such as mixing animation into a narrative or actors addressing the camera directly. ''Those things don't throw the audience out of the film like they used to,'' he said.
Already there was buzz around some films available for acquisition, including ''The Motorcycle Diaries'' by Walter Salles, about Che Guevara's journey into political activism, and ''Open Water,'' a thriller about two people left to face sharks in the middle of the ocean.
As has become the norm at the festival, there will be numerous films with major movie stars in them, including Julianne Moore, Kevin Bacon, DMX and this year Robert Redford, the prime mover behind Sundance.
''It's a sign of the economics of indie films,'' said Laura Kim, a consultant to Sundance and an executive with Warner Independent Pictures. ''You get your films financed if you put stars in it. That's not just Sundance. That's the film economy.''
