In the latest step in the widening investigation into an accounting scandal at the Italian dairy giant Parmalat, the police on Wednesday arrested the wife of the former chief financial officer, Fausto Tonna, for suspected money laundering, according to a court official at the Parma courthouse.
Mr. Tonna's wife, Donatella Alinovi, is suspected of withdrawing about 1 million euros last week from an account linked to a Parmalat unit, according to the official, who is close to the investigation. Ms. Alinovi is suspected of withdrawing the money some time after her husband was arrested on New Year's Eve and putting it in two safe-deposit boxes at a bank in Parma, the person said. The police seized the safe-deposit boxes.
Ms. Alinovi was placed under house arrest on Wednesday and is the 10th person to be detained in the investigation, which began last month and may involve as much as 10 billion euros in false accounting. Prosecutors continued their interrogation of Mr. Tonna, questioning him for 14 hours on Tuesday, and continuing on Wednesday. Mr. Tonna was a close adviser of Calisto Tanzi, Parmalat's jailed founder and its chairman and chief executive until a month ago.
In the last week, the investigation into the scandal at Parmalat, Italy's eighth-largest company, has expanded beyond the company's management and is likely to grow even further. Prosecutors have met with executives at Deutsche Bank and a lawyer for Citigroup. Citigroup helped Parmalat set up an offshore investment vehicle now suspected of being one way that the company hid losses and siphoned off money.
Italian newspapers have reported in recent days that the investigation may soon look at local politicians. Mr. Tanzi's sway over Parma was such that it would be difficult, if not impossible, for an important politician not to be linked in some way to Parmalat, said a professor at Parma's university who has close ties to a local judge, and asked not to be identified.
While Mr. Tanzi managed to escape unscathed from the ''clean-hands'' investigation of the mid-1990's that implicated hundreds of businessmen and politicians in Italy, the collapse of his company may lead to its own political upheaval.
While Italy waits to see which, if any, politicians may be implicated in Parmalat, attention remains on Mr. Tonna's secret testimony and Mr. Tanzi's health. Officials decided on Tuesday that despite Mr. Tanzi's weak heart, he would remain in Milan's San Vittore prison where he has been held since Dec. 27. As a precaution, he was moved to the prison's medical ward.
Mr. Tanzi's lawyer on Tuesday denied that his client had attempted to commit suicide, according to the Italian financial daily Il Sole/24 Ore.
