Ballet has been an international affair since it was introduced from Italy to France after the Renaissance. Choreographers and dancers have frequently crossed borders.
George Balanchine was no exception, and New York City Ballet offered a nod to his time as ballet master with the Royal Danish Ballet in 1930-31 with guest appearances by two soloists from the Danish company on Sunday afternoon at the New York State Theater.
Dancing the pas de deux from ''Flower Festival in Genzano,'' Gudrun Bojesen and Thomas Lund offered a typical showpiece by August Bournonville, the great 19th-century Danish choreographer.
The complete ballet from 1858 is no longer performed, but this excerpt, sometimes danced by City Ballet, is full of charm and beauty.
Yet here it was part of City Ballet's ingenious packaging of its regular repertory in tribute to the centennial of Balanchine's birth. ''The Heritage,'' as the winter season is called, is reconsidering familiar works in a new context by presenting not only Balanchine's early ballets but also a few by choreographers he saw before arriving in New York in 1933.
Whether he was greatly influenced by Bournonville is debatable, but he paid homage to that Danish master in three of his own works, ''Donizetti Variations,'' ''Tarantella'' and ''Scotch Symphony.''
One had only to watch Ms. Bojesen being sweetly courted by Mr. Lund in ''Flower Festival'' to understand why Balanchine included some of the same steps and buoyancy in his ''Bournonville'' ballets. What appealed to Balanchine was the way Bournonville preserved the purity of the French classical style in Denmark.
To see it come alive was to see Ms. Bojesen's flight across the stage in a series of sparkling brisés, or traveling leg beats, and the precision of Mr. Lund's entrechat and air turns in alternating directions. There was also his sensational spring in the signature Bournonville leap, leg bent behind and arms open. The joy of dance radiated through these performers, and Mr. Lund gave his coda the right folk heartiness. Richard Moredock conducted Edvard Helsted's tuneful music.
The rest of the program roamed over the 1920's and 30's. ''Prodigal Son'' (1929) shows Balanchine at his most conventionally modernist, strongly influenced by the Soviet avant-garde. Damian Woetzel danced the title role with perfect stylization, concentrating on the angular rather than the natural in his body. His ferocity and vigor contributed to an outstanding performance. As the Siren, Maria Kowroski might have been more energetic.
In 1936 Balanchine created ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue'' within the Broadway show ''On Your Toes.'' His 1968 version of ''Slaughter'' is an amusing trifle. Nonetheless Sofiane Sylve and Philip Neal gave their mock romance as a stripper and a hoofer something of a tender edge.
By 1941 Balanchine had become Balanchine: that is, he found his lasting signature with ''Concerto Barocco.'' Yvonne Borree, Nikolaj Hübbe and Jennie Somogyi found its sublime center on Sunday.
On Saturday night in Balanchine's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' Ms. Sylve use her power to gorgeous effect in a debut as Hippolyta. The leads were Kyra Nichols, wonderfully regal as Titania, and Tom Gold, as a temperamental Oberon.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
