It was undoubtedly disconcerting to Iowans to learn that Howard Dean had denounced their caucuses as a dumb way to kick off the presidential nominating process, one that was ''dominated by special interests'' and party extremists. It must have been even more painful to discover that while Dr. Dean's opinion, circa 2000, was news to them, it was an old story to Canadians, who were exposed to 90 appearances by the then-governor of Vermont between 1996 and 2002 on a news program called ''The Editors.''
''Quebec knew about this guy before the Midwest ever heard of him,'' said Todd Meyer, a recovering political junkie who sat in his bar and grill, grinning at the vagaries of the American political ritual. Mr. Meyer is amused that every word of a former talking head on Canadian broadcasting is now being vetted by his Democratic rivals. ''I mean, to come out of the woodwork in Iowa and suddenly be so prominent,'' he mused.
Coming out of the woodwork is precisely the point of the frenzied Iowa caucus system that is heading toward its quadrennial climax -- or anticlimax -- Monday. Historically, coming out on top here does not matter so much as being noticed -- emerging from the pack and marching off to the regular primary elections to come with the aura of a potential winner.
Mr. Meyer was a teenage political zealot in the early, innocent caucus years, even before Jimmy Carter arrived with his signature garment bag and demonstrated that this was a place where a relatively unknown governor -- one who never even made the cut for Canadian interview shows -- could pull himself far, far out of the woodwork and into the front of the pack. ''I don't want to say the novelty of the caucuses has worn off, but it's been years since a candidate made me want to go,'' said the 49-year-old proprietor of the Irish Democrat, a soothing roadhouse booming lately with out-of-town political roustabouts.
It's been a long time since Mr. Carter, or anything approaching innocence, was a caucus feature. Now, like many Iowans, Mr. Meyer is thoroughly sick of the mass of daily mailings, nightly phone messages and endless TV pleas that besiege his home from candidates who, for all their homage to vox pop politicking, feel obliged to buy into packaged campaigning.
The exercise of fresh discovery once marked Iowa as a citadel in the 1970's rebellion by party reformists against boss-run nominating conventions. But anyone who has visited the caucuses across the years can sense that quality eroding. The people somehow have been reduced to reactive roles for the stratagems and conceits, claims and attacks concocted a year in advance by campaign managers, fund-raisers, focus-groupies and pundits offering politics as something for insiders.
Issues are slyly weighted and religiously tracked. But the sad fact underlying the modern process is that the candidate who can raise the most money usually gets the nomination. Ordinary people inevitably fade in that equation, for all their value as sounding boards and photo-op authenticators.
The pity is that there are fine local discussions to be heard here this year about war and joblessness, education and domestic insecurity. Leo Gerard of the United Steelworkers is stirring listeners with an apocalyptic view of the nation's shockingly inert job-creation numbers. But his speeches are just a backdrop to organized labor's extremely expensive union showdown between the mostly blue-collar unions supporting Representative Richard Gephardt and the service and government workers backing Dr. Dean.
One of the state's most respected Democrats, Pat Marshall, a 73-year-old retired union worker who captains her neighborhood caucus here and sits on the Democratic National Committee, senses the intrusion of big-money politicking. ''But the candidates still campaign eyeball-to-eyeball here and we get to study their body language,'' she insists.
Ms. Marshall favors Dr. Dean for his mastery of small-money donors via the Internet, although he will need big-money power if he is to get far beyond Iowa. She thinks Dr. Dean's Trumanesque outbursts define him favorably. Others are hoping that's not the case. His rivals are putting each of his utterances through a chamois as late polling hints at some sort of neck-and-neck, if inconclusive, caucus result.
If there's anything that really marks the Iowa caucuses these days, besides their first-in-the-nation status, it's the great distances of flat highways that stretch between campaign stops. Spread out as the population is, the Democratic contenders all seem desperate to meet Ms. Marshall's standards and get in the eyeball of every potential voter at least once. ''Pardon me for speaking through the spaghetti,'' Dr. Dean told a packed house of potential caucusgoers the other night at the Best Western in Burlington. His campaign bus was outside with the motor running. The spaghetti eaters needed no apology for the urgency. Clearly, neither Dr. Dean nor his rivals plan on going gentle back into the woodwork.
Editorial Observer
