Herb Williams was a statuesque figure on the Knicks' sideline last night, pacing beside the court, making faces, hollering instructions. Mike Malone sat near him on a bench that looked oddly unfilled, the only assistant coach besides Williams remaining after Isiah Thomas purged the staff.
It was a strange night indeed at Madison Square Garden, where the Knicks made the best of it against the Orlando Magic until meeting their new head coach, Lenny Wilkens, who is to arrive today.
When it becomes Wilkens's turn to patrol the sideline tomorrow against Seattle, he will do so in much the same way as his predecessor, Don Chaney. Calm and mellow, Wilkens won't run to midcourt and scream for his point guard to ''slow it down,'' as many of the more demonstrative coaches do. Wilkens will let the players play, and ultimately that is what Thomas said got him the job over the runner-up, Mike Fratello.
Defying the book on coaching that says management replaces a players' coach with a control freak or a screamer with a cool customer, Thomas placed his team in the hands of Wilkens. ''That surprises me,'' said one Eastern Conference official, speaking on condition of anonymity, ''because usually if you had a coach who is mellow and low-key, you bring in someone with more intensity. That's wild.''
Thomas admitted that Wilkens's similarity in manner to Chaney gave him pause. ''Yes, but that's a positive because both men are gentlemen, very classy men,'' Thomas said of Wilkens and Chaney. ''You don't need to have a fiery disposition to be a competitive person. Allan Houston and Penny Hardaway are very competitive people, but they don't have fiery dispositions. Lenny Wilkens and Don Chaney are very competitive people, but they are also very classy individuals.''
Class and calm are not what made Wilkens, 66, the coach with the most victories (1,292) and losses (1,114) in National Basketball Association history. Comparisons between Chaney and Wilkens stop at deportment.
''Don Chaney is a great guy, but I don't think you can compare him to Lenny Wilkens in terms of coaching,'' said another Eastern Conference official, also speaking on condition of anonymity. ''Lenny Wilkens has been successful everywhere he has coached. He's just on a whole different level than Don Chaney. I think he's going to be terrific for the Knicks.''
Those who believe coaching ability is measured by the number of bruised egos a coach leaves on the practice court or by how many times he calls a play himself don't put Wilkens among the elite of his profession. Fratello is that kind of coach, an animated shouter who appears to be working harder and doing more coaching during a game.
That type of coaching also tends to overshadow players, earning the coach more credit than the players for winning and less blame than them for losing. But that style has a short shelf life, eventually breeding resentment in the locker room.
''Lenny respects that it's a players' game,'' said one former league official who worked with both coaches. ''He doesn't try to upstage the players.''
Fratello also slows the pace, a style that might have stifled Stephon Marbury, the team's new point guard. ''I thought Lenny Wilkens was a better fit for our team,'' Thomas said. ''I think the tempo that we want to play at and I think his relationship with Stephon will be very important as far as Stephon's maturity and continued growth in this league.''
Wilkens, a Brooklyn native and one of the first great New York City point guards, has coached in the finals twice, winning it once with Seattle in 1979. He is also the only person besides John Wooden to be inducted into the Hall of Fame as both a player and a coach.
Wilkens has coached five different teams and has won at every stop except Portland (1974-76). Even in Toronto, where he was fired last year after going 24-58 without a healthy Vince Carter, he took the Raptors within a shot of the Eastern Conference finals in 2001.
The ugly way his time in Toronto ended has also put a chip on Wilkens's shoulder. His résumé will give him something else that Chaney seemed to lack: authority. While Chaney was merely the guy who was pegged after Jeff Van Gundy quit, Wilkens, voted one of the greatest 10 coaches of all time in 1996, is a pillar of the game.
''Lenny will get the players' respect,'' one league official said. ''Guys will play hard for Lenny.''
PRO BASKETBALL
