Two of the final pieces of the N.F.L. coaching puzzle fell into place yesterday, with the Chicago Bears hiring Lovie Smith, the St. Louis Rams' defensive coordinator, and the Buffalo Bills settling on Mike Mularkey, the Pittsburgh Steelers' offensive coordinator.
Of the seven teams that let their head coach go after the season, only Oakland is left to select a new one.
Almost more notable than who was hired is who has been left out. The former Giants coach Jim Fassel found himself an odd man out despite varying degrees of interest from four teams, the Washington Redskins, the Arizona Cardinals, the Bills and the Bears.
Teams had also been lining up to interview New England's offensive and defensive coordinators, Charlie Weis and Romeo Crennel, but neither seems likely to get a head-coaching job because Oakland has not expressed interest. Teams seemed unwilling to wait for Weis and Crennel, who could not field offers until the Patriots finished playing.
''I thought they would both end up somewhere,'' said John Mara, the Giants' executive vice president, who, with General Manager Ernie Accorsi, interviewed Crennel and Weis before hiring Tom Coughlin. ''The wait that the system imposes is not advantageous for them. It is a major factor. It is tough to sit there and wait because you can't offer them a job until their season is over.''
The Giants also interviewed Smith, who became the second African-American head coach hired this winter. Arizona hired the former Minnesota Vikings coach Dennis Green, bringing the number of black head coaches in the league to five.
Fassel's trip from ousted coach to hot candidate to forced sabbatical has been one of the stranger stories on the coaching carousel. He returned from his whirlwind round of interviews starting to think that a year -- at least -- away from coaching would not be such a bad thing.
''The season is so long and you work so hard,'' Fassel said. ''I didn't realize how drained I was.''
Only a day after his final game, Fassel was asked to interview with the Cardinals. The Redskins' owner, Daniel Snyder, was so enthusiastic about him that he flew to San Francisco, where Fassel was watching his son's bowl game, to talk to him before Arizona could. Snyder's interest was serious until he found he could lure Joe Gibbs out of retirement.
Fassel was not involved in two openings -- with the Atlanta Falcons, who hired Jim Mora Jr., the San Francisco 49ers' defensive coordinator; and with the Raiders, who are still conducting interviews.
Fassel's situation has big repercussions for the Giants, who remain responsible for his $2.5 million salary for another year, on top of the $2.7 million they will pay Coughlin.
Fassel may end up in a television booth while waiting for another opportunity next year.
The process was harder on Crennel and Weis, who will most likely watch the vacancies be filled before they can be allowed a second interview. The N.F.L. changed the rules, allowing one interview during the playoff bye week instead of delaying all contact until the season was over. But not being able to talk to Crennel and Weis a second time or offer the job until the end remains an issue for teams that want to move quickly.
Coaching a good team, ostensibly a benefit for a coordinator, has often become a hindrance. Mara pointed out that John Fox was not offered a job when the Giants went to the Super Bowl in the 2000 season; Carolina hired him a year later. It took Marvin Lewis two years to parlay his success as the Baltimore Ravens' defensive coordinator into a head-coaching job with Cincinnati last year.
EXTRA POINTS
Knowing that the Giants' special teams disintegrated into a weakness, Coach TOM COUGHLIN announced the hiring of MIKE SWEATMAN yesterday as special-teams coordinator. Sweatman, 56, returns for a second stint with the Giants. He was special-teams coach from 1985 to '92, a span encompassing both of the team's Super Bowl victories. He was the Chicago Bears' special-teams coach the past three years. . . . The Jets, still searching for a defensive coordinator, now have to hire a wide receivers coach, too. MIKE CANALES has left after one season to become the offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach at the University of Arizona. BO PELINI, Nebraska's defensive coordinator and interim head coach until he was fired this week by the new coach, BILL CALLAHAN, will be interviewed today for the Jets' defensive coordinator opening. GUNTHER CUNNINGHAM, the Tennessee Titans' linebackers coach, interviewed with Coach HERMAN EDWARDS for the job yesterday and is expected to interview in Atlanta for a similar job today.
PRO FOOTBALL
