Was that Andy Reid holding hands with his quarterback, Donovan McNabb, as Philadelphia kicked the winning field goal in overtime against Green Bay last Sunday? A rare moment of public expressiveness from a coach who has been accused of having his personality Botoxed?
His postgame news conference featured another improbable moment in this unlikely season. Reid smiled. O.K., it was restrained jubilation, mostly hidden under his brushy mustache, but for the stoic, businesslike Reid, this amounted to conspicuous joy.
Edward G. Rendell, governor of Pennsylvania and inveterate sports fan, said Reid's smile would stay with him, no matter what happened here Sunday against the Carolina Panthers in the National Football Conference championship game.
''Usually, he looks like a kid about to taste the worst kind of medicine,'' said Rendell, the former mayor of Philadelphia, who spends his Sundays here critiquing Reid and his players on a postgame television program. ''This time, he was beaming. I've never seen him this animated. It did our hearts good.''
Philadelphia's whole season was built on such unconventional moments. Hoary tenets of the National Football League were debunked. A dominant running back? The Eagles relied not on one but on three. A go-to receiver? McNabb has spread the ball around like Halloween candy. A defense that must stop the run? Eight times a running back gained 100 or more yards against Philadelphia, and the Eagles won seven of those games.
Ailments on the defensive line alone would have qualified as an episode of ''E.R.'' The Eagles played Green Bay without their most versatile running back (Brian Westbrook), top linebacker (Carlos Emmons) and best pass-coverage cornerback (Troy Vincent), and still prevailed, 20-17.
How could this happen? First, Philadelphia protects the ball. The Eagles tied a franchise record with only 22 turnovers during the regular season. Beyond that, players and coaches have been sent scrambling to the cliché thesaurus to explain their success. Character. Unselfishness. Resolve. Destiny.
''Your hearts are bigger than my waist,'' the corpulent Reid told his team on Sunday.
As rational an explanation as any for Philadelphia's third consecutive appearance in the N.F.C. championship game is Reid's even-tempered nature. A former offensive lineman at Brigham Young, he came to understand that emotion meant vulnerability at his position. This lesson he never forgot.
He did not panic when the Eagles (13-4) lost their opening two games this season and repeatedly lost players to injury. Most important, he did not give up on a struggling McNabb when the fans howled for him to be benched. If he was prosaic, Reid was also composed and unruffled. His team came to mirror his own resiliency.
''With all the adversity we faced, he maintained his focus and steadied the ship,'' defensive tackle Corey Simon said of Reid. ''That's all you can ask for, that every day you go to work, you can expect the same person.''
In the N.F.C. East, coaches have become as throwback as jerseys: Bill Parcells in Dallas, Tom Coughlin going to the Giants, Joe Gibbs back to Washington. Yet the coach with the most victories (51) in the N.F.L. since 2000 is the one with the lowest profile, Andy Reid, who is 45 and had never been so much as an offensive coordinator when Philadelphia hired him five seasons ago.
''He's as dry as a piece of beef jerky, but he's always the same,'' said Vincent, a Pro Bowl cornerback. ''You respect that. He comes in every day with his 3-by-5 card and his red Uniball pen, and he says his little blip and you're gone. You see him be consistent, and it causes you to be consistent.''
His name will not appear very often in the same sentence as the word loose, in regard to his personality or his clothes, but Reid has had his lighter moments this week. Referring to the celebrated fourth-and-26 pass that Philadelphia converted into a first down against Green Bay, Reid said that, yes, he kept a play ready for such desperate situations. It is called a punt.
Asked about the odds of McNabb's completing that first-down pass to receiver Freddie Mitchell, Reid told a reporter, ''A lot slimmer than you and me.''
When he was hired from Green Bay, where he served as quarterbacks coach, Reid banned sleeveless T-shirts in meetings and ball caps that were not team-issued. He even banned sunflower seeds. Players had to keep their jerseys tucked into their pants at training camp, and had to check in for breakfast whether they ate or not. ''I thought I had enlisted in the Army,'' Vincent said.
Vincent later came to realize that the coach was trying to create structure and uniformity in a professional environment. If players dressed alike and spoke as one, the theory went, they would play as one. Public dissension or ostentation was not to be tolerated. There will be no Eagles pulling pens out of their socks or retrieving cellphones from beneath the goal-post padding as they celebrate touchdowns.
''If somebody did, he'd probably say, 'Call your ride home because you're not on this team anymore,' '' Mitchell said of Reid.
When running back Duce Staley held out for 26 days during a contract dispute in training camp, Reid played hardball. Both men seemed as unswerving as bulls, Vincent said. Staley was fined $100,000 and seemed in jeopardy of playing little, thus be unable to showcase himself for free agency. Yet, annoyed as he was, Reid clearly did not hold it against Staley. He told Staley he could still be an indispensable part of the offense, and he has been.
While not discussing specifics of the conversation that smoothed ruffled feathers, Staley suggested that Reid said this: He respected him for sticking by his beliefs, even though he disagreed with his stance.
''If anything, what went on brought us closer,'' Staley said.
If Reid sometimes seems unyielding, his players can count on something valuable in return: if they put team goals ahead of individual goals, he will stand up for them, not criticize them in public.
McNabb is a case in point. The Eagles appeared listless while opening at home with a 17-0 loss to Tampa Bay and a 31-10 thrashing by New England. To some, McNabb seemed musclebound in his newly buff, 240-pound body. He was bothered by a bruised thumb. Rush Limbaugh soon suggested that McNabb was overrated by reporters who wanted to see him succeed because he is black.
Eagles fans booed McNabb and chanted for the backup quarterback, A. J. Feeley. Reid heard familiar criticism, too. He was scripting too many passes and not enough running plays, and failing to manage the clock properly. Reid did begin calling more running plays, but otherwise held his ground.
''Nobody panicked,'' Reid said. ''The players are obviously going to look at the coaches first and see if they're panicking.''
Instead of benching McNabb, Reid stuck with him. In fact, he blamed himself for his quarterback's troubles, saying, ''I've got to put Donovan in better position to make plays.''
The words were balm to McNabb's ego, which was as bruised as his thumb.
''It's important to know that you have the confidence in your coach so that when things aren't well, they're not going to sit there and point the finger at you in the media,'' McNabb said.
Their relationship appears more professional than personal, but there is clearly a strong trust between them, a willingness by Reid to let McNabb explore the full range of skills, to do the splendid things that are not coachable. Many here have noted the symbolism of the coach and his quarterback holding hands as they awaited the winning field goal against Green Bay.
McNabb joked on Wednesday that a ''magnetic field'' seemed to draw his hand to Reid's. However this season ends, their gesture seemed to say, the two are in this together.
''The things we've been through for five years, there's a bond we have,'' McNabb said.
Reid's management style is not without risk. He is essentially the Eagles' general manager, as well as their coach, and seems reluctant to renew contracts after players reach age 30. There are exceptions, and Joe Banner, the team president, said that 15 of 22 Philadelphia starters are in at least their second contracts with the team, a figure that only Green Bay surpassed.
Few would argue now with Reid's decision to part with his top pass rusher (Hugh Douglas) and kick returner (Brian Mitchell) after last season. At the same time, loyalty and business frequently clash in this league, and Eagles veterans are sometimes left to play with uncertainty about their futures. A number of valuable starters -- Staley, Vincent, Emmons and cornerback Bobby Taylor -- could be lost to free agency next season.
Some believe that if Westbrook had not rescued a victory over the Giants with a late punt return on Oct. 19, when the season hung in the balance, disgruntlement might have bubbled to the surface. But winning numbs a lot of stings. The Eagles have lost only once since then, and Reid has persuaded his players to proceed as if wearing blinders, looking ahead only to the next game, the next play.
''You don't want to be a cancer on something special,'' Vincent said.
Meanwhile, Philadelphia aches for a Super Bowl championship. No city with four pro sports teams has gone as long -- 21 years -- without a league title. Hope and trepidation always exist side by side here. There is no guarantee that the third time will be the charm for the Eagles in the N.F.C. title game after losses to St. Louis in 2002 and Tampa Bay in 2003. As The Philadelphia Daily News noted, the Browns, the Giants, the Rams and the Cowboys have all lost three consecutive conference championship games.
Asked whether he would change preparations this week, Reid said no, that to change now would be to admit mistakes in preparing for the other 17 games this season. And so the Eagles await Carolina, trusting that their coach's constancy may help them to finally navigate toward victory.
''Some people would say that losing three straight title games would cause radical change, would throw Andy into despair,'' Rendell said. ''Absolutely not. Win or lose, the opening day of training camp, it would be the same Andy.''
More or less.
''His guts might not be the same,'' Banner said, ''but everything else will be.''
PRO FOOTBALL
