The developer Bruce C. Ratner, who wants to buy the Nets and move them to Brooklyn, has been in exclusive negotiations with the team's owners since Monday, an executive involved in the negotiations said last night.
''We're almost there,'' the executive said. ''It's beyond tasting it.''
Ratner has said he would move the team to a new arena in downtown Brooklyn as part of a $2.5 billion commercial and residential development project to be designed by Frank Gehry.
Despite the optimism expressed last night, a representative of the Nets' owners warned that no deal had been reached with any of the three bidders. The representative, Edwin Stier, president of Community Youth Organization, the ownership group led by Raymond Chambers and Lewis Katz, said it was too soon to say who would win.
''We're still moving ahead,'' Stier said. ''No decision has been made.''
A spokeswoman for Ratner, Michele DeMilly, declined to comment.
Charles Kushner and Senator Jon S. Corzine, whose $267.5 million bid is second to Ratner's, may raise their offer as soon as tomorrow, a person with knowledge of the bid said.
Bob Sommer, a spokesman for Kushner, said, ''As a matter of fact, Mr. Kushner intends to present the winning bid, and any statement about an alternate winner is a baseless rumor.''
A third bidder, the venture capitalist Stuart Feldman, who is offering $257.5 million, has adopted a position that the Nets' ownership can come to him if the other bids falter. Unlike the other two groups, he has not increased his initial offer.
Katz, who watched last night's Nets game from his courtside seat at Continental Arena, refused to comment on the sale and said, ''Why don't we wait and see?'' He spent most of the game on the phone.
The current owners refused to give any details on the sale. Stier, a former federal prosecutor, said, ''Any story that says the sale process has ended is wrong.''
Ratner has offered $300 million in the bidding, which began in October after YankeeNets, the holding company whose assets included the Yankees and the Nets, chose to dissolve. Ratner increased his bid in the days before Christmas.
Even if Ratner becomes the owner, he still must clear several hurdles before getting permission to move the team to Brooklyn. Byron Scott, the Nets' coach, said the team would probably not move to the new location for four or five years.
The Nets will play at Continental Arena again next season because they did not inform the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority by a Dec. 31 deadline whether they planned to move.
Several people involved in the sale said that no contract had been signed with Ratner, who recently staged a news conference displaying his plans for moving the Nets to a Brooklyn arena that would be the centerpiece of the commercial and retail complex. They said considerable financial and accounting work remained to be done in areas like analyzing the cash value of the bids and offering additional information that might persuade the bidders to go higher.
Ratner's plans to build the Brooklyn complex have not been completed, but if he gets the team, his partners would include Katz and the hip-hop mogul Jay-Z.
The bidders have been in regular conversations with Stier and the team's investment bankers, Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers, about the terms of a possible sale.
Ratner would appear to be the leader because of his higher bid and any possible doubts the Nets' owners might have about Kushner's apparent involvement in a federal investigation. Last month, the F.B.I. raided an accounting firm connected to Kushner, a Florham Park, N.J., developer, and the home of one of his former executives.
Kushner and Corzine have been negotiating with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority over the financial details of a plan to pay for up to $150 million in renovations to the Continental Arena.
Gov. James E. McGreevey said last summer that New Jersey would not offer new subsidies for arena renovation or for building a new arena.
PRO BASKETBALL
