The United States trade deficit shrank unexpectedly in November to $38 billion, the government said Wednesday. That is the smallest trade gap since October 2002, reflecting a rise in exports, especially of civilian aircraft.
November's decline, from $41.6 billion in October, surprised most analysts and helped strengthen the dollar against the euro.
American exports increased around the globe -- to China, Japan, Europe and Mexico. The rise in exports, by 2.9 percent, was credited in part to the weakness of the dollar, which has helped make American goods and services more competitive.
At the same time, United States imports remained relatively flat, with a small dip despite growing consumer demand.
''On an underlying basis, we may have turned the corner and seen an end to constant rises in the trade deficit,'' said David J. Greenlaw, an economist at Morgan Stanley.
''In the short run we could see a widening of the trade gap, but the weakness of the dollar is definitely helping United States producers,'' Mr. Greenlaw said.
He and other analysts said the trade figure could have a significant effect on how much the gross domestic product grew in the final quarter of 2003. He said he thought the estimate of growth could increase to as much as 5 percent from 4.25 percent.
Aircraft sales, which are occasional at best, accounted for at least half of the rise in exports and were largely responsible for the decrease in the deficit with Japan, to $5.7 billion from $6.4 billion.
No analyst predicted a drastic decrease in the trade deficit, but several did say that the narrowing reported on Wednesday could be explained by the lagging effect of the two-year drop in the dollar's exchange rate.
''We haven't seen the full impact of the dollar's decline,'' said Richard J. DeKaser, chief economist for National City.
Working against a further improvement in the trade balance is the growing demand to replenish the nation's basic inventories, which were depleted last summer. If demand continues to grow, the United States could increase its imports, offsetting the greater volume in American exports.
Over all, Asia, especially China, was responsible for the greatest increase in the purchase of United States products. In the face of growing discontent in the United States with China's trade policies, which have become a campaign issue as well as the focus of new legislation, China reduced its deficit with the United States by nearly $3 billion in November. Agriculture products -- soybeans and raw cotton -- topped the list of Chinese imports from the United States.
At the same time, Chinese exports of toys and apparel to the United States declined.
Robert V. DiClemente, chief United States economist at Citigroup, said the weakening dollar had had little effect on the trade balance with China, which pegs its currency to the dollar.
''China's imports have been booming as part of China's economic boom,'' Mr. DiClemente said.
The narrowing of the trade deficit helps bolster the dollar, because it means the United States depends less on foreign financing of its current account deficit, the combined measure of the nation's trade and international capital flows.
THE MARKETS
