PARANOIA  By Joseph Finder  426 pages. St. Martin's Press. $24.95.
The first jet-propelled thriller of 2004 starts with a premise that's hard to buy. Go along for the ride anyway. This book's main character, a 26-year-old smart aleck named Adam Cassidy, has taken it upon himself to throw a $78,000 retirement party for an assistant foreman known as Jonesie at the expense of their mutual employer, a telecommunications company called Wyatt. Is this reason enough to place Adam forever in Wyatt's debt?
This little gaffe -- which Wyatt unsportingly chooses to regard as embezzlement -- is meant to explain why Adam can be coerced into going to work for another company, Trion Systems, as a corporate spy for Wyatt. So the next thing Adam knows, he has been coached, drilled and marched into a Trion elevator, en route to the kind of business meeting at which he must fake high-tech expertise. ''Man oh man,'' he thinks, when asked by Trion whether a new project should be given the go-ahead. ''The nerve-racking music from 'Jeopardy' was playing in my head.''
It will play a good deal louder as this twisting, stealthily plotted story gets under way. With John Grisham as his muse and a modicum of technical research at his disposal, Joseph Finder (a member of the Association of Former Intelligence Officers) gives his double-dealing hero a thin line to walk between the warring companies that think they own him. The author also gives Adam an impressive bag of espionage tricks.
We have some stock characters on the loose here. First there's Adam's ailing dad, the guy who keeps him honest and practically gags when Adam describes an expensive new wristwatch as ''an investment.'' Among Dad's predictable Dad-isms is ''At least I know who I am.'' Among Adam's retorts -- before he comes to recognize his father's true value of course -- is this: ''You're always saying the world's divided up into winners and losers. So let me ask you something, Dad. What are you, Dad? What are you?''
Mr. Finder also provides the flaky but decent old pal who is surprised by Adam's metamorphosis, once the Trion perks begin leaving their mark. (''What's with the haircut? Seriously.'') Then there's the competitive buddy-buddy young Trion guy who would just love to catch Adam in a lie. And then there is Alana, the beautiful woman involved in the top-secret Trion project that is Adam's pay dirt. ''Her black hair was long and glossy, and it contrasted nicely with her brilliant blue eyes,'' writes Mr. Finder, at the peak of his descriptive powers.
So ''Paranoia'' cannot be read as an exercise in style. (''Man, what the hell was I doing?'' Adam asks at one of his most eloquent moments.) But as a savvy genre piece with built-in momentum, it works just fine. Mr. Finder sets his hero in the midst of a dangerous maze and keeps the fine points of Adam's chicanery sharply honed. From the way he plants keystroke-tracking devices on certain people's computers to his zeroing in on files stamped ''Secret,'' ''Must Be Kept Below the Radar'' and ''Acquisition Pending,'' the book weaves a tangled and ingeniously enveloping web.
''Paranoia'' is headed for the movies; that much is unmistakable not only from the book's strongly visual set-pieces but also from the colorful personalities of its two corporate giants. Together they compensate for the callowness that shows up in Adam. Wyatt is run by none other than Nick Wyatt, whose line of Bentleys reminds Adam of a roll of Lifesavers and who lives large in a place said to be ''bigger and fancier than Bill Gates's lake house near Seattle.'' The place has an Asian feeling, and the man asks questions like ''Do you understand the superiority of the Japanese diet?'' Needless to say, Adam hates him.
So it is that much more galling when the young corporate mole is asked to betray Jock Goddard, whom he really admires. Goddard is Wyatt's polar opposite: honest, old fashioned, good to his employees and married to his first wife. (Adam compares her to a Shar-Pei because of her wrinkles.) The sage, diminutive Goddard is also the wizard responsible for the Goddard modem, a famous innovation. And he takes a patriarchal shine to Adam, who is in the market for a new, less guilt-inducing father figure. In every sense Goddard is this book's conscience and most charismatic character. Dustin Hoffman, call your agent now.
Mr. Finder follows the Grisham model of exposing a naïve but ambitious hero to extraordinary temptation and then watching how he handles this challenge. Adam, after all, winds up being paid by both companies and sent to live in a building where the elevator is as large as his old apartment. But Mr. Grisham (whose latest is due in two weeks) can start off with spectacular plot tricks and then drift into a more routine narrative. ''Paranoia'' works the opposite way, saving its killer twist for the end.
In light of this deftness, it's a shame that ''Paranoia'' hasn't been written with a keener eye for the needless cliché. ''He was toying with me, sadistically,'' Adam observes, at what is undeniably an exciting point in the story. But he need not have added ''like a cat with a mouse.''
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
