They say that Martin Duffy went everywhere with a snare drum on one hip and his children on the other.
He was one of those old-school Irish-Americans from the Bronx. He studied for the priesthood for a while. He played in a bagpipe band. He was friends with firefighters and police officers -- scrappy, happy, sunny, fun. Except for a brief sojourn upstate, he never left the borough where he was born and raised.
On Tuesday night, Mr. Duffy, 37, died inside his home at 4279 Oneida Avenue in the Woodlawn section of the Bronx. Fire officials said that carbon monoxide had seeped into his family's apartment from a leak in the flue pipe in the gas-powered boiler. His daughter, Hannah, 9, also died, officials said. His wife, Valerie, 37, remained in fair condition yesterday at Jacobi Medical Center, a hospital spokesman said. His son, John, 12, has been discharged.
The news of Mr. Duffy's death sent grief and disbelief through the Monaghan Pipe Band, which his father, Pete, helped found, and through the Silver Shield Foundation, a charity for fallen firefighters and police officers, which he had served as executive director.
The grief at Mr. Duffy's death was so profound that his friends and colleagues said they worried that their tributes would sound clichéd.
''He was one of the finest human beings I have ever met,'' said Michael Hoffman, chief executive of Changing Our World Inc., a philanthropic consulting firm where Mr. Duffy used to work. ''He'd give you the shirt off his back. You hear people say that all the time, but with Marty it was true.''
Martin Duffy's life was one of service, said his friend Pat Timmons. Mr. Timmons, a lawyer, lived with Mr. Duffy for a year at the St. John Neumann Residence in Riverdale, which is part of the St. John's Seminary of the Archdiocese of New York. Mr. Duffy had worked with Changing Our World, helping the Silver Shield raise money, even before the Sept. 11 terrorist attack, Mr. Timmons said. After 9/11, he worked full time for the foundation and eventually served as its director.
The Monaghan Pipe Band will miss him, said Dan Hamilton, who manages the group. ''He and his dad basically carried the torch for this band,'' he said. ''They brought it up to become one of the best bands in the metro area. This guy did more to further piping and drumming in the tristate area than any other individual I know.''
If music was a big part of his life, his children were equally important.
''His kids were like his world,'' Mr. Hamilton said. ''He always brought his kids to band events. He'd have a drum on one hip and a kid on the other.''
Mr. Hoffman said that Changing Our World would establish a fund for Valerie and John Duffy in Mr. Duffy's name. Contributions can be sent to the company, he said.
Marshals, meanwhile, continued to investigate the accident yesterday, a spokesman for the Fire Department said. Carol Abrams, a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development, said the building had no violations or complaints on file.
In fact, the building was quiet almost all day yesterday. Mr. Hamilton said the thought of it gave him chills. ''He was born in the Bronx and I always thought he was going to die in the Bronx,'' Mr. Hamilton said. After pausing, he added, ''But I was hoping it would come another 60 years from now.''
