Federal prosecutors scored a big win yesterday in the two-year-old Enron probe, when Andrew and Lea Fastow entered their guilty pleas in Houston. Mr. Fastow, the former chief financial officer of Enron who helped mastermind the company's fraud, will now become a cooperating witness as prosecutors put other former Enron officials on trial. With his help, the government also has a better chance of indicting Jeffrey Skilling and Kenneth Lay, the energy-trading company's former top bosses.
Leslie Caldwell, the lead prosecutor brought in after federal prosecutors in Houston recused themselves, deserves credit for painstakingly building a case against Mr. Fastow. Mr. Fastow was indicted on 98 counts of fraud more than a year ago, but in the end it appears to have been the indictment of his wife, who had also been an Enron employee, that forced him to succumb. Because they have young children, the married couple's primary concern was not to serve jail time at the same time.
In a carefully orchestrated family deal that was almost derailed last week by the federal judge handling Mrs. Fastow's case, she pleaded guilty to a single felony count and will likely serve five months. Mr. Fastow, for his part, will serve 10 years and surrender more than $20 million, an unusually stern sentence for a cooperating witness in a white-collar case. The sentence can be stiffened if the government is dissatisfied with his cooperation.
Mr. Fastow created the vehicles for Enron's fraud, those notorious off-the-books partnerships that allowed the company to mask its true financial condition. He enriched himself as a result of the complex deals struck between Enron and the partnerships, and stands accused therefore of defrauding both the company and its investors.
Because of his alleged role in the scandal, it might be tempting to lament any deal -- even one that includes substantial jail time -- made with Mr. Fastow. But given the reality that Mr. Fastow's cooperation is needed to reel in other top Enron executives responsible for the fraud, and possibly some of the company's outside financial advisers, the government has struck the proper balance.
