They are everywhere in Iowa these days, the frontline ground troops of the presidential campaigns, and they all have the same goal: To get as many people as possible to come out and vote next week. But the inside-outside approaches of the two biggest armies -- Richard A. Gephardt's and Howard Dean's -- are as different as the candidates they work for.
Dr. Dean has run as the quintessential political outsider, and his campaign here has by far the most workers from outside Iowa. Every weekend since Christmas, fresh batches of volunteers have arrived from as far away as Texas, Virginia and Mississippi. They get fluorescent orange knit hats, cellphones, purple identification wristbands and 45 minutes of training in the nuts-and-bolts of caucus procedure, then are sent out to stump as part of what they call the Iowa Perfect Storm.
A prepared script offers Dean volunteers hints for handling voters. ''If they get upset and try to cut you off or hang up,'' the instructions read, ''assertively tell your story.''
The script continues: ''Listen, I know people are sick of the calls and the mail, but I'm not a telemarketer. I dropped everything and drove/came all the way from ____. I'm volunteering here because we need a candidate who can stand up to George Bush and take our country back. That's why so many of us have come to Iowa.''
Mr. Gephardt, by contrast, is a Washington insider who hails from neighboring Missouri, won the Iowa caucuses in 1988 and is now running on his experience, counting on his homegrown Iowan-to-Iowan edge.
He, too, is relying on out-of-state help, but mostly in the form of top-flight union organizers with long experience in past campaigns in Iowa and around the country, including the political directors of the United Steelworkers of America and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, who organize their troops in satiny windbreakers at a ''shape-up'' each morning, as if they were assigning work on a job site.
They are all part of the most intensive, expensive canvassing effort in the history of the Iowa caucuses, blending the latest targeting technologies with the oldest techniques of voter outreach. It remains to be seen whether the famously proud Iowans will be energized or irritated by the flood of outside campaigners, but the candidates are running true to form.
''They're running a bit like their stereotypes,'' said Gordon Fischer, the chairman of the Iowa Democratic Party. ''Gephardt is slow and steady, focusing on his hard count. John Edwards is focusing on rural areas, campaigning there more and harder. John Kerry is targeting vets.'' So who has the mojo? ''It's hard for me to judge,'' Mr. Fischer said. ''It does seem like Dean's campaign has been perhaps the most innovative.''
The Dean campaign estimates that it will have had 3,500 volunteers by caucus day, falling short of its initial goal of 5,000 recruits.
Party officials here are hoping for a record turnout on Monday among Iowa's 530,000 registered Democrats, well above the 61,000 who participated four years ago. Getting supporters to the quirky caucuses is not nearly as simple as getting voters to the polls in a primary.
Senator Tom Harkin, who backs Dr. Dean, summed up the challenge: ''You have to motivate someone to leave their warm house on a cold January night, to travel some distance, and then what? Stand up in front of your friends, your neighbors and co-workers and publicly say, 'I'm for Joe.' ''
The Dean forces are coming here in carpools, charter buses or commercial flights, traveling on their own nickel and bunking in motels or winterized Y.M.C.A. camps around the state. By no means are all of them young. Jack Heacock, a retired Methodist minister from Bristol, Va., drove 775 miles with his wife, Eleanor, to campaign last weekend in Davenport, on the Mississippi River in eastern Iowa. Why?
''We believe it's time to take this country back,'' Mr. Heacock said, echoing Dr. Dean's slogan at a rally with former Vice President Al Gore. The Heacocks wore their orange hats proudly, but they stayed at a Holiday Inn. ''We didn't know about the camps,'' Mrs. Heacock said.
Dan Link, 31, a graduate student in American history at New York University, is coming this weekend with several friends to help contact gay Iowans in a special effort dubbed the Rainbow Storm. He, too, is ''well beyond the level of sleeping on sleeping bags,'' but has been impressed with the Dean campaign's organization. Within 24 hours after he signed up to volunteer on the Dean Web site, Mr. Link said, ''someone from the campaign called on the phone to verify that I was coming, and whether I'd need transportation or housing.'' He added, ''They seemed totally organized and professional.''
Joe Trippi, the Dean campaign manager, said the volunteer operation was an important part of the campaign's strategy, buttressing the statewide network of operatives that all the major campaigns have.
''We've got a lot more people knocking on doors,'' Mr. Trippi said. We're bringing in a lot of new voters. They don't know what a caucus is like.'' He added: ''If you have 3,500 people and you say, 'Here's a voter list, just get three people to this caucus,' that's 10,000 people. It doesn't have to be a real complicated organizing thing. It's pretty simple.''
Chuck Rocha, the national political director for the steelworkers union, is working for Mr. Gephardt, and he sounds a similar note. He has been in Iowa since before Labor Day, organizing a force he estimated at 30 percent local and 70 percent out of state as the caucuses approach.
Dr. Dean has the endorsement of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees and the Service Employees International Union, each of which has also sent experts from out of state. Mr. Gephardt has the backing of a score of industrial unions.
Some 500 union troops were here for Mr. Gephardt at the end of last week, some volunteers and others paid union members.
Mr. Gephardt's state director, John C. Lapp, said Mr. Gephardt's union supporters would focus on union households, adding, ''I think the qualitative aspect of the contact takes over the quantity.''
Neither Mr. Edwards nor Mr. Kerry can claim the same scale of ground operation, but Rob Berntsen, Mr. Edwards's caucus director said the campaign had recruited supporters from around the country to come to Iowa this weekend. ''It's in the hundreds,'' Mr. Berntsen said.
As he has around the country, Mr. Kerry, a decorated veteran of two tours in Vietnam, has been counting on a newly built network of fellow veterans. His national veterans director, John Hurley, has been living here since Christmas, leading an effort to reach 79,000 veteran Democratic or independent households.
The campaign says it has commitments from 2,600 Iowans who have never voted in caucuses but say they will support Mr. Kerry.
On Monday night, Larry Ingvall, 64, a Vietnam veteran disabled by Agent Orange, sat at a Kerry phone bank with Carl Schumann, 69, a Marine veteran of Korea who served in the Air Force in Vietnam. They took calls from veterans who had received automated calls and then pushed a number to be connected to a fellow veteran to learn more about Mr. Kerry.
''I went to one of his doings out in Ankeny,'' on the outskirts of Des Moines, Mr. Schumann said, ''and I volunteered to help. I think they're pretty hard up, because I'm a little hard of hearing and I have to say, 'What?' a lot.''
For a few more days, all the effort here is aimed at the caucuses. But for the candidates, that is just the beginning, as a sign near the door of the Dean ''Storm Center'' headquarters made clear: ''Going to New Hampshire after Iowa? Can you give someone a ride?''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VOLUNTEERS
