The history of bold visions for human spaceflight is littered with more failures, delays and cost overruns than clear successes. The fates have been particularly unkind to Republican presidents, who twice made their ambitious ventures in election years.
It is a legacy that President Bush, who unveiled a plan yesterday to put Americans on the Moon, Mars ''and beyond,'' hopes to overcome. The broad goals are the same as those his father proposed as president in 1989, but the new plan is more hedged, giving no firm date for the Mars venture and deferring the need for big spending increases until after what would be Mr. Bush's second term. In part, it seeks to make vagueness a virtue, which is giving some space experts the jitters.
''People are happy and worried at the same time,'' said Lawrence H. Kuznetz, a scientist at Baylor College of Medicine who conducts research for NASA. The effort to return to the Moon, instead of going straight to Mars, he added, could become ''a bottomless pit of misdirected targets'' and ''suck up NASA's budget faster than a black hole sucks up light.''
The troubles with grand White House plans began in January 1972 when President Richard M. Nixon proposed that the nation embark on a new kind of spaceship, reusable and known as the shuttle. ''It will take the astronomical costs out of astronautics,'' he said, promising that the vehicle would be highly reliable and its expense perhaps one-tenth that of expendable rockets. Instead, the shuttles turned out to be roughly 10 times as costly and prone to catastrophic failure.
In January 1984, President Ronald Reagan, evoking the spirit of President John F. Kennedy's rally to the Moon, proposed that the United States build a permanently manned space station within a decade. The cost estimate was $8 billion. In fact, the feat took 16 years and price estimates soared to between $30 billion and $100 billion.
In 1989, in a speech honoring the 20th anniversary of the initial lunar landing, the first President Bush proposed that the nation establish a base on the Moon and send an expedition to Mars to begin ''the permanent settlement of space.'' He set the Mars goal for 2019 but the effort soon fizzled when the cost estimates hit $400 billion.
Yesterday, Mr. Bush said his new space mission could succeed with fairly modest increases: $1 billion in new money and $11 billion scavenged from existing NASA programs.
''We have called for hard choices, and the president has made them -- setting a termination date for the shuttle,'' said Representative Sherwood Boehlert, the New York Republican who is the chairman of the House Science Committee. He added, ''The president has also laid out a thoughtful, gradual, achievable set of missions that don't require an Apollo-like crash program in terms of attitude, design or budget.''
John Bahcall, a physicist at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, N.J., who has long advised NASA, said Mr. Bush's plan was inspirational because it was so daunting.
''The whole agency is challenged to refocus its efforts,'' Mr. Bahcall said. ''Everything will be turned upside down. It will be an exciting place to be.''
''I'm thrilled,'' he added, ''that the U.S. has something to shoot for, not only to shoot at.''
But other space experts, looking to lessons of history, warned of failure.
Howard E. McCurdy, a space historian at American University, said that most presidential initiatives went sailing off course because of insufficient discipline and seriousness. ''The success rate for bold new visions in human spaceflight is about the same as that for missions to Mars, namely two out of three fail,'' Dr. McCurdy said.
The moral of the story, he added, is that success requires what Presidents Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson achieved: a restructuring of the federal space agency into a superstar of technical advance and savvy management.
In his speech yesterday, President Bush made no suggestion that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration was anything less than stellar, repeatedly praising its personnel, calling them ''risk takers and visionaries.''
The nation's winged spaceships would stop flying around 2010, the same time work is expected to end on the International Space Station, Mr. Bush said. Astronauts would land on the Moon by 2015 and, after using it as a training station, head for Mars sometime later. He called on NASA to develop rockets and technologies to achieve the goals.
''Can it be done?'' asked Dr. McCurdy. ''Yes. This is feasible historically. Do the odds favor it? No.''
''Doing it successfully would mean a total transformation of the space program, as radical as happened from 1961 to 1966,'' he said. ''For 30 years NASA hasn't had that discipline.''
Hans Mark, a former chancellor of the University of Texas who was NASA's deputy director in 1984 and the Reagan administration's architect of the space station plan, expressed skepticism for a different reason. A prerequisite for success for any space vision, he said, is that its goals have to be near enough to excite people and form solid political constituencies. Any space plan whose culmination is more than a decade away is probably doomed to failure, he said, as was the first President Bush's plan. ''He put on a time schedule that was so long it was beyond anybody's political horizon,'' he said. ''So nothing happened.''
John E. Pike, the director of GlobalSecurity.org, a Washington research group on military and space topics, said the Bush plan was unlikely to go anywhere because, unlike President Kennedy's call to excellence during the cold war, it addressed no underlying national political issue. It was, he said, just election-year grandstanding, and dangerous at that.
''The trivial budget increases they're proposing are only going to produce artwork,'' he said. ''Basically, they looked at piloted space and said, 'Let's shut it down and let's have a hedge against the possibility that the Chinese will go to the Moon. That's it. There's nothing to replace shuttle and station except artwork.''
News Analysis
