Andrew S. Fastow, the former chief financial officer of Enron, pleaded guilty yesterday to two felonies, becoming the highest ranking officer at the company to admit to participating in crimes that contributed to Enron's collapse into bankruptcy protection more than two years ago.
In his plea, Mr. Fastow admitted to working with other senior officers to disguise Enron's deteriorating financial health, as well as engaging in a scheme to defraud Enron of millions of dollars for his own benefit.
Mr. Fastow also settled related civil charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All told, he agreed to surrender more than $23 million in civil and criminal penalties.
Two hours later, in another courtroom, Lea Fastow, Mr. Fastow's wife who was a former assistant treasurer at Enron, entered a separate guilty plea to a single tax felony stemming from efforts she made to hide income that came from one of her husband's secret dealings with an Enron colleague. The two pleas were negotiated as a joint resolution of the separate criminal cases facing the Fastows.
The deal requires Mr. Fastow -- who had direct, daily contact with numerous senior officers of the company, including two former chief executives, Jeffrey K. Skilling and Kenneth L. Lay -- to cooperate with prosecutors in their investigation.
''This is a very significant development,'' said Leslie Caldwell, who leads the Justice Department team investigating Enron. ''For the first time, the Enron task force has a seat on the 50th floor'' of the Enron building, she said. The plea deal with Mr. Fastow was unusually tough; the government appears to have given up almost nothing in reaching it.
Prosecutors will recommend that Mr. Fastow serve a 10-year sentence, the maximum under the two counts to which he pleaded guilty.
The remaining 96 counts that he faces will only be dismissed after prosecutors determine that they are satisfied with Mr. Fastow's cooperation.
In other words, despite his plea deal, even after sentencing Mr. Fastow could still be tried on the remaining charges. That provision provides both an enormous incentive for Mr. Fastow to tell everything he knows, as well as a vehicle for defense lawyers to attack his credibility in any trial at which he testifies.
Lea Fastow's plea agreement calls for a five-month prison term and then five months of home detention -- an unusually stiff sentence for a first-time tax offender. The judge hearing the case could still toss aside the deal, and sentence her to up to 16 months in prison.
Both of the Fastows are scheduled to be sentenced in April.
The fraud on investors committed by Mr. Fastow was complex, but effectively amounted to the accounting equivalent of sweeping dirt under the rug. According to statements entered with his plea, he arranged to use an investment partnership he controlled, LJM2, to provide Enron with a hedge against losses in certain investments.
Accounting rules required that for Enron to keep the arrangement off its books, another party had to invest at least 3 percent in independent capital. LJM2 met that requirement by putting up $30 million.
But according to Mr. Fastow's statement on Wednesday, he had a secret agreement with Enron's chief accounting officer at the time -- who, while not named in government papers, was Richard A. Causey -- under which LJM2 was guaranteed the return of its investment plus a profit.
That meant LJM2 never assumed any risk. The entity created to keep the deal off Enron's books, called Talon, returned $41 million to LJM2 before it ever entered into any hedging. At that point, Enron began using Talon to avoid disclosing huge losses in its investments.
Mr. Causey has already been notified that he should expect to be charged, people involved in the case said. He has maintained through his lawyer that he always thought that he followed accounting rules.
In the second count, Mr. Fastow admitted to using one of his off-the-books entities to defraud Enron. In effect, he conspired with others to trick Enron into buying an asset for $20 million that in fact the entity, called Southampton, almost simultaneously acquired for $1 million. He then split the $20 million with a group of co-conspirators and others, both inside and outside Enron, directing some $4 million to his family foundation.
