In his stump speech, Gen. Wesley K. Clark emphasizes leadership and tries to distinguish himself from the rest of the Democratic presidential candidates by emphasizing his military career. Here are excerpts from a speech given on Jan. 10, 2004, at the V.F.W. post in Milford, N.H., as recorded by The New York Times:
I want to bring a higher standard of leadership to this country.
There's a lot of anger in the Democratic Party and out across America toward George W. Bush. But I want to make it clear. I'm not running to bash George Bush. I'm running to replace him.
We're going to replace him with a higher standard of leadership. Leadership that looks for what's good for the country as a whole, not for special interests. Leadership that looks for what's good for the next generation, not just the next election cycle. Leadership that's not afraid to lay out some specific, tangible, realistic goals and expects to be held accountable for them. And leadership that will pull this country together, not divide us and polarize it. That's the higher standard of leadership I want to bring to this country.
And we're going to build it on the values that all Americans share. They're values I learned growing up in Arkansas, certainly in the armed forces, values like patriotism, faith, family and pulling together, inclusiveness.
I think patriotism is about taking care of the country. I think it's about making the tough choices, the right choices to keep the country safe, to protect our freedoms. To take care of the men and women in uniform, to make sure we have the strongest armed forces in the world, to look after their families so they can protect us. And I think it's to meet our obligations to our veterans, and their families as well. And as president of the United States, I will do each of these things.
But I don't think it's patriotic to dress up in a flight suit and prance around on the deck of an aircraft carrier. I don't think it's patriotic not to have done everything you can as president of the United States to protect us from terrorism. George W. Bush didn't do everything he could have before 9/11. After 9/11 he took us into a war that we didn't have to fight in Iraq. And today we're still living under a cloud of fear. . . .
I hear that other party using this term, ''family values.'' But they use it as a way of dividing people, grading people, sorting them out. There's these good people over here, they're the family value people, and over here there's these other people, they're not the family value people. It's a way of separating people. I don't think that's the right way to use the term ''family values.''  THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
