The New York City teachers' union proposed yesterday cutting to six months the time it takes to remove incompetent teachers, speeding up a process that can now drag on for years.
As part of a broad overhaul of the disciplinary process and evaluation system for teachers, the union president, Randi Weingarten, also called for ending so-called rubber rooms, where more than 200 teachers facing charges of malfeasance are sent to languish, some for years, while still receiving full pay. She proposed the appointment of a special master and a task force of pro bono lawyers to clear the backlog of cases.
''Yes, this is a union president who is going to talk about removing teachers who should not be teaching,'' Ms. Weingarten said in a breakfast speech to the Association for a Better New York. ''And I do that without hesitation, because this a union that is not about just keeping people. We are about keeping qualified people.''
Ms. Weingarten's public effort to reach out to the Bloomberg administration and Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein seemed to signal a thaw after months of icy relations with the city, a state of affairs that had begun to draw criticism from the business and nonprofit communities.
Business leaders, in particular, who have donated more than $160 million to the administration's ambitious plans to overhaul the schools, have raised concerns that the constant bickering with the union would doom the mayor's efforts.
''I want you all to know that I fully briefed Joel Klein last night on this speech,'' Ms. Weingarten said, ''because I want to do in every way possible what I can to extend my hand in partnership, and my members' hands in partnership. We want the city school system to be the crown jewel of public education in the United States of America.''
Chancellor Klein's response was enthusiastic. ''I think she has some very positive, constructive proposals,'' he said, adding that he looked forward to working out the details in formal contract talks, which are expected to resume next month.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg also sounded a conciliatory note. ''We're not going to solve the problems of the public schools without a joint effort between teachers and principals and parents, the administration and the general public, and along with the Police Department and school safety officers,'' he said. ''We are all in this together, and I think that Randi understands that.''
Business leaders were elated at the signs of a truce.
''There is nothing more critical to the reform movement than that the various critical players in the system are on the same page and working together,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, president and chief executive of the Partnership for New York City, a business group that pledged $30 million to the city's new academy for training principals. ''This is a very positive move in the right direction.''
Ms. Weingarten's proposal calls for expanding an existing peer intervention program for troubled teachers. Under her plan, a teacher in danger of being fired would enter the intervention program for up to 90 days. If the teacher was still ill-equipped to return to the classroom, Ms. Weingarten said, union representatives would counsel the teacher to leave the school system. If the teacher refused, an existing 90-day grievance and arbitration process would begin. Currently, city officials say they must spend at least two years building a case, with a principal giving the teacher two annual unsatisfactory ratings, to stand any chance of dismissing a teacher through the 90-day arbitration process.
In her speech, Ms. Weingarten also said that retaining good teachers was even more critical to the future of the public school system than removing the few bad ones. She cited statistics showing escalating retirements among older teachers and resignations among new teachers who leave after one or two years.
''The single biggest dilemma the city faces in dealing with the quality of its teaching staff today is how to retain that overwhelming majority of teachers who are highly skilled professionals,'' she said, ''because they are leaving in droves.''
She added: ''This combination of new talented teachers resigning with older more seasoned professionals retiring has become a formula for disaster.''
Mr. Klein said he agreed that the city faced a crisis in retaining good teachers. ''She's absolutely right on about that,'' he said. To retain good teachers, Ms. Weingarten urged higher pay --''the first step is the one you would expect me to say,'' she told her audience -- and said the city's primary obstacle to retaining teachers was that base salaries remained 10 percent to 15 percent lower than in surrounding suburbs, despite big raises in the last teachers' contract.
But she also stressed working conditions and proposed a new career ladder for teachers, modeled after the medical profession, with teacher interns, teacher residents and a master teacher position for experienced, veteran educators.
In calling for an end to the rubber rooms, which are actually district offices where teachers removed from their schools await disciplinary hearings, Ms. Weingarten blamed the city for failing to swiftly resolve the cases. ''It's the school system that elongates the process,'' she said.
In March 2000, Schools Chancellor Harold Levy said he wanted to close the rubber rooms within 30 days after he became enraged about a case that had dragged on for three years. He ordered the school system's lawyers to refuse adjournments and sought to disqualify arbitrators known for long delays.
At one rubber room yesterday, on East 28th Street in Manhattan, teachers said they felt trapped in a Kafkaesque netherworld. They said they were allowed to speak to each other or read but not to use computers or talk on the telephone. They can drink coffee, but cannot smoke.
The teachers are required to be in the room for the regular teaching hours at their former school. They clock in and out with punch cards. One English teacher in the room said many teachers there had not been told the nature of the complaint against them. ''It's very debilitating,'' he said.
A health teacher said she was sent to the room for ''inappropriate behavior'' after holding the hand of a student who had just learned of a diagnosis of H.I.V. ''It makes you feel like you're worthless,'' she said of the rubber room. ''It's like jail.''
