The La Guardia Airport contractor that hired former Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato to lobby on its behalf violated Port Authority rules and should be barred from bidding to renew the refueling and services contract, the chairman of a state legislative committee investigating the matter said yesterday.
Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat, called for Signature Flight Support to be cut out of the next round of bidding, pointing to a report he obtained in which the inspector general of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey recommends that the question of a possible impropriety by the company be referred to the agency's legal department ''for appropriate disposition.''
Signature was seeking renewal of a contract -- worth $6 million to $8 million a year -- to refuel and provide services to private and small planes that use La Guardia Airport. A rival firm, Fort Lauderdale Jet Center, was about to be awarded the contract after it came in with a bid that offered to pay the Port Authority a slightly higher share of the money it would earn by selling fuel.
Signature, however, hired Mr. D'Amato, a lobbyist and former Republican senator from Long Island who has personal friends and political allies on the Port Authority board. After the agency's staff recommended giving the contract to Jet Center, Mr. D'Amato called Port Authority board members to urge them to throw out all the bids, raising questions about the rival firm's fitness.
Port Authority rules say that a company involved in bidding on a contract cannot hire a lobbyist to try to influence the process.
Chris D'Amato, the son of the former senator and an executive at the same lobbying firm, Park Strategies, said the company's action was within the Port Authority rules, as Park Strategies was retained only after the Port Authority staff recommended that the contract be awarded to one of Signature's competitors.
''We were not hired to secure bids on behalf of Signature,'' Chris D'Amato said ''but rather to advise them on a course of available legal and administrative actions that they could take to protest what they came to believe was a manipulated bid process.''
Senator D'Amato's firm was paid an initial fee of $25,000 and an undisclosed monthly retainer.
Although the Port Authority staff and its inspector general said that there was no merit to Mr. D'Amato's allegations of a manipulated bidding process, the Port Authority board nonetheless decided to scrap the bids and start all over.
Mr. Brodsky said that action by the Port Authority board was proof that high-paid lobbyists like Mr. D'Amato have far too much influence over state boards and authorities. ''Signature succeeded in disrupting a properly bid process by using a politically connected lobbyist who went to the Port Authority board and then went around the staff and got the board to do something which was not appropriate,'' Mr. Brodsky said.
Joe Goldstein, general counsel for Signature, said that his firm had done nothing wrong, as it did not hire Mr. D'Amato until after it was clear that the staff recommended the contract be given to Jet Center. Signature, which has held the LaGuardia contract since 1992, should be allowed to bid on the new contract, Mr. Goldstein said.
But Mr. Brodsky, in a letter yesterday to Joseph J. Seymour, executive director of the Port Authority, asked him to push for a further investigation of the actions by Signature and Mr. D'Amato.
Dan Maynard, a Port Authority spokesman, said there was currently no prohibition on Signature participating in the rebidding on the contract, a process that is expected to start next month. He would not address the question of whether Signature violated the Port Authority's prohibition on prospective contractors from hiring a lobbyist. But he did say that this matter was moot, since the Port Authority board had decided to throw out all the bids.
''The Port Authority has already taken all appropriate action in this matter,'' Mr. Maynard said. ''Any subsequent action can only be taken in the context of the upcoming bid process. It is sad that this dialogue is being reduced to another pointless exercise in political name calling.''
