The New York City schools chancellor laid out the timeline yesterday for creating community education councils, saying the city's 32 community school boards would be gone in a matter of months.
The end of the community school boards has been a centerpiece of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's overhaul of the city school system. Yesterday, Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein set July 1 as the date for their demise. He also announced that applications from candidates for the councils would be due March 16, and that the councils would be selected by May 11.
In a brief eulogy for the school boards, many of which were known for being ineffective, highly politicized, corrupt or all of the above, Mr. Klein noted that over the years, some of their members had done some good things.
But their dismantling, he said, was a better thing.
''These are not political organizations, these are not people looking to run for different offices,'' Mr. Klein said of the new councils, which will be dominated by parents. ''The critical thing, I think, about this change is we are moving away from what I think was the wrong focus to a parent-based focus.''
Under the existing system, all citizens, even those without children in the public schools, have been able to vote for board members in their community school districts.
The new system will consist of 34 councils, 32 of which will be made up of nine parents elected by the presidents, treasurers and secretaries of parent associations at schools within the district; two appointees by the local borough president; and one nonvoting student representative. There will also be a citywide high school council, with 10 parents and one student, and a citywide special education council, with nine parents, two members appointed by the city's public advocate and one student representative.
The councils were supposed to have been created by Dec. 1. But it was not until Dec. 30 that the federal Justice Department approved the system for electing their members. Some people had argued that the new voting system was unfair to minority parents, because of a preponderance of white parent-association officers at racially mixed schools and an overrepresentation of minority schools among those without parent associations.
Jean Desravines, the executive director of the city Department of Education's Office of Parent and Community Engagement, said the department had worked to encourage the establishment of parent associations in schools that did not have them.
Of the city's 918 elementary and middle schools, he said, about 190 did not have parent associations when school started. Now that number is down to 27, he said, and elections will take place in those schools by March.
Mr. Klein said word of the elections would be spread through 25,000 posters, 2 million fliers and meetings in every borough.
Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat who is the chairman of the Assembly's Education Committee, said the councils would be ''vastly superior'' to the old community school boards.
''I'm very confident that these new educational councils usher in a new era of community representation in which the most important stakeholders in the education system, the parents, will now have the greatest amount of input,'' he said.
Robin Brown, the president of the United Parents Association, said the councils could make a difference if their members were properly trained.
By law, the Department of Education must ensure that council members, who will be elected to one-year terms this year and two-year terms in the future, are trained.
''Without the resources, I don't see them being much different than what currently exists,'' Ms. Brown said.
