It seemed unlikely that there could be more surprises yesterday when the tweaked, updated, reconciled -- and leaked -- World Trade Center memorial was unveiled by Gov. George E. Pataki, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.
After all, the name of the dark-horse winning design -- Reflecting Absence, by Michael Arad, 34, and Peter Walker, 71 -- was trumpeted last week, and artists' renderings and many of its signature features had been revealed on Tuesday. But though no curtain was parted to reveal the latest model at yesterday's much-anticipated ceremony, a wealth of new details was presented.
First, both the governor and the mayor announced what they said was the resolution of a dispute over the designation of victims who worked for uniformed services. Upon the ribbon of 2,982 victims' names, according to the development corporation, etched in stone about the memorial's two reflecting pools, the police officers, firefighters and other rescue workers will be designated with individual shields.
Also, it was the first time a price tag was mentioned. The development corporation said that the preliminary estimate of the memorial site's cost was $350 million. This does not include the curatorial costs of creating the memorial's interpretive center but it does include the estimated $175 million to build the infrastructure underlying a platform 70 feet above the original foundations.
But the decision to mark the names of the rescuers prompted a call to recognize another group of uniformed workers: the 33 pilots and flight attendants who were, in a sense, the very first responders, since they died aboard the four hijacked jetliners.
''They were trained emergency workers who faced the terrorists head on,'' said Tom Rogér. His daughter Jean was a flight attendant aboard American Airlines Flight 11 and would have been stationed in the business-class cabin where Mohamed Atta, considered the mastermind of the attack, was seated.
Mr. Rogér, who attended the unveiling at Federal Hall National Memorial yesterday, suggested that the names of all the flight crew members ought to be designated by airline wings. ''They were in the face of death and they knew it,'' he said.
State officials did not respond directly to the idea yesterday but cited Mr. Arad's statement that ''the selfless sacrifices of rescue workers could be acknowledged with their agency's insignia next to their names,'' suggesting that airline and military personnel might not be so designated.
Mr. Arad said that he had agonized over the designation of rescue workers. ''Every way you find to resolve this satisfies some, but causes pain and anguish to others,'' he said. The development corporation declined to elaborate on his statement.
Yesterday's announcement could not be a celebration, Governor Pataki said, ''because you don't celebrate a memorial.'' But it had congratulatory elements, and even a whiff of promotion, when John C. Whitehead, chairman of the development corporation, reminded the crowd that its next challenge was to motivate the public to donate to the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation.
Mayor Bloomberg praised the design because, he said, ''memorials should leave room to imagine, and this memorial, in a very simple way, has done that.''
Mr. Pataki told Mr. Arad that he did ''a phenomenal job under tremendous pressure.'' He also praised the work of the 13-member jury.
Vartan Gregorian, head of the panel, said the two 30-foot-deep reflecting pools that define Mr. Arad's design have made ''the voids left by the destruction the primary symbols of our loss.''
Squeezed by the frantic media scrum, the other jurors -- who had been sequestered for nine months -- expressed not annoyance, but a sense of liberation. Their burden had been to select a design from 5,201 submissions from 63 different countries that would memorialize those killed at the World Trade Center on Sept. 11, 2001, and Feb. 26, 1993.
''I feel an enormous sense of relief,'' said Martin Puryear, a sculptor, who had, in the end, supported Mr. Arad's design. ''There were times during the process when I thought it would never end.''
But now, he said, ''there is a sense of satisfaction and pride.''
Some of the victims' family groups, which have long lobbied the development corporation to reflect their design views, gave qualified approval to the memorial presentation.
''We see this as a vital first step in the process to make a sterile design more authentic,'' said Anthony Gardner, a spokesman for the Coalition of 9/11 Families. He was pleased that his group was told that at bedrock, 97 percent of the north footprint and 57 percent of the south footprint would be unobstructed. But Mr. Gardner expressed dismay that more details about the fate of the steel column remnants had not been revealed.
Some victim family members seemed ready to move on. ''There will never be consensus in any memorial,'' said Monica Iken. Her husband, Michael, died in the south tower, and she founded September's Mission, which has started an effort, the 9/11 Campaign, to raise money for the memorial's educational programs. ''But I think Michael Arad is truly emotionally invested in the interests of the families.''
One of the more remarkable new insights offered yesterday was Mr. Arad's description of his original notion for a memorial: two square voids in the Hudson River, near the trade center site but forever inaccessible, expressing inconsolable loss.
While much has been made of the relation between Mr. Arad's minimalist design and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial by Maya Lin -- who was one of the jurors -- Mr. Arad said yesterday that he had begun thinking about a trade center memorial long before he knew that Ms. Lin would be one of the jurors.
His first submission showed none of the cultural buildings required under the master plan by Studio Daniel Libeskind. Instead, it created a space as stark as -- if not even starker than -- the original Austin Tobin Plaza around the trade center.
Mr. Arad, an architect with the New York City Housing Authority, said the choice of Mr. Walker -- a former chairman of the Landscape Architecture Department of the Graduate School of Design at Harvard University -- was a natural. ''I've known Peter's work for a long time,'' Mr. Arad said.
The principal rendering of the latest memorial plan shows a park even larger than the designated memorial site, in that it extends across Liberty Street to parcels now owned by the Milstein family and Deutsche Bank.
''With all the input, it always gets better,'' Mr. Libeskind said about the effect of Reflecting Absence on his overall master plan. And he added, referring to Mr. Arad's growing awareness of the complexity of the site: ''It takes people a while to become aware of other issues. He's only been talking to the jury.''
Indeed at this point, both designers and family groups made clear, the memorial design is hardly finished. ''This is still a work in progress,'' said Charles Wolf, whose wife, Katherine, died in the north tower. ''We are defining what a memorial is.''
