There is a new king of online advertising: Yahoo.
The company reported strong profit and revenue yesterday for the fourth quarter, meeting analysts' expectations.
And Yahoo, the big Internet portal, said its revenue from online advertising, its largest business line, was $1.2 billion in 2003, up 84 percent. That exceeded the expected ad sales for America Online, which has led online advertising since the dawn of the commercial Internet. This year, AOL's ad revenue is expected to be about $775 million, down 41 percent, said Jordan Rohan, of Schwab Soundview Capital Markets.
Part of Yahoo's ad growth came from the acquisition in October of Overture Services, which sells ads on search engines (on Yahoo and other sites). The company said that both search advertising, which is generally simple text links, and bigger display advertising, showed solid gains.
After a long decline, Yahoo said the ad prices increased 15 percent to 25 percent in the quarter.
Yahoo's chief executive, Terry Semel, said that some popular areas of Yahoo, like its home page, were in such demand over the fourth quarter that prices were driven up.
''We used to talk about unlimited inventory,'' of advertising, Mr. Semel said. ''We don't have unlimited inventory any more.'' He predicted that the growth would continue this year.
''Most of what we read says the Internet advertising will grow by about 20 percent this year,'' he said. ''We think we will grow 25 to 30 percent, organically excluding Overture.''
For the fourth quarter, Yahoo earned $75 million, up 62 percent. That comes to 11 cents a share, exactly as analysts had expected.
The company asked investors to look at its revenue after deducting the payments the Overture unit makes to other sites on which it places its ads, like Microsoft's MSN. These payments, which Yahoo calls traffic acquisition costs, can exceed two-thirds of the revenue from those ads.
On that basis, the company's revenue in the fourth quarter was $511.3 million, up 79 percent. (Excluding Overture, the increase would have been 40 percent.)
In the fourth quarter, revenue from ad sales was $545.5 million, up 178 percent. Excluding Overture, the increase was 48 percent.
Revenue from fee-based services increased 37 percent, to $85.2 million. The largest part of that comes from Yahoo's Internet service venture with SBC Communications. It now has 4.9 million customers for all of its fee-based services.
The company's listings business, mainly its hotjobs site, was the laggard, with revenue of $33.2 million, up 21 percent.
Mr. Semel said that Yahoo would focus for much of the year on introducing products including an online music store similar to Apple's iTunes, more video content and other fee-based products. Most important in the first quarter it will introduce a Web search service. Now its main Web search results are provided by Google, which has become Yahoo's most potent rival in online search advertising.
Yahoo estimated that its revenue, excluding traffic acquisition costs, will be $475 million to $505 million for the first quarter. For the year, the revenue will be $2.1 billion to $2.3 billion. These estimates were not sufficiently bullish to impress investors.
As a result, Yahoo's shares fell $1.84, to $46.55 in after-hours trading. Results were announced at the close of the regular trading session in which its shares closed at $48.39.
TECHNOLOGY
