Isiah Thomas continued his dramatic reconstruction of the Knicks yesterday by dismissing Coach Don Chaney, who had failed to come anywhere near a winning record in two-plus seasons with the team. Seeing the bottom line that was dropping lower every day, Thomas replaced him with Lenny Wilkens, a member of the basketball Hall of Fame and the coach with the most career victories, and defeats, in the National Basketball Association.
Chaney's departure was painful, and at times almost humiliating. He was left to preside over the team's morning practice session yesterday despite widespread speculation that a replacement for him had been found. Late yesterday afternoon, the 57-year-old Chaney reported for work at Madison Square Garden -- where fans had chanted ''Fire Chaney!'' in recent games -- only to be informed at 5:15 p.m., two hours before the Knicks were to play the Orlando Magic, that he no longer had his job.
Chaney, carrying his black work bag, walked out of the Garden with his wife, Jackie. They were escorted by two Knicks officials.
Moments later, Chaney's top assistant coaches, Brendan Malone and Lon Kruger, arrived at the coaches' office at the Garden, whereupon Thomas, the team's president of basketball operations, told them that they, too, had been fired.
In bringing in Wilkens, 66, Thomas is turning to a respected N.B.A. figure who was born in Brooklyn and starred at Boys High 50 years ago.
In the process, Thomas ended a painful period for Chaney, who has two years left on his contract, while continuing an aggressive revamping of a Knicks team that failed to make the playoffs the last two seasons and that had been playing to increasing numbers of empty seats at the Garden. In the three weeks since he took control of the team, he has acquired an All-Star guard in Stephon Marbury, removed four veteran players from the roster, surrendered future draft picks and even lent a hand at coaching.
But so far, the moves have not had that much positive impact on a Knicks team that is 16-24 after beating Orlando last night.
''I felt change was necessary; Don Chaney is a good man and he gave the Knicks his best,'' Thomas said last night at a news conference in announcing Chaney's dismissal.
James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, and Steve Mills, the chief operating officer of Madison Square Garden sports, had a meeting with Thomas yesterday morning in which Thomas discussed his intention to fire Chaney and chose between Mike Fratello and Wilkens.
According to two people with knowledge of the Knicks, the meeting was scheduled before The Daily News published a report yesterday saying that Fratello would be named coach.
''There was no offer ever made to Mike Fratello,'' Thomas said.
An Eastern Conference official said that Fratello had made exorbitant contract demands -- both in control over player personnel decisions and in salary. It is believed that he demanded more than the $5 million he was to have made in his last season with Cleveland. He was fired before the 1999-2000 season.
Thomas acknowledged at yesterday's news conference that he had considered himself as coach but decided that Wilkens was the best candidate.
Thomas said: ''We came to the conclusion late this morning. You never thought you would be able to get a Hall of Fame coach to be able to coach a team. Having the opportunity to have the winningest coach in basketball, we pride ourselves on being the best and having the opportunity to select the best. I just think he's a perfect fit. And I think he's the perfect fit for Stephon.''
In an eight-player trade with the Phoenix Suns last week, Thomas acquired Marbury. But amid all the turmoil, the Knicks are now only 2-3 with him.
Allan Houston, the team captain, lauded Thomas. ''He wants us to win,'' Houston said. ''In a way, you can't fault him for that. After what I've been through, from when I just got here, and after what I've been through here in the last few years, it's no fun.''
Since taking over the team when Jeff Van Gundy resigned Dec. 8, 2001, Chaney compiled a 72-112 record. In his three weeks under Thomas, Chaney was 5-6.
On Tuesday, Chaney described the guillotine hanging over his head as ''horrible working conditions.'' Then yesterday, at the team's practice facility in Greenburgh, N.Y., Chaney directed the team's shoot-around under intense scrutiny. Chaney, a soft-spoken man respected by his players, took what would be a parting shot at Thomas.
''Without hearing anything one way or the other is a sign of disrespect to a degree, yeah,'' Chaney said. ''If that's the case. I don't know if that's the case yet. If that's the case, I think management should at least communicate with me, just out of respect.''
Wilkens spent 30 years as an N.B.A. coach with stops in Seattle, where he won an N.B.A. title in 1978-79, Portland, Cleveland, Atlanta and Toronto. He compiled a record of 1,292 victories and 1,114 losses.
Wilkens, known as a laid-back coach, was fired last season by Toronto after the team finished 24-58. He will be introduced at a news conference this morning. Herb Williams, a Knicks assistant, coached the team last night.
''I think I've been very respectful and supportive of Don since the time I've been here,'' Thomas said. ''I didn't feel it was appropriate to give a 24-hour status update of what was going on. I didn't feel it was appropriate for me to go in every day and say to him, everything's O.K., because I was still in the process of evaluating the whole situation. I never wanted to lead anyone on or give any false intentions. I wanted to be completely honest.''
Since Thomas became president he was dismayed by two embarrassing defeats. The first was against Minnesota on Dec. 23, when Latrell Sprewell shouted obscenities at Dolan and the Knicks' bench. Kruger was the only Knick to stand up to Sprewell, telling him to be quiet. The second was last Thursday, when Van Gundy returned to the Garden with the Houston Rockets, who routed the Knicks, 111-79. Fratello was contacted the next day, according to a person with knowledge of the Knicks.
After the Sprewell game, Thomas decried the Knicks' lack of toughness and called the team a sick patient. Chaney said he did not think it was up to the players to police their opponents. That was the first warning sign that Chaney's job was in jeopardy.
Within a week in New York, Thomas had brought in his own coaches from the Pacers, Mark Aguirre, his childhood friend and former Pistons teammate, and George Glymph, who had been a high school coach for 27 years. Aguirre is expected to be named an assistant coach today. Wilkens will also be bringing in his own assistants.
On Monday, after the team's shoot-around, Thomas offered a clinic for the team's guards on the pick-and-roll. ''It's obvious when that happens, there's a message that it's just one more thing for Don to deal with,'' Kruger said.
Thomas recalled what he told Chaney in a meeting last Friday. ''I voiced my concerns and also my care for him,'' Thomas said. ''I said to you that no one wanted to see any person go through the things he was going through at the time.''
The final 72 hours were nearly unbearable for Chaney. His assistants could see the strain on him. Thomas appeared on ''Late Show With David Letterman'' on Tuesday and responded to Letterman's question about what he was going to do with Chaney.
''You definitely don't like to see anyone humiliated in such a public forum,'' Thomas said. ''It's a tough time for him as a man.''
Everyone could see how tough it was on Chaney.
''I think in fairness to Don, he could have communicated a little bit better,'' Kruger said, referring to Thomas. Kruger replaced Wilkens in Atlanta, then was fired after 27 games last season.
There had already been a history of strained communication between Thomas and Chaney, stemming from their experience 10 years ago in Detroit. In Chaney's first season as head coach of the Pistons, 1993-94, the team was 20-62. It was Chaney who gave Thomas his first and only career ''D.N.P. -- Coach's Decision'' on March 11, 1994.
Chaney occasionally benched Thomas in favor of the young point guard Lindsey Hunter. Thomas was injured that season, playing only 58 games.
Chaney came to New York as an assistant under Don Nelson. When Nelson was fired after just eight months, Van Gundy was named head coach. Chaney spent seven years as an assistant. But almost immediately since taking over for Van Gundy, there was speculation he would be fired.
The Knicks were 10-9 when Chaney took over. Three games later, they were 11-11. That was the last time the Knicks were at .500 under his leadership.
Chaney not only survived the critical junctures, he thrived, getting two contract extensions, through 2005-6.
After completing an 0-5 Western Conference trip, the Knicks came home, won back-to-back games, then lost so abysmally to Golden State that management made a change, firing Scott Layden and replacing him with Thomas.
Dolan, while very supportive of Chaney, clearly gave Thomas control of the basketball decisions.
''Life isn't fair, and you have to deal with it,'' Chaney said yesterday morning. ''I'm not one who thrives on excuses.''
He added: ''As long as we're not talking about life or death. We're talking about a job, a job that I enjoy, a job that I put my heart and soul into.'' Then he said, ''It's not the end of the world.''
PRO BASKETBALL
