THE SUPER BOWL of antiques shows, the Winter Antiques Show, opens tonight on Park Avenue at the Seventh Regiment Armory, celebrating its 50th year. It once again pits George III against 18th- century America, American Indians against the colonials and Napoleonic France against Czarist Russia, as giltwood mirrors, imperial porcelains and hairy-paw-footed desks tackle each other over the recently fatted wallets walking the silk-brocade carpet on the exhibition floor.
The show, with its prestigious gala party, kicks off the new year's social season and the big antiques-buying season. This year, there is high expectation and high anxiety, say exhibitors and others in the antiques world, as well-heeled shoppers and collectors get their first big chance, at show, to make good on talk of a strengthening economy and a bolder market.
Earlier this week, optimism among the 74 exhibitors peaked and dipped like this winter's temperatures. And at bread-and-butter shows like the White Plains Antiques Show at the Westchester County Center last weekend, where prices run in the tens of thousands rather than the hundreds of thousands of dollars, sales reflected caution as well as confidence, not the true luster of a brilliant return.
Leigh Keno, a specialist in Americana, said that he thought the general psychological moment was right for recovery. Mr. Keno, who stars with his brother, Leslie Keno, the head of Sotheby's Americana department, in ''Find!'' and ''Antiques Roadshow,'' cited the capture of Saddam Hussein in December and the Mars landing on Jan. 3.
''What's Mars got to do with it?'' he said, with an affable chuckle. ''That's about optimism. You're not looking for antiques there, but it does help with a sense of pride. Things like that affect people's mood about buying a $30,000 Chippendale table.''
Mr. Keno said that he had been buying more stock over the last year and a half than in any comparable period in his 18 years in business. That included seven of the 10 top-selling lots at the Sotheby's Americana sale in December.
Several dealers acknowledged that aggressive buying on their part, in addition to a reviving competition between collectors, had produced newly aggressive pricing. Mr. Keno has with him at the armory a desk made by Benjamin Reead in Marblehead, Mass., in 1771, priced at $380,000. (The price when new, as detailed on the desk, was £10 British sterling.)
But Thomas Woodham-Smith, a managing director of Mallett Inc., a specialist in English and Continental furniture with showrooms in London and New York, was less ebullient about a bounce-back.
''Crystal-ball gazing, isn't it?'' he said of the current fortune of antiques. Business was slower in 2003 than in 2002, Mr. Woodham-Smith said. ''Our experience is that this market is later to turn than other markets,'' he added. ''When the Nasdaq was going disastrously wrong, we were still selling lots of art.'' (Mallett Inc. is 139 years old.) Mr. Woodham-Smith, who is showing an 1825 Empire table from the Skottorp Palace in Sweden, priced at $315,000, said that he was ''timidly optimistic.''
Dealers discounted the extent to which strong signals from the economy might encourage antiques collectors to sell. Though the April sale of the Forbes collection of Fabergé Easter eggs at Sotheby's, announced earlier this month, appears well-timed, antiques collectors typically have lived with their collections and behave accordingly.
''The market doesn't flush out sellers -- these people become attached to their furniture,'' said Clinton Howell in New York, who specializes in English furniture. Mr. Howell joined the show's coveted exhibitors' lineup last year when he received an invitation to replace Richard Green, an English dealer. Mr. Green dropped out at the last minute amid speculation that his sales to L. Dennis Kozlowski, the former Tyco International executive now on trial for larceny, had made the gallery's appearance in New York problematic. (The gallery is exhibiting in the show this year. Mr. Green, through his lawyer in New York, declined to comment on the reasons for last year's absence.)
''Death, debt and divorce -- those are the three things that bring things to market,'' Mr. Howell said.
On one point dealers agreed. The high spots at the high end of the antiques market are selling briskly, and the middle range is disappearing like the ink on an old love letter. Important, well-documented provenance and full A-plus reports on condition are providing the kinds of assurances that are making collectors, eager for a reward after a little good news, reach for their pockets. And pretty items without any real claim to fame or uniqueness, which appeal to people who are furnishing and not collecting, are slow leaving the gate, and getting slower. That could mean bargains among the B material as dealers clear inventory to trade up.
At the same time, interior decorators are less of a force than they have been in several years, dealers said, as academic interest and fresh directions in scholarship again take the helm. Several new books, including ''The Furniture Masterworks of John and Thomas Seymour''(Peabody Essex Museum and the University Press of New England, 2003), a book by Robert D. Mussey Jr. on two New England furniture makers of the Federal period, are producing enthusiasm in the collecting market for perhaps undervalued work.
''If you have a masterpiece in whatever field, there's a good chance you'll sell it,'' said Barry Friedman in New York, who specializes in 20th-century art and design. Mr. Friedman, who spoke on Tuesday after returning from what he said was a very successful showing at Palm Beach Contemporary, a fair, said that in the last six months the interest among buyers was for more expensive things. At the armory, he has a chair designed by Gerrit Rietveld, a seminal Dutch Modernist, and painted by Rietveld in 1923 for his own use. It is priced at $225,000.
On Sunday, at the White Plains Antiques Show, the light gray thin cashmere sweaters, the suede brogues, the British racing-green car coats and corduroys were as much in evidence as the Spode foot baths, the mahogany knife boxes, the hunting scenes and the silver.
Attendance was light, several dealers said, though the weekend also experienced record cold. ''People buy -- when they come,'' said Bruce Phillips of Fair Trade Inc. in Shelburne Falls, Mass., which specializes in Anglo-Indian and British colonial furniture. ''No one is beating down the door at shows.''
Much that dealers who will participate in the Winter Antiques Show noted seemed evident in White Plains.
Decorators, who made up 70 percent of Mr. Phillip's sales three years ago, now amount to 30 percent. He said that there had been no substantial upswing in his business in the last year, attributing the situation to an absence of belief in the economic news being reported by the Bush administration.
Mark Schedlbauer, an Americana dealer from New Salem, Mass., said that ''the economy might be coming back, but it's not back.''
He added that he thought the more modestly priced middle of the antiques market was dwindling because ''the middle class is shrinking -- we see it in our business.''
But Simon Powell, of Freshfords in Bath, England, sold several items that topped $10,000 each, including a mahogany cellaret, or liquor cabinet, circa 1810, for $12,000, which justified the excursion, he said.
And David and Hilary Lehv, two lawyers who live in White Plains in an old house for which they buy old pieces, and who enjoy the circuit of weekend antiques shows, bought a serious dining table at Artemis Gallery, a North Salem, N.Y., dealer, after several years of shopping for one.
Last year, they passed on a table they liked because of qualms about the money, Ms. Lehv said. This year, she explained, as Mr. Lehv hit the floor to measure the $13,500 three-leaf American campaign-style table they had just committed themselves to, ''the moment seems more right to buy.''
A Catalog Of Troves For Buyers  THIS is antiques show season, with several important ones in New York.
Winter Antiques Show  Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 66th Street; (212) 472-1180.
The 50th annual event, with 74 dealers, will begin tonight with a party from 5 to 9 p.m. Tickets, which must be ordered in advance (718-292-7392), are $300 for patrons (7 to 9 p.m.); $500 for collectors (from 6 p.m.); and $1,000 for benefactors attending a reception at 5 p.m. On Jan. 22 there will be a party for young collectors, 6:30 to 9 p.m.; tickets in advance are $125; at the door, $150. Proceeds from the parties and the show will benefit the East Side House Settlement in the Bronx.
The show opens tomorrow. It includes an exhibition of 18th- and 19th-century decorative objects and paintings from the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum, including a 1775 Philadelphia Chippendale table, an 1817 girandole mirror; favrile glass vases by Louis Comfort Tiffany and an 1882 secretary desk by Herter Brothers. Curators will lecture at 2:30 p.m., Monday through Jan. 23. Through Jan. 25, noon to 8:30 p.m. every day except Jan. 22 and Sundays, when it closes at 6 p.m. Admission: $16.
Antiques at the Armory  69th Regiment Armory, Lexington Avenue at 26th Street; (212) 255-0020.
A hundred dealers will sell wares a range of items, including 18th-century American furniture, 19th-century textiles and 20th-century Arts and Crafts-style decorative objects. From 11 a.m. to 8 p.m. tomorrow and Saturday, and on Sunday from 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission is $12.
The American Antiques Show  Metropolitan Pavilion, 125 West 18th Street; (646) 638-4073.
Forty-five dealers in American folk art will sell quilts, portraits, weather vanes, American Indian and Shaker objects. The show runs today through Sunday, opening at noon each day and closing today at 8:30 p.m., tomorrow at 8 p.m., Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and Sunday at 5 p.m. Admission is $15.
Park Avenue Antiques Show  Wallace Hall, Park Avenue at 84th Street; (212) 288-3588.
Furniture from Europe, America and Asia will be offered by 45 dealers, along with sterling silver, glassware and estate jewelry. Today from 3 to 7 p.m.; tomorrow and Saturday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.; and Sunday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission is $10.
Antiques at the Piers  Piers, 88, 90 and 92, 12th Avenue at 55th Street; (212) 255-0020.
Five hundred dealers, with Americana and folk art at Pier 92; classical antiques at Pier 90; and 20th-century items at Pier 88. Saturday and Sunday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; admission $12.
New York Ceramics Fair  National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue (89th Street); (212) 289-0496.
A show and sale of antique and contemporary ceramic vessels, platters, figures and sculpture, today through Saturday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., and Sunday, noon to 6 p.m. Admission is $15. There will also be a small exhibition of works from the Museum of Arts and Design.
