Still smarting from the $1.2 billion accounting scandal at Royal Ahold, Dutch financial regulators said on Wednesday that they had opened an investigation into Parmalat's financial dealings in the Netherlands.
Parmalat, the global dairy and food giant based in Italy that was declared insolvent on Dec. 24, used a group of shell companies in the Netherlands to raise at least 5.2 billion euros ($6.64 billion) from bond investors around the world. The shell companies were set up under special Dutch tax laws that help businesses and wealthy individuals from other countries, ranging from multinational companies to rock stars, avoid paying taxes on royalty income.
Parmalat had at least five subsidiaries in the Netherlands that existed almost entirely on paper. Documents and regulatory filings show that most of the companies had no employees, sold no goods and had headquarters consisting of post office boxes. Nevertheless, these ''brass plate'' companies played a vital role in raising capital for Parmalat, selling at least 30 bond issues managed by at least 10 major investment banks over the last decade.
Those bonds and others issued by Parmalat have plummeted in value since the scandal surrounding the company hit the headlines in December, inflicting huge potential losses on the institutional investors who bought them. Duncan A. Yin of CRT Capital Group, an American bond dealer, said on Tuesday that most Parmalat bonds were trading for less than 25 cents on the dollar, implying that at least 6.9 billion euros ($8.8 billion) in value had been wiped out by the scandal so far.
Now, both in the Netherlands and abroad, regulators are collecting and scrutinizing annual reports and bond offering documents of the shell companies to see if Parmalat's financing activities violated securities laws.
Seger Pijnenburg, a spokesman for the Netherlands Authority for Financial Markets, the main securities regulator here, said the agency had been in frequent contact with the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United States about Parmalat's shell companies. ''We are investigating closely the activities of Parmalat in the Netherlands,'' Mr. Pijnenburg said. ''We are trying to gather together all of the facts we can.''
Neither the Parmalat shell companies nor the administrators who established and ran them have been charged with any wrongdoing in the Netherlands.
Still, the paper trail that Parmalat's activities generated here sheds light on how the group used an intricate web of corporate vehicles to raise money and move it around within its ranks, at one point even entering into a currency hedging transaction effectively with itself.
And the case provides a glimpse into what is known in the Netherlands as the trust business, the lucrative work of creating and administering hundreds of brass-plate companies for foreigners, which until recently had largely avoided any regulatory scrutiny.
Over the last 15 years, Parmalat set up at least five subsidiaries here: Parmalat Netherlands B.V., Parmalat Capital Netherlands B.V., Dairies Holding International B.V., Parmalat Finance Corporation B.V. and Parma Food Corporation B.V. Together, these companies issued the majority of the global Parmalat group's outstanding bond debt, with a total face value estimated to exceed 8.9 billion euros ($11.4 billion). The bulk of the Dutch bonds -- more than 20 issues -- came from Parmalat Finance. That company's annual reports show a trail of transactions among Parmalat subsidiaries. In 2002, for instance, Parmalat Finance reported that its main source of revenue was 279.4 million euros ($356.7 million) in interest payments from other Parmalat entities.
In the same year, Parmalat Finance recorded a profit of 136 million euros on a currency hedge, a type of transaction in which one party effectively buys insurance against currency fluctuations from another.
The party on the other side of this deal was another Parmalat-owned entity, Bonlat, based in the Cayman Islands, which is at the center of the scandal involving missing assets at Parmalat. According to Parmalat Finance's annual report, Bonlat reimbursed it for part of its foreign exchange losses that year.
Hedging among subsidiaries of the same corporation would seem to accomplish little for the group as a whole, because one subsidiary's gains would be exactly canceled by the other's losses. Some accountants say the deal should have raised eyebrows. .
''Any time you start to see transactions like this on a subsidiary level, it always raises questions whether these gains and losses have been reported correctly in the parent company's financial statements and that should always be a red flag for the auditors,'' said Lynn Turner, a former chief accountant for the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Deborah Harrington, a spokeswoman for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accountants for Parmalat Finance Corporation, said the firm could not discuss the matter because it involved confidential client information.
Anton Louwinger, a Dutch tax adviser with the Lovells law firm, said that he had not studied the particulars of the Parmalat deal, but that it would not be surprising to see a multinational group using such a transaction between subsidiaries for a legitimate business purpose, such as concentrating its currency exposure in a country where tax laws were favorable.
Tax experts said they thought Parmalat might have chosen to set up finance companies in the Netherlands for a similar reason. The withholding tax here on interest and royalties paid to foreign entities is usually much less than in other countries, and in many cases is zero. By issuing bonds here, Parmalat would likely have saved both itself and the buyers of its bonds some tax expense.
''You tend to see Dutch companies included in group structures in order to retain a reduction of the tax burden on intragroup interest,'' Mr. Louwinger said.
Parmalat Finance, which according to its reports had no employees, was administered in part by a subsidiary of Nauta Dutilh, a large law firm in the Netherlands. The Nauta unit and another company, Amaco, provided Parmalat Finance with a postal address and assisted the company in filing annual reports with the Rotterdam Chamber of Commerce, records show. In the Netherlands, chambers of commerce serve as repositories for corporate filings of companies not listed on the Amsterdam stock exchange.
Spokesmen for both Nauta Dutilh and Amaco declined to comment.
Two central figures in the Parmalat scandal who are in custody -- Fausto Tonna and Luciano del Soldato, both former chief financial officers of Parmalat -- have at various times been listed as managers of Parmalat Finance. Giovanni Tanzi, son of the founder of Parmalat, Calisto Tanzi, is also mentioned.
The Netherlands is tightening its restrictions on administrative subsidiaries and on the banks and law firms that set them up and run them, partly out of concern that brass-plate companies could be used for money laundering.
Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  An article in World Business yesterday about the investigation into Parmalat, the Italian dairy and food giant, misstated the relationship of Giovanni Tanzi, a former board member, and Calisto Tanzi, the company's founder. They are brothers, not son and father.
