Inside the Jones household, there are two kinds of sounds. One is of illness and adversity: The children's chronic coughing. The motor of an inhaler machine that helps them cope with their asthma. The tapping of their grandfather's cane on the linoleum floor.
And the other? It's laughter. It's the sound of a family gamely trying to meet adversity head-on. Inside their apartment in Manhattan, Billy Jones lives with his daughter, Utara, and her six children: Quantil, Xandria, William, D.J., James and Amanda. Among them, there are frequent asthma attacks, things they cannot control. But one thing they can control is taking good care of their grandfather, whose own health needs have sidelined him after a lifetime of being the one who helped others in need.
Until recently, when Mr. Jones received a motorized scooter, paid for with money from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, he could not get around on his own. ''Even when I laid down,'' he said, ''I had to get one of my grands to straighten out the legs.''
With the scooter, he can now spend time with his grandchildren outside their cramped three-bedroom apartment in a housing project. The children transform the daily task of exercising his stiff, painful limbs into a game they loudly compete over.
Being so dependent on others goes against the grain of Mr. Jones, who has long been active in his community. He was a Parent-Teacher Association president when his own children were in school.
Starting in the early 1980's, he worked as an outreach worker at the Dunlevy Milbank Center of the Children's Aid Society, one of seven charities supported by the Neediest Cases. As a single father raising three of his own children, in addition to eight of his sister's, whom he adopted, he found the center to be indispensable.
When his children were young, Mr. Jones used to walk them to the center and wait for them so that he could make sure they got home safely. One day, while he was waiting, it suddenly occurred to him to get up and start helping out.
From that point on, ''it was a love thing,'' he said.
He started volunteering at the center and became increasingly more involved. He became known around the neighborhood for visiting homes to inquire about a child whose participation had dropped or to inform families about beneficial programs at the center, like one on sex education. He also recalled negotiating with drug dealers to try to keep them away from play areas.
But things changed in 2002. Mr. Jones, who is diabetic, began to have weakness in his legs. A mysterious ailment hit him hard and fast and within days he was at home, unable to work. In November his unemployment insurance expired; since then it has been a struggle for him to pay for his insulin and medications for his legs. Before Christmas, Wayne Dawson, the director of the Dunlevy Milbank Center, got $1,695 from the Neediest Cases for the scooter.
Though he can no longer run around or play ball, Mr. Jones has not lost his desire to do some good. He works hard to inspire his grandchildren, who, he recognizes, already have much harder lives than he does.
To keep them hopeful he tells them: ''You can go as far as you want to go. Tomorrow is nothing but a dream. A dream is the future. And keep going for that.''
And still, there are the difficulties of the present to contend with. Often, the burden falls hardest on Ms. Jones. ''''She's daughter, she's mother, she's the father, she's the nurse,'' Mr. Jones said of his daughter, who between trips to the doctor manages their tight budget.
Ms. Jones used to work as a pharmacist technician at a drug store, but after her last child was born she found that her time was consumed by the needs of her family.
D.J., short for Don Jenkins, was born with cerebral palsy and receives $587 a month in Supplemental Security Income. They also get $423 a month in food stamps, and the children receive Medicaid.
Still, things have been getting worse. ''He wakes up in the middle of the night, complaining about headaches,'' Ms. Jones said of D.J. She explained how his growing brain is creating pressure in his head.
At the same time, James and D.J. have speech impediments that require therapy. Meanwhile, Xandria, who was found to have attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, is working to keep up her performance in school.
''You're wanted and you're loved,'' Ms. Jones said she tells her children. ''You're going to be something. There is no other option. There's no when or if I graduate high school. It's when I graduate college.''
In that moment, the apartment was once again filled with laughter, the sound that helps the Jones family face everything else. From her playpen, the baby Amanda shared a laugh with her grandfather. Ms. Jones watched the scene unfold.
''I tell them, our life makes for a good story,'' she said.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,770,138.64  Recorded Tuesday: $43,197.50
Total: $6,813,336.14  Last year to date: $7,258,172.55
