THE AOL division of Time Warner will bet an estimated $10 million in a gamble on Super Bowl Sunday that it can start to turn around its struggling dial-up operations by helping customers who feel the need for speed.
An agency recently hired by AOL, Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., is creating a campaign that will be introduced during the CBS broadcast of Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1. AOL joins a roster of blue-chip superbrands paying an average of $2.3 million for each 30 seconds of commercial time during the game, which includes Chrysler, FedEx, Lay's, Monster, Pepsi-Cola and Visa.
''It's like war; we have one chance to win,'' said Len Short, executive vice president for brand marketing at America Online in Dulles, Va.
''So we've got to make sure we come up with the right answers,'' he added, ''and make sure our customers have no good reason to consider anyone else.''
The campaign uses three members of the Teutul family -- the cast of the ''American Chopper'' reality series, the top-rated show on the Discovery Channel cable network -- to promote a feature of the new AOL 9.0 service being branded as AOL Top Speed. The feature is what is known as a Web accelerator -- that is, it hastens the poky download times for Web pages, particularly for users of the lagging narrowband AOL dial-up service.
The Teutuls, who customize motorcycles at a shop named Orange County Choppers, are meant to serve as a metaphor for the benefits of AOL Top Speed. The commercials, to appear during the Super Bowl as well as the halftime show, for which AOL is the sole sponsor, will show Paul Teutul Sr. and his sons Mikey and Paul Jr. souping up motorcycles to hyperbolic levels to humorously demonstrate what AOL Top Speed can do.
Beginning Sunday, CBS will run 10-second teaser spots during its coverage of the National Football League playoffs to promote its halftime show. AOL will follow those teasers with 15-second versions of its own, on CBS and other networks, intended to generate anticipation among viewers for the halftime show and campaign.
Though AOL Top Speed also accelerates the performance of broadband, the focus of the campaign will be on the dial-up service because that is the most problem-plagued aspect of AOL. When dial-up was the sole method to connect to the Internet, AOL rode the Web as proudly as an owner of a Teutul chopper cruises along Route 66. But now, AOL is hemorrhaging customers, losing two million in the last 12 months alone as competitors steal subscribers on both ends of the spectrum. On the high end, cable and telecommunications companies are luring them away with elaborate broadband packages, and on the low end, rival dial-up services are wooing them with lower prices.
''While it is too early to write AOL's obituary, one thing that is certainly dying is dial-up Internet access,'' said Ben Macklin, senior analyst for eMarketer, which specializes in Internet research and analysis.
''AOL really needs to get momentum going at the start of this year after the tough years it had in 2003 and 2002,'' Mr. Macklin said in a telephone interview yesterday, ''and reduce the customer churn.''
''The pieces are in place to do it, such as Top Speed,'' he added, ''but is it too late? That's the question.''
''I don't think it is,'' Mr. Macklin said, ''but the next three to six months will be key to whether consumers will take another look at AOL.''
The Super Sunday campaign, which will continue through March, is part of a media strategy for AOL centered on the sponsorship of so-called big-event TV that in addition to the Super Bowl includes coverage of the Daytona 500, the Grammy Awards, the Academy Awards and the National Basketball Association All-Star Game as well as the finale of the NBC sitcom ''Friends.''
''We want to put ourselves at the center of these big events,'' Mr. Short said, ''to let people know we're changing our product so loudly and overwhelmingly that we own the field.''
''We have to behave like leaders and leave no room for the other guys,'' he added.
''In the past, when we had the Internet boom creating the interest for us in I.S.P.'s,'' Mr. Short said, using the shorthand for Internet service providers, ''we didn't have to do that, but now we have to.''
''It's like we grabbed a ride on a helicopter,'' he added, laughing ruefully, ''but now the helicopter has stopped flying.''
That change in attitude at America Online was welcomed by Rich LeFurgy, a longtime online-industry executive who served as chairman of the Internet Advertising Bureau.
''AOL has a number of hurdles to get over,'' said Mr. LeFurgy, the principal at Archer in San Francisco who is serving as a consultant to AOL.
''Top Speed allows a better Internet experience so Web pages will load faster,'' he added, ''but the advertising will have to break through and challenge people's perceptions about AOL to prove it's not 'the same old AOL' anymore -- and not just say it, but show it.''
The campaign represents a potential big-risk, big-reward challenge for Wieden &amp; Kennedy as well as for AOL. Wieden &amp; Kennedy, best known for creating campaigns for ESPN and Nike, was named to the AOL agency roster in June, joining the New York office of BBDO Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, which created campaigns last year promoting the new AOL broadband service featuring celebrities like Sharon Stone and Elle Macpherson.
Since then, BBDO New York has produced spots promoting the 9.0 service, which mentioned the Top Speed feature in passing, and Wieden &amp; Kennedy produced spots promoting the familiar AOL disks that arrive in the (snail) mail, which featured the unlikely star pair of the comedian Jerry Stiller and the rapper Snoop Dogg.
''We're thrilled with the opportunity to handle this assignment, an important one for AOL,'' said Trish Adams, group account director at Wieden &amp; Kennedy.
''The Teutuls have a broad appeal,'' she added, ''and people you wouldn't expect tune in to their show -- like me, as well as my dad.'' The spots are the first that Wieden &amp; Kennedy is creating for a Super Bowl since 1997.
Mr. Short said nothing should be read into the decision to select Wieden &amp; Kennedy rather than BBDO New York for the Super Bowl spots to suggest one agency is being favored -- or disfavored -- over the other. He did, however, express dismay at an announcement Tuesday by BBDO New York that Bill Katz, president and chief executive for the last three years, is stepping down.
''Bill was the go-to guy for us,'' Mr. Short said, so ''that causes some concern.''
''It doesn't destabilize the account for us,'' he added, ''but I'd be a lot more comfortable if he's there.''
It will be ''critical,'' Mr. Short said, for BBDO New York to retain Jimmy Siegel, vice chairman and senior executive creative director, who is the top creative talent on the AOL account.
As for the Super Bowl advertiser lineup, CBS has sold about 85 percent of the commercial time it planned to sell during the game. There are about eight 30-second spots remaining, primarily during the fourth and final quarter. They have been priced below the average $2.3 million rate, at around $1.7 million to $1.8 million each.
Among the advertisers that have bought Super Bowl spots in recent weeks, adding their names to the roster of familiar, longtime sponsors like Anheuser-Busch, General Motors and PepsiCo are: the American Legacy Foundation, for the ''Truth'' anti-smoking campaign; H&amp;R Block; Nextel Communications; Procter &amp; Gamble, for Charmin bathroom tissue; the Sony and Touchstone Pictures movie studios, for coming films; and the Staples office supply retail chain.
In selecting the Teutuls and their motorcycle shop, AOL and Wieden &amp; Kennedy may be avoiding one obvious pitfall: the long-circulating Internet joke ''If America Online made cars.'' The list, as it appears on one Web site (sick-humor.com), includes fanciful suppositions about such a car like these: It would ''have a top speed of 40 miles per hour yet have a 200 m.p.h. speedometer,'' it ''would come equipped with a new and fantastic 8-track tape player'' and ''Every time you close the door on the AOL car, it would say 'Goodbye.'''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
