The merger of Bank One and J.P. Morgan Chase will substantially widen the gap between the nation's three largest banks and the rest of the industry, making it virtually impossible for the smaller banks to catch up, analysts and investment bankers said.
The combined bank will be close to Citigroup in assets, and just slightly larger than Bank of America, which announced its own merger with FleetBoston Financial just three months ago.
''This creates a super-tier of banks that is just untouchable,'' said Richard Bove, an analyst with Hoefer &amp; Arnett, an independent research company.
Smaller banks will by necessity have to be more focused in strategy and may have to divest themselves of those businesses in which they are now also-rans, Mr. Bove said. ''It simply isn't possible to be a do-anything bank anymore,'' he said.
''This definitely puts pressure on mid-tier banks,'' said Steven Wharton, a banking analyst with Loomis, Sayles &amp; Company.
Analysts have been expecting a wave of bank deals for some time, now that the economy is recovering and banks have recovered from the ill effects of the last wave of mergers in the late 1990's. But the scale of the deal announced yesterday makes it hard to match, they said.
An oft-rumored combination of Wells Fargo and Wachovia, now the fourth and fifth largest banks, according to SNL Financial, would result in an institution 25 percent smaller than the new J.P. Morgan.
In the last wave of bank takeovers, the stronger banks traded at far higher multiples of earnings than the weaker banks, said Brock Vandervliet, an analyst with Lehman Brothers. But after a recent rally in bank stocks, ''there is no real currency advantage'' for the healthier banks, he said in a recent report.
Still, other analysts noted that the cost of potential bank mergers now appears more reasonable. J.P. Morgan is paying a 14 percent premium to Bank One's stock price at the close of trading yesterday. That is less than half the premium offered in October by Bank of America to FleetBoston shareholders, a price many analysts and bankers called too expensive then.
Mr. Vandervliet said the latest deal would put pressure on Bank of America to justify the price it is paying for FleetBoston. ''This price is so cheap'' in comparison to the Bank of America deal, he said. Jon Balkind, head of banking research at Fox-Pitt, Kelton, said, ''Some potential sellers may now be willing to accept a lower premium.''
If some smaller mergers follow this deal, likely targets include U.S. Bancorp, SunTrust and PNC Financial Services, as well as Washington Mutual, Mr. Balkind added.
The merger of J.P. Morgan and Bank One would bump the combined Bank of America-FleetBoston from its anticipated slot as the second-largest bank into third place based on assets, but Bank of America would remain the largest United States bank in deposits, SNL said.
''Bank of America is still the premier domestic bank,'' Mr. Bove said.
Very different motivations were behind the two giant mergers, analysts said. Bank of America sought geographic diversification, with FleetBoston allowing it to enhance its consumer banking business in the Northeast. J.P. Morgan sought to broaden its business mix, giving it a bigger consumer operation to balance the volatility of its dominant investment banking division.
Further deals are possible for the new J.P. Morgan, analysts said. The combined bank still has a modest presence, compared with Citigroup, outside the United States, Mr. Bove said. ''They could do follow-on deals.''
MARKET PLACE
