There is no word for depression in Luganda, the local language, but until about a year ago Josephine Namaganda was most certainly suffering from just that.
She shunned her grandchildren, preferring to cry alone in her hut. She lacked the energy to work, which meant that her fertile farmland became overrun with weeds. She wished she were dead.
Mrs. Namaganda was not alone. Researchers who visited 30 villages in southwestern Uganda three years ago found 21 percent of the people surveyed showed depression. They traced the problem to AIDS.
In villages along Lake Victoria, some of Africa's earliest AIDS cases were discovered 20 years ago. The disease has devastated the area, dotting the fertile landscape with graves. Uganda's government has made strides in reducing its overall infection rate, but the lakefront remains a trouble spot.
One aggravating factor is the havoc that depression can wreak on those infected or those who have seen family members die one after another. Researchers have responded with a new group-therapy program. And they have found that in the African bush, as elsewhere, treating people's minds can help their bodies rebound.
''You see people who in the beginning don't want to live anymore who start becoming productive,'' said Cephas Hamba, a group facilitator with World Vision, a relief organization that conducted the research with experts from Johns Hopkins and Columbia universities.
Mrs. Namaganda lost her husband to AIDS, and 6 of her 12 children have died, some from related ailments. She now cares for nine grandchildren, tiny ones with big eyes who have had no choice but to suffer through her low moments with her.
She says she reached rock bottom in 2002, when she discovered that she, too, was infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS. ''I locked myself in the bedroom and I chased all the children outside,'' she recalled. ''I beat them whenever they came around. They would say, 'Grandma, where's the food?' I'd say, 'Let's all die.' ''
Then one day last year, a World Vision counselor invited her to share her woes with her neighbors. At first she sent the counselor away, but eventually she agreed to listen. A session was convened, and after many long silences, people began opening up. They shared their suffering. They recalled the funerals. Once they came to trust one another, each revealed his or her H.I.V. status.
And their depression lifted.
The therapy study was conducted with 15 groups of up to a dozen people each -- segregated by sex to encourage confidences. Each group met 90 minutes a week for four months.
Results indicate that 6.5 percent of those who underwent therapy still suffered from major depression. In a control group without therapy, 54.7 percent remained depressed.
''Group interpersonal psychotherapy was highly efficacious in reducing depression,'' read an article on the research in the June 2003 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association. ''A clinical trial proved feasible in the local setting. Both findings should encourage similar trials in similar settings in Africa and beyond.''
Mrs. Namaganda began sleeping through the night. She picked up her hoe and started working her fields, growing corn, bananas and nuts.
Before the researchers came along, locals described their suffering using two terms. In Luganda, ''yo'kwekyawa'' means hating oneself. ''Okwekubagiza'' means pitying oneself. Nobody had any idea that talking could make one feel good enough to get out of bed.
The researchers had had similar doubts. They ruled out antidepressants because of the cost and a lack of health services. They worried that psychotherapy might not translate well in the local culture.
''So much attention is being paid to AIDS but so little is being done about the mental health aspects of the disease,'' said Paul Bolton of the Boston University School of Public Health, who led the project while he was at Johns Hopkins. ''Depression devastates people's ability to function.''
By using local facilitators, the researchers found that talking through one's woes works just as well on a straw mat as on a couch.
One of the study participants, Maria Prisca Namugerwa, said she had been so afraid before the therapy that AIDS would kill her that she had thought about taking her life before the disease did.
The researchers said that for ethical reasons, nobody who entertained active thoughts of suicide had been included in the study. But many of those who took part said they had thought about it.
At a recent group therapy session, Mrs. Namugerwa smiled broadly as she described how she used to toss and turn at night. She now sleeps peacefully, she said, adding, ''The group told me my life was worth something.''
In a group session for men, Livingstone Ntale got the strength to visit a clinic to determine if he was H.I.V.-positive. Though the results confirmed his fears, he said the group discussions changed his attitude so much that he took his wife for testing, too. Her test was negative, and they now live with the hope that she, at least, will be around to rear their 10 children, some of whom were borne by Mr. Ntale's first wife, who died of AIDS.
''My philosophy now is, 'I could die tomorrow but I could live another 50 years,' '' Mr. Ntale said. ''I used to pick up the hoe and start working, but then I'd stop. I'd think, 'Why should I bother?' ''
Others who have benefited include Justine Nalweyiso, who learned to control her urges to abandon her three children, and Gormet Nayiga, who no longer thinks she is going to die every time she does not feel well.
The therapy sessions drew participants together so effectively that many have continued meeting. Some have also used their counseling groups to start business ventures together. Women weave multicolored mats. Men pool their money to buy chickens and goats.
Lwanga Lawuli, 65, who has lost all his relatives to the disease, said he considered the half dozen men in his group to be his brothers. The best thing about the discussions, he said, is the comfort of knowing that he will have people around to take care of him if he falls ill.
Like so many others, Abdul Hakim Ssempijja thought he had AIDS but was too terrified to find out for sure. He, too, got tested, and he, too, found the virus was in his blood.
But talking about his woes, he said, has given him strength. ''This group didn't take the virus out of my body,'' he said. ''I still fall sick. I am still weak. But at least now I'm living.''
At one recent session, Mr. Lawuli chastised a fellow member, George Lubulwa, for failing to get tested.
Mr. Lubulwa said he was fairly sure that he is H.I.V.-positive but would rather live without the certainty. He feared falling into depression again if the test is positive. His wife, he said, definitely could not handle the news.
''He keeps telling us he'll go get tested,'' countered Mr. Lawuli. ''But he doesn't do it.''
Mr. Lubulwa's big smile faded and he looked down solemnly. ''I respect your advice,'' he said. ''I'm still looking for the right time.''
There was an awkward silence.
Then Mr. Lubulwa spoke again. ''Let me tell you a secret close to my heart,'' he said. ''I want a child. If I'm positive or my wife is positive, and we know it, maybe we won't get one.''
The men sitting around him had no mercy. They told him sternly that the child might be born infected, spreading the disease into a new generation. And they told him that his wife might not have the virus yet and that he might infect her.
''I think I should go get tested,'' Mr. Lubulwa said finally.
