Steve Smith was a blur, moving fast forward in a real-time world as he sprinted into the end zone.
It was a 69-yard highlight-reel catch and run for a touchdown that beat St. Louis, 29-23, in double overtime last Saturday, sent the Panthers into the National Football Conference championship game at Philadelphia on Sunday and put Smith on the cover of newspapers throughout the country.
For Smith, it was one more step toward building a reputation as an elite receiver in the N.F.L. And perhaps a stride away from the other reputation he had developed in the past two seasons.
''Big-time receiver,'' Philadelphia safety Brian Dawkins said. ''He's the guy that started off humbly on special teams, and now he's making a name for himself as a big-play receiver. That's just what he is, a big-play receiver. Anytime he gets the ball in his hands, he has the capability, the speed and the smarts to get it to the house.''
Smith has already made a name for himself in Charlotte, for better and sometimes for worse. He made the Pro Bowl as a punt returner in 2001, his rookie year, and has developed into the go-to receiver for quarterback Jake Delhomme this season. Smith set personal highs with 88 receptions for 1,110 yards and 7 touchdowns in the regular season. In two playoff games, Smith leads all receivers with 298 yards on 11 catches. He has two touchdowns, including the game-winner at St. Louis.
''You always dream about, especially being a receiver, you always dream about making that great catch,'' Smith said. ''Somebody said earlier that's the biggest catch of my career. I said: 'I hope it's not. I hope it's one of many. Or the second of many.' ''
That kind of performance can help offset the personal lows Smith has experienced with the Panthers. Last year, Smith made headlines when he broke the nose of his practice-squad teammate Anthony Bright during a film session. Smith was arrested and charged with misdemeanor assault and underwent anger-management counseling as a first-time offender.
The Panthers suspended Smith for one game.
''He handled it the right way immediately afterwards and admitted he made a mistake to us and he was very sincere about it,'' Panthers General Manager Marty Hurney said. ''Steve knows what we expect as an organization, and he seems to be trying very hard to do the right thing. He wants to do the right thing.''
Despite the apology, it took time for Smith to regain respect of teammates.
''I think that there were some people that were upset with how he handled the situation,'' the veteran wide receiver Muhsin Muhammad said. ''I think he's gotten better and better as far as controlling his temper and stuff like that, channeling it in the right direction.''
But Smith, 24, has had his slips this season. Early in the season, Smith derided management in a profanity-laced display when the team signed defensive lineman Kris Jenkins to a new contract but did not negotiate a new deal for him. Jenkins, a Pro Bowl defensive lineman, was the Panthers' second-round pick in 2001. Smith was a third-round choice that year.
Not long after that, Smith drew headlines again when he kicked Houston defensive end Jerry DeLoach in the fourth quarter of a 14-10 loss to the Texans. Smith drew an unnecessary roughness penalty during their final drive of the game and perhaps cost the Panthers a chance at victory.
Again, Smith was forced to apologize.
''It's something you've got to learn how to deal with and grow and learn the business,'' Smith said of his mistakes. ''It's going to be a lot of ups and downs in this business, and I guess I learned a lot of downs and the ups are coming, they're still coming. But you just take it with a grain of salt and learn from it and go about your business.''
In the playoffs, Smith has gone about his business as well as anyone could have expected. Smith had 5 receptions for 135 yards in a 29-10 victory against Dallas in an N.F.C. wild-card game. At St. Louis, Smith finished with 6 catches for 163 yards. Now Smith has a chance to tie receivers like Jerry Rice and Randy Moss, along with Tom Fears, for the N.F.L. record with three consecutive 100-yard receiving games in the playoffs.
''You'd like to think the more you do something, the better you get,'' Panthers Coach John Fox said. ''Last year was his first year as a starter. There were some growing pains there, as there are with many young players in this league. This year, he had that experience to draw from, and I think he's just continued to get better every game this year. He's got the skills. He's got the talent. And now it's just developing the skills and the exactness that comes with the job description of being a wide receiver. He's come a long way.''
PRO FOOTBALL
