The British police said Wednesday that they had arrested a Sudanese man carrying five bullets after he arrived at Heathrow Airport on a flight from Dulles International Airport, which serves the Washington area.
The 45-year-old man, who was not identified further, was initially charged with violating a firearms statute, but he was later held and questioned under Britain's antiterrorism laws, officials said.
There was no immediate explanation from the British or American authorities about how airport screening procedures at Dulles failed to detect the ammunition the man was said to have been carrying when he boarded a Virgin Atlantic flight, No. 022.
The ammunition was found at 7:40 a.m. when the passenger was passing through a security station at Heathrow during his transit from the Washington flight to a flight to Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates.
''A quantity of suspected ammunition was found in his possession,'' said a statement by Scotland Yard. ''The items are being forensically examined.''
The ammunition was later identified by security officials as five bullets, Reuters reported.
Flights between the United States, Britain and France have been under heavy scrutiny in recent weeks.
Earlier this month security officials canceled British Airways flights from Heathrow to Dulles on consecutive days because of concerns that terrorists were planning to attack during the holiday season. Six Air France flights between Paris and Los Angeles were canceled on Dec. 24.
On Dec. 29, the United States secretary for homeland security, Tom Ridge, ordered international airlines to carry armed sky marshals on flights to the United States when American officials determine there is a threat.
The crew of the Virgin Atlantic flight from Washington reported no security problems, British officials said.
''The safety and welfare of our passengers and crew is Virgin Atlantic's top priority,'' a company statement said. ''The item seized did not pose a threat to our aircraft. Screening of passengers at Washington Dulles airport is the responsibility of the Transportation Security Administration.''
