More than 40 Impressionist and modern paintings from one of the last great American collections in private hands are to be sold at Sotheby's in New York on May 5, the auction house announced yesterday. Sotheby's estimates the sale could bring $140 million to $190 million.
The collection includes works by Manet, Degas, Monet and Sargent as well as a rare Rose Period Picasso, ''Boy With a Pipe.'' It was formed over two generations beginning with Payne and Helen Hay Whitney, heirs to a fortune made from oil, tobacco, street railways and real estate and then by their son, John Hay Whitney, the sportsman, financier, publisher and former ambassador to Britain, and his wife, Betsey Cushing Roosevelt Whitney.
Experts say the Picasso, which Sotheby's estimates to sell for$70 million, could well become the most expensive painting ever sold at auction, breaking the world record price set in 1990 when van Gogh's ''Portrait of Dr. Gachet'' sold at Christie's in New York for $82.5 million.
The sale is another triumph for Sotheby's, following last week's announcement that it was selling the $90 million Forbes collection of legendary Fabergé eggs. The 44 Whitney paintings will go on view at Sotheby's from April 28 to May 5. Proceeds of the sale will benefit the Greentree Foundation, established by the Whitneys to promote international cooperation.
During their 46-year marriage, John Hay Whitney, who died in 1982, and his wife, a New York socialite and philanthropist who died in 1998, amassed one of the world's most important art collections, rivaled only by those of Stavros Niarchos, the Greek shipping magnate, and in this country the Havemeyers, among the first collectors of French Impressionist art, and Walter H. Annenberg, another former ambassador to Britain, who died two years ago.
Like the Havemeyers and the Annenbergs, the Whitneys were generous to museums. When Mrs. Whitney died, she left more than $300 million worth of art by masters like Picasso, van Gogh, Matisse and Monet to four museums: the National Gallery of Art in Washington, the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Yale Art Gallery in New Haven and the National Portrait Gallery in Washington. They formed their collection with the advice of John Rewald, the curator, teacher and expert on Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art who died in 1994, and John Richardson, the Picasso biographer.
The undisputed star of the collection is ''Boy With a Pipe (The Young Apprentice)'' painted in 1905 when Picasso was only 24, soon after he settled in Montmartre. It depicts an adolescent boy known as ''p'tit Louis,'' who hung around the artist's studio, holding a pipe in his left hand with a garland of roses on his head. In the background are two large bouquets. ''Historians believe the garland of roses were added towards the end of the painting,'' said David Norman, co-director of Sotheby's Impressionist and modern department worldwide. ''That touch transformed the boy from a moody adolescent in blue overalls to a bizarre deitylike figure.''
The Whitneys bought ''Boy With a Pipe'' in 1950 and hung it in the living room of Greentree, their 400-acre estate in Manhasset, N.Y. Whitney, known as Jock, founded J. H. Whitney &amp; Company, the oldest venture capital company in America. He was also editor and publisher of The New York Herald Tribune and chairman of The International Herald Tribune (now owned by The New York Times) from 1966 until his death. In 1956 President Dwight D. Eisenhower appointed him ambassador to the Court of St. James's. The couple filled their five homes -- in New York City, on Long Island, in London, Saratoga Springs and Georgia -- with art and antiques. A large portion of art, objects and jewelry was sold at Sotheby's in a series of auctions in 1999. The art -- a group of 50 works -- from Mrs. Whitney's estate brought $128.3 million, the second highest single-owner sale in auction history.
The paintings to be sold in May were bequeathed by Mrs. Whitney to the Greentree Foundation, named for her Long Island estate. The foundation was established in 1982 to further international relations and is run by five trustees, her two daughters, Kate Whitney and Sara Wilford, along with her husband, Ronald Wilford; Robert Carswell, the Whitney family lawyer; and Franklin Thomas, the former president of the Ford Foundation. At her death Mrs. Whitney instructed the trustees to preserve the estate and use it for gatherings devoted to international cooperation.
Richard Schaffer, president of the foundation, said this year that it would undergo extensive renovations to convert the complex into a meeting center. Auction proceeds will be used to finance these activities and other charitable and educational programs at the foundation.
''It was a straightforward investment decision,'' Mr. Schaffer said of the sale. ''The trustees felt the time was right to sell the art and build Greentree's endowment.''
He declined to discuss how the foundation selected Sotheby's over its archrival, Christie's, other than to say, ''They've done a good job for the family in the past.'' Sotheby's confirmed that it had given the family a guarantee, an undisclosed sum regardless of the outcome of the sale, but declined to disclose the financing details. Experts familiar with the negotiations say the foundation hopes to raise $200 million, either in a straight guarantee or combination of guarantee and percentage of the buyer's premium.
When the 44 paintings are on view at Sotheby's, it won't be the first time they have been seen in public. An important show of the Whitney's collection was at the Tate Gallery in London in 1961, and again in 1983 at the National Gallery of Art in Washington. More recently, the Picasso, along with five other paintings, were on loan from the foundation to the Frick Collection from July 25, 2000, until April 21, 2002.
Besides being serious art collectors, the Whitneys were also known for owning some of the country's great race horses. These two loves sometimes intersected in their art collection. Among the best is Manet's ''Races at the Bois de Boulogne,'' from 1872, a scene of spectators watching a horse race at Longchamps, with the artist's friend Degas shown in the lower right hand corner of the canvas. Sotheby's says the painting could bring between $20 million and $30 million. Two important Degas works will also be sold at the Whitney sale: ''Before the Race'' (1882-88), and ''Hacking to the Track'' (1892) are each estimated to sell for $5 million to $7 million.
