Jann Wenner, the founder and editor of Rolling Stone magazine and chairman of Wenner Media, said yesterday that he would invest $200,000 in the Salon Media Group, the financially struggling Internet media company, and join its board.
Also yesterday, Salon announced that John E. Warnock, co-chairman of Adobe Systems and a longtime financial backer, would invest an additional $600,000 in the Web company.
As part of the alliance with Mr. Wenner, Salon and Rolling Stone, each known for liberal political leanings, will collaborate on a series of articles about the presidential election. ''I really like what they have been doing over the years,'' Mr. Wenner said. ''I have been impressed with their journalistic drive and energy. And given that we are gearing up our political coverage, we thought they would be a good partner.''
David Talbot, the site's chief executive and editor in chief, said, ''This is all part of Salon ramping up its political coverage in a major way for the coming election.'' In addition to the collaborations with Rolling Stone, Salon has hired Sidney Blumenthal, a former aide to President Bill Clinton, as a consultant and columnist.
This week Salon will begin offering a political commentary site, a so-called blog, called the War Room. Mr. Talbot also said that Dave Eggers would serialize his next book -- a political satire -- on the site beginning this month.
Since Salon began in 1995, the company, based in San Francisco, has received much news media attention for its aggressive political coverage and cultural commentary, but has struggled to find a business model to support its journalistic efforts. The site, which went public in 1999, has yet to make a profit and has an accumulated deficit of more than $80 million. For the six months that ended Sept. 30, Salon had a net loss of $2.5 million on revenue of $2.1 million.
The company has stayed alive because of cash infusions from wealthy supporters who are intent on maintaining Salon's journalistic presence on the Web.
Mr. Wenner, asked why he was investing in a media property that had not shown much promise of turning into a business, first joked.
''The real truth is that everybody was cashing in on this dot-com stuff, and I thought this was my big opportunity,'' he said. ''Really, I wanted to show that I was serious and committed to the partnership, and I think participating as an investor and a board member was a good way to demonstrate that.''
The site has 73,000 subscribers to its premium service, which allows visitors, for a fee, to view articles without sitting through banner and pop-up ads, and is aggressively soliciting subscribers through incentives, including a two-for-one subscription offer that features free magazines and free MP3 music downloads.
Mr. Talbot said that the alliance with Rolling Stone was a natural step for Salon, which is eight years old.
''Even though we are an Internet company, we realize that print is not dead,'' he said. ''Rolling Stone has a lot of readers who we are interested in reaching.''
