The myth that a prince and princess are essential to a 19th-century ballet comes crashing down anytime the Royal Danish Ballet arrives on our shores.
Rarely does dance treat human foibles and desires, especially among common folk, with such insight and wit as in the Romantic ballets of the great Danish choreographer August Bournonville (1805-1879).
Unfortunately the full company from Copenhagen has been absent from the United States since 1995, sending over only small groups of soloists for festivals and guest appearances. On Tuesday night it returned in full force for a run through Sunday afternoon at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts here with ''Napoli,'' its ever-colorful signature piece.
Humorous but also dark, studded with outbursts of subtle virtuoso dancing and cameos for Italian street singers and macaroni sellers, this is on the surface a vivid tale of a Neapolitan fisherman who rescues his sweetheart from a king of the sea.
But significantly it has more in common with the stories of Hans Christian Andersen, Bournonville's friend, than it does with the Romantic ballets that Bournonville saw on many visits to Paris, where he studied and danced in his youth. Like Andersen, Bournonville offers a moral in his magic tales and uses a subtext of Christian idealism. When Teresina, the heroine of ''Napoli,'' drowns in a storm, she is saved from the clutches of Golfo, the underwater ruler in the Blue Grotto, by the sight of a religious medal held by Gennaro, who has come to rescue his sweetheart.
Golfo has turned her into a sea nymph (this transformation scene is a wonderful piece of stage magic, not to be missed) and she cannot recognize Gennaro. Musical motifs from her past fail to jog her memory. It is only when she recognizes the medal of the Virgin Mary does a higher power bring her back to human form and defeat the unclean forces represented by Golfo.
Eroticism is one of these forces, and with one exception, no Bournonville ballet would be itself without a warning to resist temptation. His heroes stray but are guided back to home and hearth.
The exception is his 1836 version of ''La Sylphide,'' to be performed on Saturday and Sunday in a new staging by Nikolaj Hübbe, a Royal Danish alumnus who is a principal with New York City Ballet. Here Bournonville followed the scenario of the original 1832 ''Sylphide'' by Filippo Taglioni and allowed his hero to be struck down by his chase after illusion.
''Napoli'' (1842) keeps to the formula of Romantic ballet by dividing into scenes that are supernatural (the grotto) and deemed exotic (Naples in this instance). But ''Napoli'' was drawn from Bournonville's life experiences.
In 1841 he offended the King of Denmark by addressing him directly from the stage. The king placed him under temporary house arrest for the impertinence (yes, even in Denmark), but then suspended him from his duties for six months. Bournonville went off to Italy and came back with the carefully observed detail of street life that fills the first act of ''Napoli'' and the folk festival of Act III.
Since much of the action is in mime, a contemporary audience can grow impatient. Yet Bournonville's credo was ''dance and mime united,'' and here the current dancers remain in the great acting tradition of the Royal Danish Ballet.
The dancing, by contrast, is not at full strength when compared with the level seen 10 years ago. It is not only technique that has to be executed differently than in other repertories: niceties of style must be maintained. There were no faux pas, but the power of projection in the dancing, as opposed to the acting, was often missing in this first of several casts.
An unusual turnover in artistic directors at the Royal Danish Ballet may be responsible for such lapses. Since 1993 the company has been led successively by Frank Andersen, Peter Schaufuss, Maina Gielgud, Aage Thordal-Christensen and, since last year, Mr. Andersen again. In 1992 Mr. Andersen followed up on the company's sensational 1979 Bournonville festival in Copenhagen with another fine Bournonville festival; he has announced a festival for the bicentennial of Bournonville's birth in 2005.
Veterans schooled in the Bournonville tradition can set the standard. The classical purist Flemming Ryberg is now a mesmerizing mime, seen silently mouthing his street singer's song in ''Napoli'' on Tuesday with some of the pathos that was once in the role. Tommy Frishoi made Peppo, the lemonade seller, a vibrant villain and was always clear in his mime as he spread the slander that Gennaro was in league with the devil. Alexander Sukonnik was a comic foil as Giacomo, the macaroni seller. Jette Buchwald was impressive in her despair as Teresina's mother.
And so were Gitte Lindstrom as Teresina and Mads Blangstrup as Gennaro in conveying conflicting emotions. They are fine dancers, but only when Gennaro burst onstage did one see the old Bournonville buoyancy. The grotto scene in Act II feels too contemporary, and the wonderful cascade of dances in Act III could use better pliés in the male dancing. The women do better, although Thomas Lund, exceptional in the first male solo, showed how a tradition can be preserved.
BALLET REVIEW
