In a blistering  and at times deeply personal -- critique of President Bush and his policy on Iraq, Senator Edward M. Kennedy declared on Wednesday that Mr. Bush ''broke the basic bond of trust between government and the people.'' He also accused the administration of marketing the war like a ''political product'' to help elect Republicans.
''We are reaping the poison fruit of our misguided and arrogant foreign policy,'' Mr. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said in a speech before the Center for American Progress, a liberal policy organization in Washington. ''The administration capitalized on the fear created by 9/11 and put a spin on the intelligence and a spin on the truth to justify a war that could well become one of the worst blunders in more than two centuries of American foreign policy.''
This is not the first time Mr. Kennedy, who has previously worked with Mr. Bush on education and health care, has lashed out at the administration on Iraq. But his remarks on Wednesday were more pointed and partisan than in the past.
The speech drew an immediate and harsh reply from Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House Republican leader. ''His hateful attack against the commander in chief would be disgusting if it were not so sad,'' Mr. DeLay said, adding that Mr. Kennedy ''insulted the president's patriotism.''
The White House response was more muted. ''Let me remind you that the world is safer and better because of the action that we took to remove a brutal regime from power in Iraq,'' Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, said, adding, ''The president worked to exhaust all diplomatic means possible before taking the action that we took.''
Mr. Kennedy, who has served in the Senate for 40 years and is regarded by many as the chamber's leading liberal Democrat, often gives a major speech in January, typically focusing on domestic policy.
In the speech on Wednesday, Mr. Kennedy made the case that the administration used ''scare tactics'' to persuade Congress to approve a resolution authorizing the use of force against Iraq, just as the hotly contested 2002 election campaigns were coming up, to distract attention from the economy and the failed effort to find Osama bin Laden.
The senator did not mince words. At one point, he called the administration ''breathtakingly arrogant''; at another, ''mean-spirited and vindictive.'' He also singled out Vice President Dick Cheney, Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld, and Paul D. Wolfowitz, the deputy defense secretary, for particular criticism, labeling them ''the axis of war'' -- a reference to the ''axis of evil'' phrase Mr. Bush has used to describe Iraq, Iran and North Korea.
''War in Iraq was a war of choice, not a war of necessity,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''It was a product they were methodically rolling out.''
He went on to complain about a ''gross abuse of intelligence,'' citing in particular the president's State of the Union address last January, when Mr. Bush said the British government had learned that Saddam Hussein ''recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa'' -- an allegation that American intelligence officials had previously discounted.
''No president of the United States should employ misguided ideology and distortion of truth to take the nation to war,'' Senator Kennedy said. ''If Congress and the American people knew the whole truth, America would never have gone to war.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: A CRITIC
