Driven by strong sales of the iPod digital music player, portable computers and a new version of the OS X operating system, Apple Computer exceeded Wall Street expectations in its first quarter.
For the three months that ended Dec. 27, Apple, based in Cupertino, Calif., reported a net profit of $63 million or 17 cents a share, compared with a net loss of $8 million or 2 cents a share in the same quarter a year ago. Analysts surveyed by Thomson First Call had projected earnings of 15 cents a share on revenue of $1.9 billion.
''We achieved a four-year revenue high of $2 billion,'' said Steven P. Jobs, the company's chief executive. That figure represented a year-to-year revenue growth of 36 percent.
Sales of the company's iPod, which was one of the nation's most popular Christmas presents last year, increased 235 percent to 733,000 units, and the company said that it could have sold more had it not been for inventory shortages. The company did not break out revenues from its iTunes music store.
At the Consumer Electronics Show last week, Apple announced a partnership with Hewlett-Packard that calls for Hewlett, which is based in Palo Alto, Calif., to resell Apple's iPods and to offer its customers iTunes.
Apple gave ground, however, in its consumer business for personal computers, according to analysts.
Apple's share in the United States market for personal computers declined slightly to 3.2 percent from 3.5 percent, according to a survey released Wednesday by the International Data Corporation, a market research firm in Framingham, Mass.
''There were real upsides and a couple of downsides,'' Charles R. Wolf, a financial analyst at Needham &amp; Company, said. ''The most egregious negative was the iMac. It's clear that Apple needs to put a high priority on bringing its price down.''
Mr. Jobs, however, pointed to the company's combined unit volume, including Macintoshes and iPods.
If the iPod were considered the equivalent of a $400 personal computer, he said, the view of Apple's overall business would change significantly.
''I find that intellectually interesting,'' he said.
The company is also responding quickly to product reliability complaints, he said. The iPod battery is supposed to last for the life of the product, but the company recently introduced a $99 replacement offer should the battery need to be replaced.
Apple is also investigating customer complaints that some of its iBook personal computers have failed a month or two after expiration of the product's one-year warranty, he said.
''If we find something out of the ordinary we'll try to take care of it,'' he said. ''These are our customers.''
The company said that about 10 million Apple customers had upgraded to its OS X operating system and that it had received $60 million in revenue from its Panther operating system upgrade in the last quarter.
The company also told financial analysts to expect continued revenue and earnings growth in this quarter, and said it planned to retire $300 million in debt, leaving Apple free of long-term debt.
Shares of Apple rose 8 cents, to$24.20. In extended trading, shares were down $1.31, to $22.89.
TECHNOLOGY
