The newest judge on New York's highest court indicated on Wednesday that he could be as skeptical of challenges to New York's death penalty law as any other judge. But he quickly joined other judges on the Court of Appeals in suggesting that the capital sentence of a Rochester man may be overturned on narrow grounds.
The argument in the case of that man, Angel L. Mateo, who was sentenced to death for one of four Rochester killings to which he confessed, drew special attention because it was the first capital case heard by the Court of Appeals since the confirmation on Monday of Gov. George E. Pataki's most recent appointee to the court, Robert S. Smith.
The nomination of Judge Smith, a Manhattan lawyer who had worked for the defense in death penalty cases in the United States Supreme Court, drew criticism from some death penalty supporters who said that his vote could be decisive on the death penalty issue in New York.
The Court of Appeals, which has overturned two death sentences under the state's 1995 death penalty law, appears divided on capital punishment. After his nomination, Judge Smith said he was uncertain about his views on the death penalty.
But in the arguments during his second day on the bench, he appeared to be signaling that he is far from a sure vote against capital punishment. Within minutes of the start of the arguments, he challenged defense contentions that the trial judge had prejudiced the jurors by allowing them to hear Mr. Mateo's confessions to all four killings, not just the one for which he faces death.
As a juror, Judge Smith said, he would have wanted to know the entire picture of what had happened between the police and Mr. Mateo. ''Is it so bad for the jury to know what actually happened?'' he asked.
Judge Smith also disagreed with a defense contention that the judge had wrongly allowed the jurors to hear potentially inflammatory accounts about Mr. Mateo's abuse of a girlfriend. Prosecutors said Mr. Mateo had committed the murder for which he was sentenced to die as part of a bizarre, violent search for the girlfriend, who was hiding from him. His wife, whom he had also abused, accompanied him and took part in the violence.
But Judge Smith also seemed to agree with five of the other judges who appeared to be leaning toward overturning Mr. Mateo's death sentence on technical grounds. In a case in 2002, the court overturned the death sentence of a Brooklyn man, Darrel K. Harris, because of a flaw in the state's death-penalty law. A provision of the law had encouraged defendants to plead guilty. The court said that provision created an unconstitutional two-tiered system that penalized those who exercised their right to trial by subjecting them to the possibility of execution, while giving those who pleaded guilty life without parole.
A defense lawyer, Andrew C. Shear, said in arguments on Wednesday that the same analysis should apply to Mr. Mateo. ''There is no substantive difference between Mr. Mateo's situation and that of Darrel Harris,'' he said.
