Throughout the recent four-day N.C.A.A. convention here, California Senate Bill 193 was a blinking red light that captured the attention of the organization that oversees thousands of students participating in athletics at hundreds of institutions.
The bill, which has been approved by the State Senate, calls for California universities that belong to the National Collegiate Athletic Association's Division I to pay athletes the full cost of attendance.
That would include the room and board and books that come with the standard athletic scholarship, as well as extra items, like emergency travel and some out-of-season medical expenses for athletes for injuries that linger after the season.
Another key provision would allow athletes to keep income from work not associated with their sport.
The bill also calls for athletes to be able to hire agents while still in school and to transfer when a coach leaves a program. Athletes now must sit out a season after making a transfer in some sports in Division I.
The California bill has pushed the N.C.A.A. to mount its own reform effort, including a new initiative that would pay student-athletes an additional $2,400 a year.
The N.C.A.A. membership considers the initiative its issue because other states -- including Nebraska, Colorado, Texas and Oklahoma -- are considering expanded financial support for student-athletes.
Tom Hansen, the commissioner of the Pacific-10 Conference, said that if the bill became law, California schools with major athletic programs like Southern California, U.C.L.A. and Stanford, would be ousted from the N.C.A.A. the first time a program allowed agents to represent players or players to transfer without sitting out a season.
The bill passed the California Senate by a 26-10 vote last spring and is being considered by the State Assembly's Committee on Higher Education. If the bill makes it out of that committee, the Assembly could vote on it later this year and then send it to Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger for passage into law.
''The membership needs to consider this their problem, not just California's problem,'' Hansen said. ''We should be very concerned.''
Chris Plonsky, the chairwoman of the N.C.A.A. Division I Management Council and director of women's athletics at the University of Texas, said some student-welfare issues that were being addressed in the California bill were approved by the management council last Sunday.
Under the N.C.A.A. proposal, Hansen said, Division I athletes could get an additional $2,400 to meet the full cost of their school attendance. He also said he expects extra medical aid to win the board's approval.
Jim Delany, the Big Ten Conference commissioner, has offered a compromise which would allow incoming athletes to transfer within Division I without sitting out a season, provided they played one season under the new coach. The Big Ten supports penalizing basketball coaches for not retaining players by limiting future recruits.
Myles Brand, the N.C.A.A. president, has lobbied the membership here to support the student-welfare reforms. Brand said the N.C.A.A. needs to be less strict in enforcing its rules when student-welfare is concerned.
''These particular student-athlete welfare measures are a positive; we're not going to look at them strictly in terms of competitive impact and try and tear them down,'' said Rick Chryst, the commissioner of the Mid-American Conference. ''It's helping the kids.''
COLLEGES
