They already have Web logs that critique their work and readers who regularly pepper them with e-mail messages, but beginning today, reporters covering the presidential campaign will be subject to a new layer of scrutiny: a Web site devoted to analyzing their coverage.
The site, the Campaign Desk (http://campaigndesk.org), is a venture of The Columbia Journalism Review and its publisher, the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Journalists are the Web site's primary audience, but it is also for readers, viewers and listeners of the coverage.
''Most blogs are 99.9 percent opinion,'' said Steve Lovelady, the site's managing editor and a former managing editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer. ''This is a Web site run by and staffed by responsible journalists whose job is to monitor, critique and praise the campaign press, on a daily basis.''
Mr. Lovelady and Michael Hoyt, the executive editor of The Columbia Journalism Review, said they hoped that the Web site would identify trends in campaign reporting and also supply reporters with materials, like links to position papers.
The hastily assembled venture -- the financing came through late last month, said Nicholas Lemann, the dean of the Graduate School of Journalism -- will eventually have six full-time staff members, in addition to Mr. Lovelady.
While Mr. Lovelady, 60, helped supervise Pulitzer Prize winners at The Inquirer over two decades, he now has a less experienced staff.
They are: Bryan Keefer, 25, a co-founder of a similar site, Spinsanity .com; Zachary Roth, 28, a former intern at The Washington Monthly; and Thomas Lang, 22, a former intern at The American Prospect.
Jeff Zeleny, a national political correspondent for The Chicago Tribune, said in a telephone interview from Des Moines that with all the information being released by the campaigns, ''it might be nice to have someone watching over that from 30,000 feet.'' But Mr. Zeleny cautioned that feedback, however well intended, could distract reporters.
''Some reporters,'' he said, ''may already be spending too much time on their BlackBerries or on their e-mails and not enough time talking to voters and the candidates.''
