DESPITE Kodak's best efforts to disguise its 24,000 PrintMaker kiosks with yellow cabinetry, some of their inner workings are readily deduced.
The slots for receiving digital memory cards, CD's and floppy disks provide a glimpse of the personal computer that lurks within each of these self-service photo printing kiosks, which are found in drug and photo stores and other shops around the country. The scanners, too, are recognizable.
But the large slot from which prints emerge at the front of the kiosk offers few clues about what happens behind it. And the hidden printing secret of the Kodak kiosk is perhaps not what most people anticipate. The devices do not contain chemical photo processors or inkjet printers. Instead, the printers use a process known as thermal dye transfer.
Amateur photographers don't have to go to a kiosk to make thermal dye transfer prints. Kodak, Canon, Sony, Olympus and Panasonic are among the companies offering printers that use the technology -- sometimes known as dye sublimation -- to make prints at home.
''When we started working on a printing dock two years ago, we wanted to discover the technology that would give us the closest we could get to a real Kodak print,'' said Rowan Lawson, director of worldwide digital product marketing for Eastman Kodak, referring to development of the company's EasyShare 6000, a home snapshot printer that connects to its digital cameras.
''Inkjet was already delivering very good color,'' he said. ''But back then it wasn't robust in terms of colorfastness or water resistance. Thermal has the look and feel of a photograph.''
Inkjet printers create photos by spraying extremely fine droplets of dye- or pigment-based inks.
Thermal dye transfer printers use a series of tiny heating elements to diffuse dye from a coated plastic film onto a piece of paper.
There is also a difference in the way the two kinds of printers create colors. Inkjets form specific shades by clustering extremely small droplets of up to eight inks of different colors. Viewers perceive the desired tone because the eye blurs the tiny dots into a single shade.
Thermal dye transfer printers create continuous tones of specific colors not unlike those of traditional color photo prints. Whereas traditional color photos use dyes and fine grains of silver salts, chemically processed to produce an image, thermal printers achieve continuous tones by laying their cyan, yellow and magenta dyes on top of each other with repeated passes of the paper through their print heads. (Some thermal printers also add a black dye to the process.)
While the ability to create continuous tones may have once been a significant advantage, inkjet printers are catching up.
David Spencer, the president of SpencerLab, a company in Melville, N.Y., that provides color testing services to the printing industry, said the droplets from most current inkjet printers are so fine that ''they in fact achieve almost the level of a continuous tone.''
''For many people it is very hard to tell the difference,'' he said.
Thermal dye transfer printers, however, can perform one trick that no inkjet printer can match. Once their printing duties are finished, they use their print head's heating abilities to seal a clear plastic layer over the result.
The sealing layer makes the prints waterproof; Mr. Lawson said it also plays a significant role in preventing premature fading.
Kodak estimates that prints made on its most expensive inkjet paper (Kodak makes inkjet paper but not inkjet printers or inks) will last 25 to 85 years depending on the printer. Thermal dye transfer prints, the company estimates, have a 100-year lifespan; traditional color photographs, twice that.
But Mr. Spencer, whose clients include a number of inkjet makers, said that many thermal dye transfer printers sometimes blur extremely fine details in photographs because of the inherent limitations of using heat to form images.
One exception, he added, are professional printers from Fuji Photo Film that have a unique laser-based dye transfer system.
But those Fuji printers suffer from what is perhaps the biggest problem of thermal dye transfer printers: high hardware prices. The least expensive Olympus thermal dye transfer printer for consumers that can produce enlargements costs about $400. Kodak's combined camera dock and printer, which offers functions beyond printing snapshots, sells for under $200.
Photo-quality inkjet printers now sell for well under $100. Given that cost disadvantage, even Kodak, which introduced the first color thermal dye transfer photo printer in the late 1980's, isn't predicting the end of the inkjet.
''We're obviously keeping an eye on both technologies,'' Mr. Lawson said.
HOW IT WORKS
