A panel appointed by Gov. George E. Pataki to rein in Medicaid costs has recommended that New York State eventually take over all the costs that it now shares with localities.
More immediately, it urged that the state start paying the local share for long-term health care, like nursing homes and home care, one of the largest parts of the program's budget.
The report by the governor's panel, released Wednesday, outlined a raft of proposals to reduce overall Medicaid costs by $4.2 billion over five years and to relieve the share local governments pay by $2 billion in part by taking over their long-term care costs.
In New York, the state and local governments each pick up a quarter of the cost of the federal program that provides health care to the poor. No other state has such a high local share.
The panel weighs in just as the Legislature is poised to begin another difficult budget cycle, with a shortfall estimated at more than $5 billion and local officials rebelling against Albany's propensity to approve expensive programs, like Medicaid, and pass the costs down to the counties.
''This really provides a long-term vision for Medicaid reform,'' said Robert R. Gregory, the executive director of the New York State Association of Counties, whose members from around the state have been pressuring Albany to provide some relief from the growing Medicaid costs.
While there are many details yet to be worked out, Mr. Gregory said it was significant that, for the first time, all sides in Albany agreed that Medicaid costs could not continue to escalate out of control, forcing localities to raise local property taxes. How to control them remains, however, an enormous problem.
It was not immediately clear whether the recommendations in the report would be fully embraced by Governor Pataki, though his staff has been working with the panel and generally knew of its plans. The document was released by an official in the Pataki administration's State Division of the Budget. Presumably, at least some proposals addressing the costs of Medicaid will be included in the governor's budget address next Tuesday.
Robert R. Hinckley, who is the governor's senior deputy secretary for health and human services, said the report would be considered by the governor.
''The governor welcomes the recommendations and he is looking forward to working with the Legislature this year, as well as with the local leaders, to enact what we believe are meaningful reforms as part of this year's budget,'' Mr. Hinckley said. ''We are finalizing our budget now and we will take them into consideration.''
Medicaid is a $42 billion-a-year program which now provides health insurance to more than three million poor people. The panel said that if left unchecked, Medicaid costs would grow to $44 billion in the coming fiscal year. ''State and local governments can no longer afford the current Medicaid program without substantive reforms,'' the panel wrote.
Already, over the last five state budgets, the program's costs have risen 40 percent, as many more people have signed on. The panel said long-term care could also grow astronomically, as droves of baby-boomers begin to need home care or beds in nursing homes.
''Contingent upon the savings from the implementation of the long-term care proposals outlined in this interim report, the Working Group recommends that the state relieve the counties of their Medicaid long-term care costs,'' the panel said.
The governor's panel did not specify how long it would take for New York to assume all the roughly $1 billion in local costs of long-term care, which include nursing homes, home care and personal care services. Stephen Berger, the chairman of the Governor's Working Group on Healthcare, said it could take at least 18 months, in part because the panel also recommended a series of cost-saving measures that, according to an aide to the governor, will take time to implement and achieve.
The panel proposed a program called NY Answers to create a single entry point for people and provide alternatives to nursing homes, like getting care at home or in communities. The report also addressed the rising costs of prescription drugs, to move toward less expensive but equally effective drugs.
The ultimate goal would be a total state takeover of the local costs, which are about $6 billion.
''After the initial state takeover of local long-term care Medicaid costs,'' the report said, ''we recommend the state gradually take over the remainder of all local Medicaid costs.''
Mr. Berger said, however, it would not happen immediately. ''You are talking about years,'' he said.
The costs of the program has been causing enormous headaches for local lawmakers. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg recently said Medicaid costs were ''a $4 billion expense for New York City that we just can't afford.'' Yesterday a spokesman for the mayor said the city welcomed suggestions to bring that expense down. ''We'll look at anything that can save money for localities,'' William Cunningham, the mayor's director of communications, said of the proposal, noting that the mayor was set to release his preliminary budget on Thursday. ''Of course, last year, the year before and tomorrow, the mayor will be seeking Medicaid reform that would save New York City money and would save every other locality money.''
Already, leaders in the State Senate have proposed far-reaching revisions of Medicaid, including a plan to yield $2.5 billion in savings over five years, most of which would be given back to the counties through a state takeover of the Family Health Plus program.
In a written statement, Senate Majority Leader Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican, said some of the panel's recommendations, while different from the Senate's, were complementary. ''However,'' he said, ''whether the focus is on Family Health Plus or long-term care, the ultimate goal is the same, providing relief to state and local taxpayers.''
Assembly Democrats pointed out that a decade ago Mr. Pataki halted plans for the state to assume the local share of Medicaid long-term and managed care costs.
