LAST month Kevin Dustin Sr. spent a Monday afternoon playing video games with his son, Kevin Jr. While this might be an everyday event for many families, his session was conducted long distance, and was aimed at improving military morale.
Mr. Dustin Sr. was at a Microsoft Xbox set up at the U.S.O. center near Times Square, and his son, a 25-year-old Air Force staff sergeant, was 4,000 miles away at Spangdahlem Air Base in Germany. The 90 minutes they spent playing Project Gotham Racing 2 was part of a collaboration between an Air Force command, Microsoft and the U.S.O. that enables military personnel overseas to play video games and speak with their families and friends using an online gaming connection called Xbox Live.
''It makes you feel a lot closer,'' the senior Mr. Dustin, 47, said after playing during an inaugural event that was also attended by his 24-year-old daughter, Laura. ''It's like we were both sitting there next to each other playing.''
When the United States Air Forces in Europe, known as Usafe, polled its personnel between the ages of 18 and 25 on what would most improve their life while stationed abroad, the most frequent response was Internet gaming centers.
Usafe initially spent $200,000 for Xbox equipment for game lounges on 14 bases across Europe. Microsoft heard about the research and results and got involved. It established the connection with the U.S.O. and provided U.S.O. sites with systems that include consoles, the Xbox Live online gaming subscription and headsets that enable players to speak to each other while gaming. It also donated games, including NFL Fever 2004, Project Gotham Racing 2, and Crimson Skies. Six U.S.O. centers are now equipped in the United States, as is one in Korea and another that opened in Kuwait in December. Soldiers from all areas of the military have been taking part at the U.S.O. centers.
''The guys come all the time and access their buddies,'' said Hazel Cathers, the executive director of the Times Square U.S.O., which is in the Port Authority Bus Terminal. ''To pick up the phone is boring; to beat his socks off is great. You feel that close connection. You're with him.''
Only one Xbox is currently set up at the Times Square U.S.O., but four people can play at it at once. There is no time limit for sessions, and players can jump into games as they arrive. Some set up appointments with Ms. Cathers so they can be sure their relatives or friends will be online at the same time.
For family members, playing video games with their relatives in the military stationed abroad brings a sense of familiarity to the interaction.
''It's a release,'' said the senior Mr. Dustin, a roofer who lives in Peekskill, N.Y. His son returned to Germany from a stint in Iraq in October and, after a brief Christmas visit home, is scheduled to go to Afghanistan in March. ''Whatever tensions he has, whatever thoughts, when he does this, he just has a good time,'' his father said.
The program, called Operation: Live Connections, is the latest effort to use technology to enhance communication with military personnel overseas. Last March, America Online, Hewlett-Packard and VIDISolutions introduced Project Video Connect, which allows people to create personal video messages to send free anywhere in the world using VIDITalk, a video messaging program, from computers set up in the U.S.O. center.
Those two projects reflect the changing modes of communication between those in the military and their family and friends. U.S.O. centers once had desks and paper for people to write letters on; now it provides computers with the video games, messages and e-mail.
''The U.S.O.'s mission has not changed for more than 62 years,'' said Ned Powell, the president of the U.S.O., whose formal name is United Service Organizations. ''But the way we deliver our services has changed tremendously.''
Several members of the armed forces indicated that for those based overseas, the ability to play live is a welcome alternative to playing games repeatedly with the same comrades, as well as a way to keep in touch. ''It's better than talking on the phone,'' said Airman First Class Christopher Calderon, 21, who is stationed at Spangdahlem and played NFL Fever 2004 with his 43-year-old father, Luis, and 12-year-old brother, Andrew, who were at the Times Square U.S.O. for the inaugural event. ''You're talking, and you're doing something together.''
At Spangdahlem, Airman Calderon said, Xbox Live has become very popular at the recreation center, where personnel from his base now have Xbox football tournaments going on with United States Air Force personnel in England and the Azores.
Some serious players say that playing video games live enhances the competition. ''You can't read someone not sitting next to you,'' said Antwoine Lancaster, 20, a U.S.O. employee at both sites in New York who is partial to Halo, Xbox's popular shooter game involving human soldiers and alien invaders. ''For real gamers, you look for a challenge. And this is a better challenge.''
The program may also prove a boon to Microsoft. Of the 1.4 million members of the United States military on active duty, 76 percent are between 18 and 34 years old. Because the average video game player is 29, according to a survey by the Entertainment Software Association, this is a significant age group to Microsoft and the makers of the two other major video game consoles, Sony and Nintendo.
''From a corporate citizen standpoint, we're out there making sure that things are working for them,'' said Julia Miller, a spokeswoman for Xbox Live. ''But from a business standpoint, there's nothing better than having a person who can actually experience connecting to Germany or from Kuwait back with his family member or one of their best friends. It's great because they become wonderful advocates for Xbox.''
In the competitive and extremely lucrative game console market, Sony's PlayStation 2 has outsold Xbox and Nintendo's GameCube by about three to one in the United States. But Microsoft has always emphasized online play as an integral aspect of its console, and a niche where it expects it to make headway. The Xbox was equipped with an Ethernet port for high-speed Internet connection even before the company introduced its live online gaming service.
''It really leverages the strength of Xbox and Microsoft, which is software and services in a network environment,'' Ms. Miller said.
So far, some gamers have been convinced. Airman Calderon, who will soon be transferred from Spangdahlem to a base in South Dakota, was given an Xbox for Christmas so he would be be able to continue playing with his family.
For Ms. Cathers, who has spent 43 years at the flagship U.S.O. in Times Square, adapting to new technology has always been part of the job.
''I even know how to use the Xbox,'' she said triumphantly. ''You've got to constantly keep moving forward.''
