Two of the three Long Island football players who admitted sexually abusing their freshman teammates will be confined indefinitely, and the third will return home on probation, a Pennsylvania judge ruled Wednesday.
One of the three varsity football players, from Mepham High School in Bellmore, N.Y., was sentenced to boot camp, people involved in the case said. A second was sentenced to a residential treatment facility for juveniles. The third teenager can return to the Bellmore-Merrick community, but will not be allowed to attend Mepham High School.
All three of the defendants -- two 16-year-olds and one 17-year-old -- will have to pay court costs and medical bills to the three victims, said a lawyer involved in the case.
Robert Kelly, a lawyer for two of the victims, said the decision effectively ends the major criminal aspect of the Mepham scandal.
''It certainly brings some closure and some sense of relief that it's over,'' Mr. Kelly said.
But in many ways, the case is far from finished. Prosecutors are expected to charge a fourth Mepham player in the attacks, and a grand jury is investigating whether the team's five coaches, who supervised players at the camp, should face charges.
Mr. Kelly said he expects to file civil suits against the district within a few weeks.
The teenagers' sentences were delivered during a closed court hearing on Wednesday afternoon in Wayne County, Pa. President Judge Robert Conway of Wayne County Common Pleas Court has sealed the case and ordered those involved not to talk about the proceedings. Relatives of the three freshmen relayed details of the sentences to reporters waiting outside the red brick courthouse.
''It's a better decision than we thought we were going to get,'' said one of the victim's aunts, Carol, who did not give her last name, citing fears of identifying her nephew.
Still, family members met the ruling with muted satisfaction laced with a sense that they had not received justice.
''I'm not real happy with this,'' said another aunt, Sue.
Relatives of the victims had argued that the crimes were so brutal they merited the harshest possible punishment. According to prosecutors, the defendants repeatedly sodomized the three freshman players with golf balls, pine cones and a broomstick last August at a football training camp in Preston Park, Pa.
When Judge Conway refused to move the players' cases into adult court in November, members of the victims' families sobbed and screamed on the courthouse lawn and said there was no justice. The scene was more muted Wednesday afternoon as it began to snow.
Only a few relatives showed up for the disposition Wednesday, compared with the flocks of demonstrators a month earlier. The families talked softly about their cases and the imminent lawsuits against Mepham High School and the Bellmore-Merrick school district inside the courthouse, warming themselves at radiators while a scrum of television camera crews waited outside. Two of the victims traveled to Pennsylvania for the sentencing while the third stayed home, relatives said.
In the third-floor hearing room, the mother of one of the victims read a statement describing her family's pain, relatives said. Judge Conway heard recommendations from a probation official and spoke sternly to the defendants, relatives said. Lawyers in Honesdale, Pa., said Judge Conway is often brusque and clipped in the courtroom and has little patience for emotional outpourings or traditional theatrics.
After the sentencing, George Newman, the lawyer for one of the defendants, praised the judge, calling him thoughtful and reflective.
