In the latest salvo against one of the most established rules of network television, NBC announced Wednesday that it intended to start its new season of programming before Labor Day, immediately after its coverage of the Summer Olympics in August.
At a news conference here, Jeff Zucker, the president of NBC Entertainment, said that NBC also intended to move up the end of the season. It will finish its series in late April instead of stretching them through May, as the networks conventionally do because that is when Nielsen Media Research, which measures television ratings, declares the official television season over.
Executives at the Fox network have already said that they intend to bring new series on early, possibly as early as June, to avoid the glut of new programming that has traditionally been squeezed into September.
NBC's decision to disdain Nielsen's official start date for the season, which generally is in the third week of September, could compromise the notion of a season where networks compete for a mythical ratings championship.
''We're clearly in a changing environment in television where we've moved to this 52-week-a-year programming,'' Mr. Zucker said. ''Just as we can't be beholden to the actual calendar, we can't be beholden to the Nielsen calendar either.''
NBC, a unit of General Electric, will broadcast the Olympics through Aug. 29, promoting its shows heavily in the coverage, which has always drawn high ratings. NBC will start introducing ''virtually the entire schedule'' of its fall shows the night after the Olympics ends, Mr. Zucker said.
NBC's carry-over series have already been told to start preproduction early so episodes will be ready.
Mr. Zucker said it was not up to him to ''pronounce that the fall TV season as we know it is dead.'' But he said, ''We're in a time in television where very few of the old rules apply.''
NBC's plan puts it in potential conflict with the Republican National Convention, scheduled for that same week. Mr. Zucker said that NBC News, which he also oversees, intended to cover the convention but might start its coverage at 10 p.m.
NBC faces its toughest new season in at least a decade next fall because it will be without its two stalwart comedies, ''Friends'' and ''Frasier.''
Mr. Zucker announced the official end dates yesterday for both those shows.
''Friends'' will end with two hours of programming on Thursday, May 6. A one-hour retrospective show at 8 p.m. will be followed by the one-hour final episode at 9 p.m.
''Frasier'' will be moved out of its longtime home on Tuesday and back to Thursday, where it once thrived, for its own finale a week later. That show will also consist of a one-hour retrospective of the program's highlights followed by a one-hour final episode.
