The board of the Boys Choir of Harlem voted unanimously yesterday to recommend that Walter J. Turnbull, the choir's embattled founder and director, be kept on in a revised capacity, even as the organization institutes reforms.
The decision throws into question the future of the choir's school, given that the city school system's investigative arm recommended last week that the Department of Education ''sever all ties'' with the academy if Dr. Turnbull and his brother, Horace, remain. Horace Turnbull is the choir's executive vice president.
''We have identified significant and substantial changes that we think will be acceptable to all persons and parties concerned with this institution,'' the board said in a statement. ''We believe that we have developed a proposal that maintains Dr. Turnbull's vital contributions to the boys and girls choirs and at the same time addresses the important concerns raised by the Department of Education.'' Details of the board's proposal were not released.
Dr. Turnbull said yesterday in a statement: ''I agree with the recommendations of the board of directors of the Boys Choir of Harlem Inc.''
In a memo sent to the board before Christmas, school investigators accused Dr. Turnbull of failing to report a student's allegations of molestation by a choir academy counselor in 2001 and allowing the counselor to continue interacting with students after he was banned from the school.
In response to calls yesterday, Richard J. Condon, the special commissioner of investigations for the New York City school system, said in a statement, ''We have not received any communications about a decision by the choir's board, and it would be inappropriate to comment at this time.''
Margie Feinberg, a spokeswoman for Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein, said that the Education Department had yet to hear from the choir board and therefore could not respond.
The choir academy is a partnership between the city, which pays for teachers and provides the academic curriculum, and the choir, which pays for musical training, tutors and counselors. The academy's 650 students are admitted by audition.
Frank Jones Jr., the counselor accused of molesting a student, was convicted in 2002 and sentenced to two years in prison for sexual abuse.
The student has filed a lawsuit that seeks $30 million in compensatory and punitive damages from the Turnbull brothers, the city, and the choir academy's principal, John King. The Department of Education has reassigned Mr. King and named an interim principal, Deloris Brown.
The lawsuit also contends that Walter Turnbull hit students who did not perform well during rehearsals, an allegation he has denied.
Michael Dowd, the student's lawyer, said yesterday, ''I think what is needed for all concerned, including the Boys Choir, is a clear statement of what is being done to address the problems of the past.''
At the same time, Mr. Dowd said the removal of Walter Turnbull was not essential. ''No one's going to deny that Dr. Turnbull's contributed a lot to the Harlem Boys Choir,'' he said. ''No one wants to see the Harlem Boys Choir destroyed.''
Before yesterday's meeting, L.B. (Skip) Wyatt, a co-chairman of the choir board, resigned. Asked why, Mr. Wyatt said he had parted ways with the other chairman, George L. Brown, as to how to structure the choir's proposal to the Department of Education. ''We did have a few fundamental differences in terms of strategy,'' he said. ''I would rather not go into those details.''
Mr. Brown did not return calls.
But Mr. Wyatt said the board was of one mind in believing that Dr. Turnbull was important to the choir's survival. ''In the end, we all shared the common view that we need Walter's long-term involvement for the organization to function,'' he said.
