For James L. Dimon, the onetime protégé of Sanford I. Weill, the Citigroup chairman, the merger of the Bank One Corporation with J.P. Morgan Chase &amp; Company represents the sweetest form of redemption, if not revenge.
Mr. Dimon was forced out of Citigroup in an ugly power struggle in 1998, one month after masterminding the merger between Mr. Weill's Travelers Group and Citicorp.
It was a classic Wall Street power play, with a dollop of Shakespearean drama: the kinglike Mr. Weill, casting out his increasingly powerful dauphin, Mr. Dimon, with the aim of solidifying the merger that would define his career and create the world's dominant financial institution.
Now Mr. Dimon, chairman and chief executive of Bank One, is in line to become chief executive of J.P. Morgan, which will be a whisker away from Citigroup in total assets.
''Sandy called and congratulated me,'' Mr. Dimon, known as Jamie, said yesterday. ''I thanked him for all he taught me.'' Still, he made it clear that their relationship had changed. Mr. Weill was now, finally, a competitor.
''If he doesn't understand that, he will,'' Mr. Dimon added with a laugh.
In Chicago, where Bank One is based, Mr. Dimon took a rigorous approach, slashing perks and cutting staff -- taking pages from Mr. Weill's playbook. In less conventional moves, he immediately bought $2 million worth of stock, sending the message that his bet on Bank One was a personal one. He then imported a cadre of former Citigroup executives and cleaned up the bank's problematic credit card business. Profits improved significantly, and the stock has surged 80 percent.
Before joining Bank One, Mr. Dimon spent two years in Wall Street purdah, licking his wounds and waiting patiently for the right opportunity. Some said that he would never leave New York. Now he is to become president of J.P. Morgan immediately and to succeed William B. Harrison Jr. as chief executive in 2006, filling a leadership void that has existed there since the departure of Geoffrey T. Boisi, the former Goldman Sachs banker who was forced out by Mr. Harrison in 2002.
To many who observed his career, there was always doubt that being the top banker in Chicago would satisfy Mr. Dimon's career hunger.
Mr. Dimon made his name as a popular leader of the investment banking department at Smith Barney under Mr. Weill. It seemed certain that he would crave a return to Wall Street, where his father worked before him and where Mr. Weill had his greatest triumphs.
In many ways, J.P. Morgan seems the perfect place to cap his career.
At 47, Mr. Dimon is 13 years younger than Mr. Harrison, a North Carolina native who is not known for the killer instincts that characterize some of his Wall Street peers.
The combination of J.P. Morgan and Bank One, with its vast branch network, will provide impressive retail scope while giving Mr. Dimon the investment banking franchise that he lacked at Bank One.
Most important, it gives him the opportunity to challenge Citigroup's claim as the world's pre-eminent financial institution.
Mr. Weill hired Mr. Dimon, fresh out of Harvard Business School, as his personal assistant in 1983.
When Mr. Weill fell victim to a boardroom putsch and was pushed out at American Express, Mr. Dimon turned his back on a thriving career and joined Mr. Weill in exile.
The two men eventually restarted their careers as dealmakers by leaving Wall Street and taking over Commercial Credit, a depressed consumer finance company in Baltimore. That move presaged, in many respects, Mr. Dimon's retreat to Bank One's offices in Chicago after Mr. Weill turned on him.
But at tiny Commercial Credit, the two men teamed up on a long run of acquisitions to create Primerica, which evolved into Travelers and finally, in 1998, into Citigroup.
That merger would be the most difficult one.
At the outset, Mr. Dimon was named president of the new company and was widely seen as a chief executive in waiting.
Young, smooth and a veteran of many an executive suite battle, he hit it off with John S. Reed, the chief executive of Citicorp.
But beneath the surface, tensions between Mr. Weill and Mr. Dimon had reached the boiling point.
Mr. Dimon clashed with Mr. Weill's daughter, Jessica M. Bibliowicz, also a senior executive at Smith Barney, leading to her departure, according to numerous accounts. Mr. Weill grew increasingly displeased with Mr. Dimon's rising profile, inside and outside the company, bankers who worked with them said.
One month after the merger, Mr. Dimon suffered what would seem to be a career-ending reversal. He lost a bitter power struggle to Deryck C. Maughan, a rival Citigroup banker and the former chief executive of Salomon Brothers, who had become a favorite of Mr. Weill's.
After Mr. Dimon left, Mr. Weill went on to oust Mr. Reed in another battle, this one in the boardroom.
For Mr. Dimon, success at Bank One came quickly. Despite Mr. Dimon's move to Chicago, the turnaround there kept him very much in the eyes of Wall Street.
When banking and research conflicts prompted an investigation by the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, Mr. Weill came under increasing pressure to name a successor. Mr. Dimon was frequently mentioned as a candidate.
Mr. Weill stepped down last year as chief executive, hand-picking Charles O. Prince, his longtime corporate lawyer, to succeed him.
There had also been speculation that Mr. Dimon might replace Mr. Harrison when J.P. Morgan's stock plunged to a low of $15 in late 2002 after a string of disastrous loans to technology and telecommunications companies.
But Mr. Harrison survived and the value of his company's stock has risen to $40. Now he is in a position to make a deal, one that solves the lingering question of who might succeed him. For Mr. Dimon, there will be some familiar faces at J.P. Morgan. The most prominent is Steven D. Black, the deputy head for investment banking and a loyal deputy to Mr. Dimon during his time at Smith Barney.
''The timing is delicious. Sandy exits stage right and Jamie takes center stage,'' said Michael Holland, a fund manager and former Bank One shareholder. ''Jamie built a franchise for himself and the people around him. In the back of his mind I guess he always wanted to come back to New York.''
BANKING GIANT: THE FUTURE CHIEF  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  A map in Business Day yesterday with an article about the merger of J. P. Morgan Chase and Bank One, showing states where the companies have bank branches, misplaced four Bank One branches. The branches are indeed in Wisconsin, not in Minnesota, which was highlighted in error.
Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  A map in Business Day yesterday with an article about the merger of J. P. Morgan Chase and Bank One, showing states where the companies have bank branches, misplaced four Bank One branches. The branches are indeed in Wisconsin, not in Minnesota, which was highlighted in error.
