HIGHLIGHTS
DEMOCRATIC NETWORK SIGNINGS -- The comedian and best-selling author Al Franken, left, and Robert F. Kennedy Jr. have been signed as talk show hosts by Progress Media, the new Democratic investment group planning to start a liberal radio network to counterbalance conservative radio hosts like Rush Limbaugh. In addition to announcing the signings, Progress Media said in a statement yesterday that it had reached its first distribution deal, with WNTD (950 AM) in Chicago, the country's third largest market. Company executives said last month that they hoped to be on the air in major markets by early spring. Mr. Franken, whose show will be broadcast daily, said: ''Our long national nightmare is over. I've signed.'' Mr. Kennedy and a co-host, Mike Papantonio, will focus on the inner workings and influence of corporations.
LONDON: ELGIN MARBLES CAMPAIGN -- If Britain agrees to return the Elgin Marbles to Greece, Reuters reported yesterday, the Greek government is willing to allow them to remain British Museum property and to allow British experts to look after them, campaigners said yesterday in London as part of a new effort to return the 2,500-year-old Parthenon sculptures to Athens. But a spokesman for the British Department of Culture, Media and Sport said the position of the British government had not changed and that the decision rested with the British Museum, which has steadfastly refused to return them. The new campaign, citing polls that it says suggest increasing support within Britain for return of the marbles, comes as the Olympic Games are scheduled for Athens in August and a new museum to house the Elgin Marbles is planned for the foot of the Acropolis. The fragments of the frieze that once adorned the Parthenon, on the Acropolis, were taken in the 19th century by Lord Elgin, the British ambassador to the Ottoman Empire, and were sold to the British Museum in 1816.
HALL OF FAME RECORDINGS -- The Everly Brothers' ''All I Have to Do Is Dream,'' Fifth Dimension's ''Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In,'' Glen Campbell's ''By the Time I Get to Phoenix,'' the Beatles' ''Let It Be,'' Simon &amp; Garfunkel's ''Sounds of Silence''' and Carly Simon's ''You're So Vain'' are among 33 recordings newly added to the Grammy Hall of Fame. The selections, announced yesterday by the Recording Academy, bring to 639 the titles chosen since 1973 to honor recordings of enduring qualitative or historical interest that are at least 25 years old. ''This year's inductees span nine decades and represent a diverse array of genres, from classical and show tunes to blues, jazz and rock 'n' roll,'' said Neil Portnow, the academcy's president.
MOSCOW: STOLEN ART RECOVERED -- ''The Kiss'' and ''Jealousy,'' two small Rodin bronzes valued at $200,000 each and stolen three years ago from a museum in Volgograd, in central Russia, have been recovered by Russian intelligence agents and returned to the Culture Ministry, officials said yesterday. ''The sophisticated operation set up to catch the thieves was worthy of a feature film,'' said Mikhail Shvydkoi, the Russian culture minister. The Russian security chief, Nikolai P. Patrushev, said the thieves had tried to find buyers in the West, Agence France-Presse reported.
'ON THE ROAD' ON TOUR -- ''On the Road'' is on the road. The yellowed manuscript of Jack Kerouac's beat generation novel, typed by the author, left, on a 120-foot paper scroll in a 21-day marathon in 1951 and published six years later, is off on a 13-stop, four-year national tour of museums and libraries, The Associated Press reported. Beginning this week at the Orange County History Center in Orlando, Fla., the tour will end with a three-month exhibition at the New York Public Library in 2007. Two years ago, Jim Irsay, the owner of the Indianapolis Colts football team, bought the scroll at auction for $2.43 million and exhibited it in Indianapolis. ''My goal all along was to have it and share it with all those who want to see it, whether in this country or other countries,'' he said.
COUNTRY MUSIC SLUMP -- Reversing a 2002 trend, sales of country music declined almost 10 percent in 2003, The Associated Press reported, in contrast to a decline in the music industry generally of less than 1 percent, according to figures released by Nielsen SoundScan, the music monitoring organization. In 2002 country music was the standout in an otherwise poor year for the industry. Ed Benson, the executive director of the Country Music Association, attributed the 2003 slump to a scarcity of new releases by leading artists. ''We face the same challenges as all musical formats,'' he said, ''but in 2003 we didn't have the same number of superstar releases that we had in 2002, when Kenny Chesney, the Dixie Chicks, Faith Hill, Tim McGraw and Shania Twain all had new releases.''
FOOTNOTES
Although the Lunar New Year -- the Year of the Monkey, 4702 -- doesn't arrive until next Thursday, the celebration will begin on Saturday in Chinatown. Opening ceremonies at Mott and Canal Streets will feature music, martial arts demonstrations and Lion Dance groups. Dances will take place there at 2 p.m. every Saturday and Sunday through Feb. 8. Next Thursday a public ceremony, including firecrackers, is scheduled for 11 a.m. in Chatham Square; on Jan. 25 the big Lunar New Year Main Street Parade of floats, bands, lion and dragon dancers, magicians and acrobats will twine through the neighborhood.
