The timing was lousy, the logic impeccable. Isiah Thomas was at it again, his quick crossover dribble leaving us guessing at air.
Mike Fratello was reportedly coming to preach defense, slow the Knicks to a crawl before they could walk. But before Fratello could be hired, before Don Chaney could be fired, Thomas was weaving his way in the open court, thinking smartly outside the box.
After years of fielding pedestrian talent at the position on the court from which everything flows, the Knicks are relaunching their run for respectability and beyond from the point guard wing of the Basketball Hall of Fame: Thomas from the front office, Lenny Wilkens from the bench, both within earshot of Stephon Marbury, the new franchise player.
Of Wilkens, the 66-year-old patriarch who ranks as the N.B.A.'s career coaching leader in victories and losses, Thomas said: ''He's a perfect fit for Stephon.''
Thomas couldn't have found two more disparate styles than the two finalists for his clumsy but necessary displacement of Chaney yesterday. Fratello, in one sense, made perfect sense, given his commitment to building the defensive foundation these Knicks lack. But by the end of his time in Cleveland, Fratello was dismissed as an autocratic play-caller of halfcourt drills and his Cavaliers were the canned vegetables of the N.B.A. Thomas did not bring Marbury to New York to walk the ball up the floor and lob the ball into the post, to exist in a universe apart from his coach.
For all the tough playoff talk and fantasies of a distant title, nothing is more crucial to the Knicks' foreseeable development than Marbury's realization of his potential as a floor leader worthy of the men he now works for. Reacting to Thomas and his latest spin move, Marbury said: ''I'm pretty much like the same player as him. If he says that's a good fit for myself and the team, that's the most important thing.''
Cynics can say that Wilkens was fired in Toronto in large part because his franchise player, Vince Carter, failed to reach his potential and ultimately tuned Wilkens out. But as Thomas said, Carter probably had more problems with his health than with his former coach.
How many young N.B.A. superstars have greased the skid of a coach or two on the way to finding the situation that unlocks the secrets to maturity? Magic Johnson comes to mind. Jason Kidd. The last time Tracy McGrady was in town with Orlando before Marbury's 26 points and 10 assists helped the Knicks to a 120-110 victory over the Magic last night, Doc Rivers sang the praises of the young man he had just named captain. The Magic then slipped into a long losing streak, and McGrady turned mute as Rivers took the fall.
Wilkens and Marbury, who will play for his ninth coach in eight N.B.A. seasons, are both from Brooklyn, and that ought to help. ''His relationship with Marbury could be an important one,'' Thomas said.
How much do today's megamillionaires relate to their ancestors? Once, while on Wilkens's United States Olympic team, Shaquille O'Neal asked the old coach, ''You ever play?'' Wilkens looked at O'Neal with his lips pursed, with his trademark wry smile. Yes, he played, and was so much the point guard that they made him a player-coach in Seattle when he was only a few years older than Marbury is now.
If Marbury is listening, Wilkens can help him become the player he says he wants to be. For the next couple of years -- or at least until Thomas makes the Knicks more athletic and decides to coach them himself -- the choice of laid-back Lenny is an uncanny call, even if Wilkens has more in common in personality with Chaney than the dearly departed Jeff Van Gundy.
Thomas called the players' coach label a positive, not long after failing to inform Chaney he was fired before he had reported to work. Good company men don't deserve the kind of denouement Chaney got last night in particular and over the last week in general. But who said Madison Square Garden is a good company?
Much as he said he felt Chaney's pain, Thomas had to know last week that he wanted his own coach. He should have made a quick surgical strike, gone the interim route until the permanent replacement was found. Chaney deserved that much after coaching the Knicks in the post-Patrick Ewing era, a well-paid shepherd through the inevitable storm.
The Knicks being where they are, a case cannot be made for Chaney, only an objection to the insensitive ending and the treatment by a Garden audience that was once celebrated for its sophistication but now is as yahoo as it gets. Fans pay good money. They get to voice whatever judgments they want to. That doesn't mean they don't sound like heartless fools when they ridicule a decent man who stepped into a situation from which his predecessor, Van Gundy, executed a slick backdoor move into a broadcasting seat on his way to an opening with upside.
The Garden, of course, has always been a political jungle. Thomas wasn't brought here by James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, to win humanitarian awards. He was hired to pull the Knicks from the shaft they fell down under Scott Layden. If Thomas's job is to scratch and claw, few men are more qualified. Not only did he fire Chaney yesterday, but he coldly sent two of Chaney's assistants, Lon Kruger and Brendan Malone, packing, too.
Malone, a so-called friend of Thomas, has now been hired and fired by him in three cities. Which brings us to the moral of our story: Friend or foe, people generally get Isiah Thomas's point.
Sports of The Times
