When Connecticut Gov. John G. Rowland made his emotional plea for forgiveness last week, he also drew a line in the sand when he insisted that he never -- ''not once'' -- took any action in exchange for gifts he accepted from state aides and contractors.
But legal experts say it is a line that he may find increasingly difficult to defend, as federal agents, ethics regulators and a legislative impeachment committee scour his record for any evidence of a link between his official actions and the gifts he has admitted receiving.
Yesterday, the speaker of the State House of Representatives, Moira K. Lyons, said that the state's legislature, the General Assembly, will form a committee to consider whether to impeach the governor. The committee of House members, evenly divided between Democrats and Republicans, will have subpoena powers, Ms. Lyons said. She met earlier with Mr. Rowland.
All of Mr. Rowland's decisions are now being viewed through the prism of that admission, which not only threatens to skew Mr. Rowland's legacy as governor, but could put him in legal jeopardy as well. Having conceded one half of a potential quid pro quo, lawyers say, the governor has made himself vulnerable to those scrutinizing his every step during nine years as governor.
''An official act can be anything'' - a phone call, a letter, a piece of legislation, a handshake on a deal -- if it helps establish a quid pro quo, said Michael R. Sklaire, a former assistant United States attorney who helped prosecute Bridgeport Mayor Joseph P. Ganim last year.
''To make a criminal case,'' said Mr. Sklaire, ''you've got to link the gifts to something the public official has done, and you do that through circumstantial evidence.''
Typical of official actions that are sure to be looked at in a different light is 1998 legislation proposed by Mr. Rowland to suspend construction of new asphalt plants in Connecticut. The bill, written by the governor's staff and presented as a plan to improve air quality, passed easily in the legislature.
Among those who objected to the moratorium was State Senator Catherine W. Cook, R-Mystic, who warned that it would create a virtual monopoly for O&amp;G Industries and Tilcon Connecticut, road-building companies that controlled 27 of the 37 asphalt plants in the state. Competitors also argued that it protected older, dirtier plants, while preventing cleaner ones from being built.
''We all had our suspicions that this thing was greased, because the legislation came out of nowhere and, in heartbeat, wiped everybody off the map except these two companies,'' said Franklin Pilicy, a lawyer for a Waterbury firm whose plans for an asphalt plant were upended by the moratorium.
What no one knew at the time is that O&amp;G, a construction conglomerate that builds highways and office complexes, installed a patio at Mr. Rowland's lakeside cottage in 1997 and performed other work there as recently as last year. The company was among several state contractors that Mr. Rowland says made improvements to the cottage, for which he wrote checks years later or not at all.
In addition, Tilcon's chairman was Angelo Tomasso, whose family controls other companies that provided workers at Mr. Rowland's cottage and are at the center of the federal investigation into his administration. Despite Mr. Tomasso's involvement, Tilcon was not related to the Tomasso companies that are part of the investigation.
Calls to O&amp;G and Tilcon were not returned. Ross H. Garber, the governor's legal counsel, declined to comment on the moratorium issue.
On Tuesday, Ms. Cook, who is among those calling for Mr. Rowland to resign, said she had no reason to suspect that the moratorium was done to benefit people who worked on the governor's cottage. But she said she expected such questions to be raised as lawmakers press ahead with an impeachment inquiry under guidelines announced Tuesday.
Lawmakers who will investigate Mr. Rowland's actions have wide latitude when considering what constitutes an offense under Connecticut's vague impeachment statute. Not burdened by the criminal-court requirement to show guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, they could set a goal of demonstrating only that there was an abuse of public trust that warrants his removal.
Even in a criminal case, where the standards are much more stringent, indictments of public officials are often based not on a blatant exertion of influence in exchange for a particular gift, lawyers say, but an accumulation of official actions, set against a backdrop of gift-giving.
While no evidence has emerged of Mr. Rowland taking action in exchange for a specific gift, he is known to have taken steps, as governor, to help friends who have helped him.
For instance, Mr. Rowland has acknowledged that, during a golf game in 2000 with Robert V. Matthews, a wealthy real estate investor, he placed a cellphone call to an out-of-state company that Mr. Matthews was trying to lure to a New Haven building that he owned. Mr. Rowland said the call was one of many he makes as governor to encourage businesses to move to Connecticut.
But Mr. Matthews is not just any constituent. He helped Mr. Rowland first lease and then sell an apartment that the governor owned in Washington, and he let him stay, for free, at a luxury home he owns in Palm Beach, Fla., one of several vacations which led to an ethics fine against Mr. Rowland last year.
In another case that was reported recently, Mr. Rowland proposed state jobs for the children of one of his partners in a real estate development group that he joined after becoming governor, according to internal administration documents. Mr. Rowland also supported the promotion of his state police driver, Vincent DeRosa, to deputy public safety commissioner in 2001 and, later, director of state homeland security.
Mr. DeRosa, who makes more than $100,000 a year in his new job, was involved in the sale of a boat and a car to the governor that are a subject of the F.B.I. investigation, according to state officials. In the case of the boat, Mr. DeRosa, who operates a marine equipment business, gave Mr. Rowland a $3,000 trade-in allowance on a boat that had last sold, eight years earlier, for $750.
In recent political corruption cases in Connecticut, prosecutors sometimes invoked the official acts of politicians as evidence of guilt without linking specific acts and payments. Making those cases, Mr. Sklaire said, generally requires the use of well-placed witnesses, wiretaps and the seizing of documents through search warrants -- serious steps that, in Mr. Rowland's case, are not known to have occurred.
In Mr. Ganim's case, the government used evidence obtained with all of those tools to prove that there was a general understanding among the mayor and his close aides that cash and expensive gifts would be exchanged for influence on contracts.
Sometimes the actions are more ambiguous.
During the 1992 corruption trial of former Waterbury Mayor Joseph J. Santopietro, prosecutors suggested that a citywide moratorium on condominium construction, though widely supported by city residents, was intended to protect the real estate investments of developers who made payoffs to the mayor. Mr. Santopietro, who was convicted, was also accused of numerous other acts, including accepting a briefcase of cash in exchange for a city investment.
