A deeply divided Securities and Exchange Commission proposed rules on Wednesday that would force most of the nation's mutual funds to replace their board chairmen with outsiders independent of the firms that manage the funds.
The proposal, which is expected to win final approval in the next few months, will affect not just mutual fund companies that have figured in recent investigations but giant firms like Fidelity Investments, the Vanguard Group and T. Rowe Price Associates, which have been left unscathed by the industry's scandals. And several mutual fund companies involved in the investigations have independent chairmen and boards for their funds.
Still, some industry experts and government officials said that the proposal, if adopted, could begin to alter the way mutual funds govern themselves. Analysts estimate that the boards of about 80 percent of the nation's mutual funds have chairmen who are senior executives of the funds' management companies and would have to be replaced under the new rule.
Critics of the plan, including two Republican members of the commission, argue that by removing insiders from leadership roles at fund boards, the S.E.C. could seriously undermine those boards' effectiveness on behalf of investors.
But the supporters of the proposal -- including the S.E.C.'s chairman, William H. Donaldson, and the commission's two Democratic members -- reject that view, saying fund managers would still be consulted and could have a voice on the board, albeit a less dominant one.
As expected, the commission on Wednesday also proposed rules that would require funds to provide investors with greater disclosure of their relationships and potential conflicts of interest with brokers who recommend their funds. On Tuesday, the commission disclosed that a nine-month investigation had found widespread evidence that brokers received undisclosed payments for steering investors toward specific funds.
The proposals were part of a series of rules that the commission intends to adopt in the coming months in response to the scandals in the mutual fund industry.
Most of the proposals have provoked little debate, but the one about increasing the independence of the board to 75 percent of the directors, from the current 50 percent, and forcing the funds to appoint independent chairmen prompted a sharp discussion over governance and the costs and benefits of such an approach. The industry's heavily influential trade organization, the Investment Company Institute, has lobbied against the proposal to require independent chairmen and prevailed upon a House committee last year to strip the provision from a bill on mutual fund regulation. In November the bill was approved by the House by a vote of 418 to 2.
While all five commissioners at the S.E.C. supported issuing the proposals for comment, two of the Republican commissioners expressed serious misgivings about the plan.
The two Republicans, Cynthia A. Glassman and Paul S. Atkins, indicated that they intended to vote against the proposal when it comes up for final vote in a few months. They said there was no economic evidence to support the idea that raising the level of independence of fund leadership would have any positive impact on the governance or performance of the companies.
''My concern is that this proposal may put form over substance,'' said Ms. Glassman, who is an economist. ''I am sure this position will be criticized by some as anti-investor, but I believe it is quite the opposite.''
''To the extent that there are resulting costs, they would likely come out of the pockets of the shareholders,'' she said. ''Second, the fact of having this required governance structure could give shareholders a false sense of confidence that improvements have been made, when, in reality, it is not clear that the structure improves anything.''
She noted that Putnam Investments, which has settled accusations of fraud, had an independent chairman and a board that was predominantly independent. Several other firms under investigation, including One Group, which is owned by the Bank One Corporation, and Nations Fund, owned by the Bank of America Corporation, also have independent chairmen.
But the two Democratic commissioners, apparently with the support of Mr. Donaldson, said the recent wave of mutual fund scandals required that the commission move swiftly to restore investor confidence and overhaul the way the funds govern themselves.
''I have great respect for economists and economic experts, but there are moments where logic and experience and anecdotal evidence compel certain conclusions,'' said Harvey J. Goldschmid, a commissioner and a professor of law from Columbia University. ''This for me is one of those areas. These independent directors must be made stronger and more active. They must bark and, where appropriate, they must bite. This proposal will help get us there.''
Mr. Donaldson pledged to listen to the comments that will be filed by supporters and critics of the proposal before making a final decision, but he indicated that he favored the plan.
''I understand that there are concerns about whether these changes will ameliorate the problems that have beset the fund industry,'' he said. ''I anticipate that commenters will express a variety of views, and I will pay serious attention to the comments we receive. Nonetheless, I do believe that these proposals are taking us in the right direction, and if adopted, will strengthen the hand of independent directors when dealing with fund management and result in better service to fund shareholders.''
Industry critics said that the proposal was productive but would not solve all the problems.
''It's potentially very significant and a reform that is long overdue,'' said John C. Bogle, founder of Vanguard, one of the nation's largest mutual fund companies and a leading critic of the industry. ''But what really has to change is the ethos and the climate in the boardroom.''
He said that the experience of funds with largely independent boards and independent directors had ''often been disappointing.''
Gary Gensler, a former Treasury under secretary in the Clinton administration, former co-head of finance at Goldman Sachs and co-author of the book ''The Great Mutual Fund Trap,'' said that governance of the funds was the core issue that had been exposed by the scandals, and that more needed to be done to make boards more vigilant.
''Directionally, what the S.E.C. did is a good thing, and it will change the atmospherics in the room,'' he said. But he added that, over the years, independent directors ''have been rather passive in performing their duties,'' and that the biggest problem was that the courts had imposed a relatively low standard of care for the duties of fund directors.
''The real question is, how do the independent directors make decisions, and will they act as real representatives of the investors?'' Mr. Gensler said.
