The bone-rattling cold that blasted through the Northeast on Wednesday rocked even the hardiest New Englanders.
Tory Bramante, a squid fisherman from Wakefield, Mass., had to stop his boat, the America, three times in the last 24 hours to chip ice off the hull.
''We got it pretty bad,'' Mr. Bramante said, describing 25-foot waves that came crashing over his head as he was heading into Boston Harbor from Georges Bank off Cape Cod. ''Keep moving, that's all you can do. Stop and you'll freeze up.''
In New Hampshire, where several Democratic presidential candidates were hoping potential primary voters would give them a warm reception, the weather was not in the mood. Workers at Laconia Ice Company found that the temperature in their warehouse's freezer, about 18 degrees, was far warmer than the weather outside, where the thermometer hit 18 below zero.
''So when we go in the freezer,'' said John Rudzinski, the company's owner, ''it does feel a little warm in there.''
At Jay Peak Ski Resort just south of the Canadian border in Vermont, where overnight lows on Tuesday plummeted to 26 degrees below zero, traffic on the slopes was thin and a couple of lifts were shut down because managers were worried that the equipment would freeze and break.
''We have definitely experienced low skier attendance this week, and probably will over the next few days,'' said Zoe Holt, a spokeswoman for the resort. But Ms. Holt said skiers who braved the subzero temperatures would get a $20 discount off a $54 lift ticket and a free beverage -- a hot one, of course. ''People can certainly come up and ski tomorrow and have a nice day, as long as their exposed skin is covered,'' she said.
Records were broken in Burlington, Vt., where the previous low temperature was 4 degrees below zero in 1988, said Brooke Taber, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service. As of 5 p.m. Wednesday, Mr. Taber said, ''it's at minus 8 and falling.''
The upstate New York towns Gouverneur and Watertown had overnight temperatures Tuesday more than 30 degrees below zero, Mr. Taber said. On Mount Washington in New Hampshire, the temperatures were the lowest in the region -- 44 degrees below zero, and feeling like 100 degrees below with the wind chill factor.
''We got more cold air to come,'' Mr. Taber said, predicting that the worst of the cold would hit Thursday night and Friday morning, with temperatures of 15 to 30 degrees below zero and wind chills of 50 degrees below zero.
''You can get frostbite within minutes -- doesn't take much at those temperatures,'' Mr. Taber said.
Charles Foley, a National Weather Service meteorologist in Taunton, Mass., said, ''It's all happening because arctic high pressure over Canada is just funneling in a frigid air mass basically right from the North Pole.'' He predicted that temperatures on Friday would break Boston's cold record, which was 5 degrees below zero, set in 1920.
The weather service has taken the unusual measure of issuing frost bite warnings for Thursday night and Friday morning.
With the kind of cold that makes lungs feel raw, many schools kept children indoors Wednesday, and at Belmont Day School in Belmont, Mass., some very exuberant kindergartners were unleashing their energy in their classroom during their second ''indoor recess'' of the day.
In Boston in the last three days, the Fire Department has responded to some 400 reports of ruptured pipes or heating problems, ''definitely an unusually high number,'' said Dave Walsh, a spokesman for the department. ''I've been on the job up here for 34 years and this is definitely about as cold as it's been.''
More people are staying home for meals, movies, even grocery shopping. Peapod.com, which delivers groceries on the East Coast in Boston; Connecticut; New Hyde Park, N.Y.; Baltimore; and Washington, has had a 23 percent increase in its sales volume this week compared with the same week last year, said Elana Friedman, a spokeswoman for the company. Hot items appear to be Duraflame fireplace logs, chicken broth and oatmeal, Ms. Friedman said.
''It's Peapod's favorite time of year,'' she said.
Business has also been jumping for those who make a living keeping people warm.
In Boylston, a rural town about 45 miles west of Boston, Wagner Brothers Auto Repair and Heating Oil has been pumping tens of thousands of gallons of heating oil into the home tanks of chilly customers, so much that the company's supplier ran out.
''It's been unreal,'' said Marge Dupis, the office manager. ''It's been go, go, go, go for our burner men and our drivers.''
Eric Johnson, the head of supervisory operations at Johnson Brothers Plumbing and Heating in Boylston, said his crews responded to 31 dire heat emergencies this past weekend and worked 36 out of 48 hours.
''This is definitely the worst we've ever seen,'' he said of the cold.
At F&amp;S Motors in Boylston, which services lawnmower, motorcycle and snowmobile engines, Bill Fuller, 46, the owner, wore four shirts and industrial gloves to keep warm in his shop, which is heated with a wood stove. This is the coldest weather he has felt since he was 12 and, as a third-string hockey player in Hudson, Mass., his foot froze.
''I guess if it dips below what the record is people say 'We're all going to die,' but this is winter in New England, this is what you get,'' Mr. Fuller said. Still, he said he had no interest in keeping track of the actual temperature.
''I don't want to know,'' Mr. Fuller said. ''If I sniff and my nose gets stuck, I put more wood in the stove.''
