The Democratic presidential hopefuls engaged in a two-front war yesterday. Howard Dean accused Gen. Wesley K. Clark of being a Republican, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt portrayed Dr. Dean as untrustworthy.
The stepped-up attacks reflected an increasingly fluid race for the nomination five days before the Iowa caucuses, as Dr. Dean battled to stay ahead of the pack here and in New Hampshire.
Mr. Gephardt, who considers an Iowa victory essential for his candidacy, mounted one of his fiercest attacks on Dr. Dean before a largely union audience in Nevada, a small town north of Des Moines. ''It's become nearly impossible to know what Governor Dean really believes,'' he said.
Mr. Gephardt said Dr. Dean had flip-flopped on issues like Medicare and trade.
''To me,'' he said, ''there is no room for the cynical politics of manufactured anger and false conviction. I believe in standing for something, and I think all of you do, too.''
Scoffing at the notion that Dr. Dean was giving Democrats the ''red meat'' that they craved, Mr. Gephardt, of Missouri, said: ''Democrats are not animals in need of red meat. After four years of George Bush, we need honesty, for a change.''
Dr. Dean responded at a rally near here: ''This is a rough campaign. They spent the whole campaign saying I was angry. Today, one of them said, 'Well, the anger's all fake.' This campaign isn't about anger. It's about hope.
''I personally like John Edwards, and I like John Kerry and I like Dick Gephardt. But they weren't there when it was time to stand up to the president on the war in Iraq. If you want to take on George Bush with another Washington politician, you can vote for one of them. But if you want someone to stand up to George Bush, I've done it.''
The charges and countercharges flew one day after Dr. Dean's campaign began showing a television commercial that criticized Mr. Gephardt and other candidates for supporting the Iraq conflict, part of a new aggressive tactic.
Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean are widely considered to be running neck and neck in Iowa.
A campaign adviser to Mr. Gephardt, Bill Carrick, said about Dr. Dean: ''We're just not going to let him define the race at the close. He wants to make the campaign a referendum on the war. We're trying to bring it back to the totality of his record.''
In New Hampshire, Dr. Dean went on the offensive at Rivier College in Nashua, taking aim at General Clark. The general, who is not competing in Iowa, has focused on New Hampshire and is appearing in polls to be Dr. Dean's closest rival there.
''Look,'' Dr. Dean said, ''I think General Clark is a good guy. But I truly think he's a Republican. I do not think somebody ought to run in the Democratic primary and then make the general election the Republican primary between two Republicans.''
General Clark dismissed attacks on him as ''the old style of politics,'' saying he would not engage in intramural fights with other Democrats. ''I'm a Democrat because of my convictions,'' he said to reporters on his plane as he traveled back to New Hampshire from New York, where he held fund-raisers. ''I'm running against President Bush. I'm not running against fellow Democrats. Some are. But I'm not.''
Reflecting the heightened competition, Dr. Dean split the day between New Hampshire and Iowa, returning to the anti-establishment, anti-Washington and antiwar themes of his insurgent campaign last year.
''We're going to win by continuing to remind people that when it was important to stand up to George Bush, only one candidate dared to do it,'' he said in Derry, N.H.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who is also bypassing Iowa, took a series of swipes at General Clark. Speaking to reporters at a cafe in Berlin, N.H., Mr. Lieberman reiterated his contention that General Clark had shifted positions on Iraq.
''To me,'' he said, ''it was particularly disappointing that a retired military officer would have so much trouble deciding where he was on the fundamental question of whether the commander in chief should have been authorized to take American troops into war.''
Speaking later in Concord, N.H., General Clark returned to national security, arguing for using NATO to create a multinational counterterrorism strike force.
Dick Bennett, president of the American Research Group in Manchester, N.H., said that General Clark had gained considerable ground in that state in the last 10 days, when he had the stage largely to himself, and that he was an increasingly strong second.
''There's a real race here,'' Mr. Bennett said.
In Iowa, two other candidates pushed to gain ground on the leaders, Senators John Edwards of North Carolina and John Kerry of Massachusetts. Mr. Edwards pressed his case in Sioux City, chatting with voters about tax credits and other measures to increase money for working- and middle-class families. Then he headed to small towns, still drawing large crowds and approving nods for his promise to stay positive.
''We need to talk about what's right and what's wrong and what our moral responsibility is,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I say no to children going to bed hungry.''
Mr. Kerry also tried to stay above the fray, except in the most oblique references to Dr. Dean.
''I'm asking you to measure candidates not by what they say, not by the positions they adopt, for the convenient purposes of a campaign, some of which change month to month in the course of a campaign,'' Mr. Kerry said in Davenport. ''I'm asking you to measure me by a lifetime of fighting consistently for the values and principles of our party and our country.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ATTACKS AND RESPONSES
