The Intel Corporation, the semiconductor maker, reported record quarterly earnings on Wednesday, after its strongest showing in the North American market in several years. The report came as Apple and Yahoo issued similarly strong earnings results yesterday amid optimism that technology spending is at last starting to rebound after a three-year slump.
During the fourth quarter, which ended Dec. 27, Intel beat Wall Street's expectations, earning $2.17 billion, or 33 cents a share. That compares with $1.05 billion, or 16 cents a share, in the fourth quarter of 2002.
''The fourth quarter was a fitting way to put three tough years behind us,'' said Paul Otellini, president of Intel, in a conference call with financial analysts. Intel is considered a bellwether for the technology industries generally, and analysts will be looking for further signs of a recovery when Sun Microsystems and I.B.M. report their quarterly results on Thursday.
Andy Bryant, Intel's chief financial officer, said he was surprised by strong sales in mature markets including North America, where the company had lagging demand for microprocessors throughout all of last year. At the end of the previous quarter, the company attributed a steep rise in profits to strong sales in Asia and the developing nations of Europe but had said the markets in North America and Western Europe would continue to be soft.
Sales of $8.74 billion for the quarter topped Intel's previous record, posted in the third quarter of 2000, when the company had sales of $8.73 billion. Sales for the fourth quarter of 2003 were up 22 percent over the previous year's fourth quarter, when the company posted $7.16 billion. Analysts had expected Intel to post a profit of 25 cents a share on sales of $8.65 billion during the fourth quarter.
Sales of Intel's Centrino chip for wireless notebook computers were particularly strong, Mr. Otellini said. Mobile processor sales were up 30 percent, compared with the previous year. ''Intel is well positioned for the recovery because the purchases are in notebooks and servers,'' said Michael McConnell, an analyst at Pacific Crest Securities.
The fourth quarter results include a $611 million charge associated with the acquisition of DSP Communications in 1999 for $1.6 billion. Intel executives said the results were helped by tax benefits of $620 million.
''We ended the year on a high note as ongoing strength in emerging markets coupled with improving demand in established markets drove revenue to record levels,'' said Craig Barrett, Intel's chief executive.
The gross margin for the fourth quarter was 63.6 percent, higher than the company's expectation of about 62 percent, primarily because of higher revenue.
But Intel executives warned investors that they would not see these growth rates in the current quarter, which is traditionally a much weaker quarter. The company forecast revenue for the first quarter would be $7.9 billion to $8.5 billion. Gross margin, executives said, would be 60 percent, plus or minus a few points.
Intel's stock closed down slightly at $33.39, ahead of the earnings report, which was issued after the close of regular trading. News of the conservative first-quarter forecast helped send the stock down another 90 cents in after-hours trading.
The biggest factor driving the decline in share price in after-hours trading, analysts said, was unrealistic expectations among investors.
''Expectations are still running ahead of reality for the entire sector,'' said Ashok Kumar, an analyst at Piper Jaffray.
Analysts estimate first-quarter earnings of 28 cents a share and sales of $8.23 billion, on average. In the first quarter of 2003, Intel had earnings of 14 cents a share and sales of $6.75 billion.
Mr. Bryant said the forecast for the first quarter should not be a surprise. ''We're just trying to consolidate the gains of the second half and see where we go in 2004,'' Mr. Bryant said. ''We'll look for seasonality in the near term, and I'd love to be wrong.''
Intel executives said the performance of the company's beleaguered communications group, which sells chips for cellphones and hand-held devices, was improving but that the unit continued to lose money in the fourth quarter, largely because of slow demand for telecommunications components. During the fourth quarter, the unit lost $49 million, roughly half what it lost last year.
For 2003, the company earned $5.64 billion, or 85 cents a share, on sales of $30.14 billion. In 2002, it earned $3.12 billion, or 46 cents a share, on sales of $26.76 billion.
TECHNOLOGY
