Following are excerpts from the address by President Bush on Wednesday on his goals for the space program, as recorded by The New York Times:
Inspired by all that has come before and guided by clear objectives, today we set a new course for America's space program. We will give NASA a new focus and vision for future exploration. We will build new ships to carry man forward into the universe, to gain a new foothold on the Moon and to prepare for new journeys to the worlds beyond our own. . . .
Two centuries ago Meriwether Lewis and William Clark left St. Louis to explore the new lands acquired in the Louisiana Purchase. They made that journey in the spirit of discovery, to learn the potential of the vast new territory and to chart the way for others to follow.
America has ventured forth into space for the same reasons. We have undertaken space travel because the desire to explore and understand is part of our character. And that quest has brought tangible benefits that improve our lives in countless ways. The exploration of space has led to advances in weather forecasting, in communications, in computing, search and rescue technology, robotics and electronics. . . .
Yet for all these successes, much remains for us to explore and to learn. In the past 30 years no human being has set foot on another world or ventured farther upward into space than 386 miles, roughly the distance from Washington, D.C. to Boston, Mass.
America has not developed a new vehicle to advance human exploration in space in nearly a quarter century. It is time for America to take the next steps. Today I announce a new plan to explore space and extend a human presence across our solar system. We will begin the effort quickly using existing programs and personnel. We will make steady progress, one mission, one voyage, one landing at a time.
Our first goal is to complete the International Space Station by 2010. We will finish what we have started. We will meet our obligations to our 15 international partners on this project. We will focus our future research aboard the station on the long-term effects of space travel on human biology. The environment of space is hostile to human beings. Radiation and weightlessness pose dangers to human health. And we have much to learn about their long-term effects before human crews can venture through the vast voids of space for months at a time.
Research on board the station and here on Earth will help us better understand and overcome the obstacles that limit exploration. Through these efforts we will develop the skills and techniques necessary to sustain further space exploration.
To meet this goal we will return the space shuttle to flight as soon as possible, consistent with safety concerns and the recommendations of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board. The shuttle's chief purpose over the next several years will be to help finish assembly of the International Space Station. In 2010 the space shuttle, after nearly 30 years of duty, will be retired from service.
Our second goal is to develop and test a new spacecraft, the crew exploration vehicle, by 2008 and to conduct the first manned mission no later than 2014. The crew exploration vehicle will be capable of ferrying astronauts and scientists to the space station after the shuttle is retired. But the main purpose of this spacecraft will be to carry astronauts beyond our orbit to other worlds. . . .
Our third goal is to return to the moon by 2020 as the launching point for missions beyond. Beginning no later than 2008, we will send a series of robotic missions to the lunar surface to research and prepare for future human exploration.
Using the crew exploration vehicle we will undertake extended human missions to the Moon as early as 2015 with the goal of living and working there for increasingly extended periods of time. . . .
Returning to the Moon is an important step for our space program. Establishing an extended human presence on the Moon could vastly reduce the cost of further space exploration making possible ever more ambitious missions. Lifting heavy spacecraft and fuel out of the Earth's gravity is expensive. Spacecraft assembled and provisioned on the Moon could escape its far lower gravity using far less energy and thus, far less cost.
Also, the Moon is home to abundant resources. Its soil contains raw materials that might be harvested and processed into rocket fuel or breathable air.
We can use our time on the moon to develop and test new approaches and technologies and systems that will allow us to function in other more challenging environments. The Moon is a logical step toward further progress and achievement.
With the experience and knowledge gained on the Moon we will then be ready to take the next steps of space exploration, human missions to Mars and to worlds beyond.
Robotic missions will serve as trailblazers, the advance guard to the unknown. Probes, landers and other vehicles of this kind continue to prove their worth sending spectacular images and vast amounts of data back to earth. Yet the human thirst for knowledge ultimately cannot be satisfied by even the most vivid pictures or the most detailed measurements. We need to see and examine and touch for ourselves. And only human beings are capable of adapting to the inevitable uncertainties posed by space travel.
As our knowledge improves, we'll develop new power generation, propulsion, life support and other systems that can support more distant travels. We do not know where this journey will end. Yet we know this, human beings are headed into the cosmos.
And along this journey we'll make many technological breakthroughs. We don't know yet what those breakthroughs will be, but we can be certain they'll come and that our efforts will be repaid many times over. . . .
We begin this venture knowing that space travel brings great risks. The loss of the space shuttle Columbia was less than one year ago. Since the beginning of our space program, America has lost 23 astronauts and one astronaut from an allied nation, men and women who believed in their mission and accepted the dangers. As one family member said, the legacy of Columbia must carry on for the benefit of our children and yours. The Columbia's crew did not turn away from the challenge, and neither will we.
Mankind is drawn to the heavens for the same reason we were once drawn into unknown lands and across the open sea. We choose to explore space because doing so improves our lives and lifts our national spirit. So let us continue the journey.
