Robert Jordan, who died on Saturday in West Palm Beach, Fla., at 76, was a great player and part of a great bridge tradition in Philadelphia that began in the 1930's. With his regular partner, Arthur Robinson, he represented the United States in the World Team Olympiads in 1964 and 1968. In 1963 they played for North America in the Bermuda Bowl, a different world championship based on continental zones. On each occasion the team finished second to Italy in the final.
In 1963 in St.-Vincent, Italy, a victory seemed probable when the Americans led by 21 imps with 32 deals remaining. But 39 imps were lost in the next 16 deals, partly because the American nonplaying captain chose to split his partnerships, a drastic experiment that is hardly ever attempted unless illness is a factor. Italy won by 19 imps.
Early in that match Jordan sat South on the diagramed deal. He landed in five diamonds after a surprising auction. It seems odd that East did not open the bidding. That would have caused West to lead his singleton heart with decisive effect, something that he might have done anyway.
Because of the danger of a heart ruff, three no-trump is a slightly better contract than five diamonds and could perhaps have been reached if Jordan had bid three hearts rather than four diamonds.
West did not think it right to try for a ruff, since he had a potential trump trick against five diamonds. His opening club lead gave the declarer a reprieve, and Jordan took full advantage of it. He ruffed in his hand, cashed the diamond ace and led to the diamond king. The American supporters watching in the theater groaned, because he seemed to have three losers. But South demonstrated that they were wrong. He cashed the club ace, discarding a heart, ruffed a club, led to the spade queen and ruffed another club. He cashed his top spades to reach this ending:
A spade ruff and a club ruff gave Jordan 11 tricks, and West's trump winner collided with one of his partner's heart winners. This brilliant effort was reported around the world.
BRIDGE
