A record number of complaints about buildings without heat or hot water are pouring into the city's 311 hotline, with the highest number ever - 5,142 calls - on Saturday when temperatures dipped below freezing, city officials said.
The five boroughs turned inward yesterday as the temperature dropped to 9 degrees. Residents of cold buildings huddled by space heaters, or ran their ovens while police officers, emergency workers and Red Cross volunteers combed the streets for people in need of shelter.
''We woke up this morning and we felt like we were sleeping outside,'' said Monica Hudson, 25, who lives in a brick tenement on Bryant Avenue in the Bronx. She said she turned up her oven when her 2-month-old daughter woke with a fever yesterday.
As of 8 last night, Ms. Hudson was among 3,099 people who had called the city's new 311 hot line to complain, a marked increase over the 1,925 who called a housing hot line on the same day last year. She was also among tenants from more than 50 buildings in the Bronx who called the office of Borough President Adolfo Carrión Jr. with complaints yesterday.
''It's really disturbing,'' Mr. Carrión said. ''The administration needs to know the level of need that exists and needs to support the emergency response more.''
The city had received two heat complaints from Ms. Hudson's building since Tuesday and was planning to send an inspector to the building yesterday evening, said officials of the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development. The department has stretched to respond to the calls, with inspectors working overtime and on weekends as they check temperatures in buildings to make sure they meet legal requirements.
Landlords are required by law to maintain an indoor temperature of 68 degrees during the day when the temperature drops below 55 degrees outside. At night, if the outside temperature drops below 40 degrees, they must maintain an indoor temperature of 55.Since the start of the heating season, more than 114,000 people have called the city with heat or hot water complaints - roughly 33,000 more calls than last year, said Carol Abrams, a spokeswoman for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development. Ms. Abrams attributes the increase to the well-publicized 311 hot line, which began operating in March, as well as to a colder winter season. In the first two weeks of January, temperatures this year averaged 30 degrees, compared with 33 degrees last year, said Jeff Warner, a meteorologist with Pennsylvania State University.
Residents of the Edenwald Houses, a crowded cluster of more than a dozen buildings in the Wakefield section of the Bronx, say they have been without heat either completely or intermittently over the past two weeks. Notices in lobbies from the New York City Housing Authority asking tenants to inform management of heat failures were scrawled with obscenities.
''We have to sleep bundled up -- we each have three blankets,'' said Daisy Martinez, 21, who is spending a few weeks at her grandmother's apartment in one of the buildings.
Another Edenwald resident, Prentiss Morrisette, 52, said he has lived without heat in his first floor apartment at 1160 Grenada Place for two weeks.''We've had no heat before, but this is the worst it's been,'' said Mr. Morrisette. He said he has lung cancer and was told by his doctor that if he caught the flu, he could die.
Yesterday afternoon, the oven in Mr. Morrisette's three-bedroom apartment was cranked to 400 degrees, and a pot of boiling water sent steam into the air. He had purchased two space heaters that day for $130, and wore a scarf and long underwear beneath his clothing.
The building is a public housing development and therefore falls under the jurisdiction of the Housing Authority, whose complaint system is separate from the city's 311 hotline. Residents of public housing buildings must complain to their management offices or directly to the Housing Authority, said Howard Marder, a spokesman for the Housing Authority.
Mr. Morrisette said he had called the Housing Authority three times to complain over the past two weeks, but said heat came in only though his kitchen, and sporadically.
Mr. Marder said, ''We're aware that there has been insufficient heat there,'' adding that the problem had been caused by a faulty boiler.
A portable boiler was delivered to the complex yesterday afternoon. An engineer with the private company that supplied the equipment said the boiler would supply enough heat for all the buildings in Edenwald.
''Nobody's going home until it's working,'' Mr. Marder said. By early evening, tenants said the heat was back.
The city has also experienced a sharp rise of calls to its 311 number for New Yorkers worried about homeless people they had spotted on the street, said Linda I. Gibbs, the commissioner of homeless services.
New York City police took 19 people to shelters on Tuesday evening, and emergency workers handled 11 cases of hypothermia yesterday, Fire Department officials said.
Two hundred single adults entered city shelters this week, bringing the city's total of single men and women in shelter to 8,600, Mrs. Gibbs said. Despite this increase, the city still has extensive capacity for more homeless, including 400 regular beds and 300 other beds for an emergency, she said.
''There is no lack of space for more folks,'' Mrs. Gibbs said. ''We absolutely will have a bed for everyone.''
