Carol Moseley Braun plans to end her bid for the Democratic presidential nomination and endorse Howard Dean on Thursday, giving him an important symbolic boost just four days before Iowa's leadoff caucuses, the Dean campaign said Wednesday.
Ms. Braun, a former senator from Illinois, failed to garner much money or support in polls and had only raised about half a million dollars to date. But she did distinguished herself with eloquent performances in several nationally televised debates.
Ms. Braun and Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, developed a respectful relationship throughout the campaign, in part because key staff members had worked for both.
The impending endorsement grew out of a contentious exchange that focused on minority issues during a debate Sunday. Ms. Braun, who is black, defended Dr. Dean against accusations that as governor he had failed to appoint enough African-Americans.
Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, said that his boss went to thank Ms. Braun after the debate and that she requested a meeting to talk about possibly joining his campaign.
The two met on Monday, Mr. Trippi said, and Ms. Braun quizzed Dr. Dean on various issues, including affirmative action,
Apparently, he passed.
As Dr. Dean's three-bus caravan sped across Iowa Wednesday night, word filtered through that Ms. Braun had decided to make the announcement on Thursday.
''We just hit it off,'' Dr. Dean said as he arrived at his hotel here in Fort Dodge. ''I always liked her; she's always liked me. She's a principled person. I like her a lot. I'm just glad she's helping.''
Aides to Ms. Braun did not return telephone calls seeking comment late Wednesday night.
Ms. Braun had filed her candidacy in only 21 states and the District of Columbia. She did not meet requirements to run in a number of states, including New York and Virginia.
Ms. Braun made few appearances in Iowa, save for an occasional debate. She spent much of her time traveling in New Hampshire, South Carolina and Washington.
Ms. Braun, a former ambassador to New Zealand and Samoa, rarely attacked other candidates, even on her key issues like universal health care.
Ms. Braun is the only member of the nine Democrat field never to have attacked Dr. Dean publicly.
''In the early days, everybody basically didn't take us seriously, didn't take her seriously,'' Mr. Trippi said. ''I think there's a bond of friendship that holds.''
Ms. Braun joins a list of well-known African-American politicians who have endorsed Dr. Dean and could help him appeal to voters across her native South and in cities like her current hometown, Chicago. They include Representatives Jesse L. Jackson Jr. of Illinois, Elijiah E. Cummings of Maryland, chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, and John Conyers of Michigan, the longest serving black member of Congress.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER AMBASSADOR
