WHEN Lee Hanson drives from her house in Orinda, Calif., to her San Francisco office, she is choosy about whom she calls on her cellphone. She has to be: she is at the mercy of the AT&amp;T Wireless network, with dead zones that she knows by heart.
Eight minutes into her 15-mile commute, for instance, she must drive through a 4,000-foot tunnel, and it is a certainty that her call will be dropped. So a lengthy business call is out of the question. ''If it's a client, I make a calculation,'' said Ms. Hanson, a corporate recruiter. ''If I know the client will be out I'll leave a voice mail, but if there's a risk I'll get him or her, I won't make the call.''
Like many of the 150 million people who use cellphones in the United States, Ms. Hanson is intimately familiar with service's limitations and has learned to cope with them. Such accommodations are part of living in the imperfect world of wireless communications.
Cellphones are a paradox of the modern era: the Mars rover may be able to send home color pictures from 35 million miles away, but just try to make a cellular call from Temple Sinai, a synagogue in the middle of New Orleans. You might have better luck on Mars.
Complaints about service and coverage are as common today as they were in the mid-1990's, at the beginning of the cellphone boom. And while the industry has grown enormously since then, by some yardsticks consumer satisfaction has declined.
Yet in many ways cellphone customers have it better than ever. There are dozens of plans, with no end of prepaid options, offered by mainstream carriers and third-party companies like Virgin Mobile. Companies are investing billions of dollars in improving coverage and quality.
In November new rules went into effect that also allow cellphone customers to take their number with them when switching carriers. That may prompt cellphone companies to improve customer service, often a sore point.
Then there are the handsets. Basic phones are dirt cheap or free. Fancier, more expensive ones have sophisticated features enabling them to function as organizers, still and video cameras, and game and music players. In fact, if any electronic object is to become an all-in-one device, it may be the mobile phone.
''The dumb old handset is truly morphing,'' said John Jackson, a telecommunications analyst with the Yankee Group, a market research firm in Boston. ''It's still our phone, but it holds our contacts, lets us play Tomb Raider, holds MP3's, gets our e-mail and has a camera.''
Bandwidth-intensive features, of course, demand high data speeds.
Two years ago, the topic of the hour was 3G, or third generation, an improved cellular infrastructure to handle data at higher speeds. Higher-speed networks -- which transfer data at a slightly faster rate than a dial-up computer modem -- are now largely in place.
And talk of still higher speeds is now in the air. Verizon Wireless, for example, offers speeds of 300 kilobits to 500 kilobits -- comparable to the speed of a cable modem or digital subscriber line -- in three cities, Baltimore, Washington and San Diego.
Still, voice calls remain dominant. The cellular industry gets more than 98 percent of its revenue from plain old talk. But being able to complete those conversations remains a vexation for many customers. Dropped or poor-quality calls are among the most common consumer complaint.
''Coverage is huge, it's just huge, especially with all the mobility that goes on,'' said Jim Straight, the vice president for data and multimedia services at Verizon Wireless, which invests some $4 billion each year in improving its network.
Industry analysts say that the new rules allowing customers to keep a phone number when changing providers may force some improvements in service. But many are skeptical that coverage problems will disappear any time soon. ''Don't expect ubiquity in terms of coverage in 2004,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''You're still going to have your dead zones. The frustration won't go away.''
Keith Mallinson, the Yankee Group's director of wireless research, said consumers were right to be frustrated, because the pace of the carriers' investment in equipment to improve their networks has slowed. ''Over the past couple of years, capital investment has become very constrained,'' Mr. Mallinson said. ''So capacity problems have increased as more subscribers have come on and increased their demand on the network.''
Mr. Mallinson said cellphone users might be expecting too much. ''America is a big country, and it's impossible to have absolutely complete coverage,'' he said. ''Having the same quality we expect on a land line is impossible. When you design a mobile network, it's diminishing returns to fill in those tricky little dead spots.''
Indeed, when Ms. Hanson, the San Francisco recruiter, travels to New York, she finds the spotty coverage there annoying, but she has made her peace with AT&amp;T Wireless's network irregularities. ''It becomes part of your life, so you adapt to it,'' she said.
But when it comes to loyalty, Ms. Hanson, like many cellphone users, is fickle. She is thinking of switching to T-Mobile so she can use a spiffy new BlackBerry device that combines a phone with the ability to send and receive e-mail and browse the Web. She is more likely to make the switch, she said, because she can now take her phone number with her. ''It's on my business card,'' she said. ''I give it to everyone.''
But contrary to what many analysts had predicted, there has been no stampede to switch carriers since the new rules went into effect. And many of those who did switch faced delays and billing problems.
Still, Mr. Mallinson characterized the number portability option as a ''churn accelerator'' in an industry where the turnover, or churn, rate is already 29 percent per year.
Along with a desire for a different type of phone, coverage is one of the main reasons users give for switching carriers. Bill Hall, 56, a vice president of a business in Plano, Tex., that sells telecommunications equipment, often travels to remote parts of Missouri, and coverage is crucial. A year ago, so desperate for better coverage and willing to give up his phone number, Mr. Hall switched from Cingular to Verizon.
''It's not perfect, but I guarantee you it's 99 percent better than it was,'' Mr. Hall said.
Carli Fried, 42, who lives in Jefferson, La., just outside New Orleans, has had four carriers over the past six years, and coverage has proved largely disappointing. Ms. Fried works at a dam on the outskirts of New Orleans and needs reliable coverage to communicate with her husband. And her synagogue, Temple Sinai, is in a densely populated part of the city but within a mysterious black hole of wireless service, she said. T-Mobile's service there was nonexistent, she said, and other carriers she has tried over the years offered little or no signal either.
When number portability went into effect, Ms. Fried switched to Cingular. Her coverage has improved. (She can get a weak signal from inside the synagogue, she said, if she leans ''a little bit to one side or another.'') But she is disappointed with the customer service.
''Cingular has become popular here, but it seems like they don't have enough salespeople to handle all of this,'' said Ms. Fried, whose first Cingular bill was much higher than she had anticipated. ''It's gotten much more complicated, but what remains the same through the past 15 years is the contracts and money and fees attached to your account.''
Some people may go to extremes to adapt to the foibles of a wireless provider. Shortly after signing a two-year contract with Cingular, Ceci Mak discovered that she needed two additional pieces of equipment to operate her phone: a ladder and a lawn chair.
To get even a weak signal at her Los Angeles apartment, Ms. Mak resorted to climbing up a ladder into the attic, then slithering through a crawlspace and out a small window onto the roof of her building, where she sat in a lawn chair making calls until her battery died.
Ms. Mak, 24, now a graduate student at American University in Washington, recently switched to AT&amp;T Wireless. Now, she said, coverage is ''impeccable,'' even on the Metro subway trains.
In a recent Consumer Reports survey of overall customer satisfaction with providers in 12 large cities, Cingular, Sprint and AT&amp;T landed in the middle or near the bottom in four categories: dropped calls, static, busy circuits and lack of coverage.
One of the big winners in the grab for customers has been Verizon Wireless. Nearly one in every four cellphone subscribers in the United States is now signed up with Verizon, which has established itself as having better-than-average coverage and customer service, if also slightly higher prices. In the Consumer Reports survey, Verizon Wireless came out on top in all categories.
In an attempt to retain customers, carriers are offering free minutes, free phones and the promise of improved customer service. Just before number portability went into effect, Ms. Fried received a letter from T-Mobile offering 500 free minutes.
Nevertheless, Ms. Fried and her husband paid a $200 cancellation fee to back out of their contract. She said she and her husband had calculated that if they did not change over, they would have to buy a more expensive handset from T-Mobile to replace a damaged one. In addition, Cingular lets customers carry unused minutes forward to the next month.
Carriers are working to offer services that set them apart from others. Cingular has its rollover plan, and Sprint and Verizon Wireless have followed Nextel's example by introducing walkie-talkie services known as push-to-talk calling. For an additional $10 per month, Sprint's MobiTV feature will send a dozen television channels to a user's phone. And T-Mobile now starts its weekend rates on Fridays. But the array of offerings often ends up confusing people, leading to disputes over charges.
Dan Frederickson, 57, a real estate developer in Ventura, Calif., is disputing a $175 cancellation fee that AT&amp;T Wireless charged when he switched to Verizon so that he could buy the kind of phone he wanted, a multifunction Samsung phone. He said that AT&amp;T had assured him that as a longstanding customer, he was not tied to a contract. AT&amp;T said yesterday that it had issued Mr. Frederickson a credit.
Mr. Frederickson is now delighted with both his phone and his service. ''The appointment thing is awesome, and so is the calendar thing,'' he said.
The only feature missing, he added, is a camera. ''In a perfect world, I'd like a camera,'' he said.
But as Mr. Federickson knows all too well, the wireless world is not perfect. Yet.
It's for You  Plenty to Do While You Wait for That Important Call
CELLPHONES are so plentiful these days, they seem to grow on trees. Regardless of who your carrier is, you will find no lack of choices among handsets.
Even the phones that carriers offer at a discount or give away now have color screens and Web browsers. And camera phones have become almost commonplace, with the newest ones shooting short video clips.
A high-end phone, also known as a smart phone -- one that includes features like a camera and a miniature keyboard and allows text messaging, Web browsing, and e-mail -- costs $100 to $500, depending on the carrier. Here are some of the most popular new multifunction handsets.
The $400 TREO 600 from Palm One has received good reviews since it was introduced in October. It is offered through AT&amp;T Wireless, Cingular and Sprint; T-Mobile plans to offer it within two weeks.
Weighing 5.9 ounces, the phone has a bright color display and includes organizer functions and a camera; it allows Internet access, text messaging and e-mail.
Another device that qualifies as a smart phone is the BlackBerry from Research In Motion. Aimed at the business market, the new BLACKBERRY 7510, which is currently sold by Nextel for $350, has a keyboard for sending e-mail, as well as a speakerphone and a walkie-talkie function.
The new BLACKBERRY 7280, whose color screen has a higher resolution than those of previous models, is sold by AT&amp;T Wireless and Cingular for about $450.
T-Mobile sells another relatively new one, the BLACKBERRY 7230, for $400.
The Yankee Group research firm predicts that about one in five phones sold this year will have a camera.
Several million of those will be the LGVX-6000 from LG Mobile Phone. Flip phones are popular once again, and the four-ounce LGVX-6000, currently offered through Verizon Wireless for $150 (with a rebate available in some places) has been a best seller for the carrier.
The phone has a seven-line color screen and enables users to take and send pictures, download ring tones and games and send text messages.
The NOKIA 3650, offered through AT&amp;T, T-Mobile and Cingular for $150 to $200, has a futuristic dial pad, a camera, a removable memory card and a built-in player for streaming audio and video. It also takes and sends 10-second video clips.
Television is coming to cellphones, too. Sprint now sells the $380 SANYO VM4500, a small flip phone that can display 15-second video clips.
For an additional $10 a month, Sprint will send a dozen or so cable TV channels to the phone. The audio quality may not be the best, and the video is halting, but it's TV. On a phone. What more could you ask for?
KATIE HAFNER
WIRELESS SCORECARD
