The taxpayer advocate, created by Congress to help the public deal with the tax system, proposed yesterday that taxes be withheld from payments to independent contractors, from truck drivers to freelance writers, and that the alternative minimum tax be repealed or at least revised so that it no longer applies to the middle class.
The advocate, Nina E. Olson, also said it was vital that the Internal Revenue Service develop a serious research capability to understand how changes in the economy are affecting taxpayers, the amounts they pay and how some people escape taxes.
Congress created the taxpayer advocate office in 1998 after hearings into whether the I.R.S. had been abusing taxpayers. Subsequent investigations found no evidence of any systematic mistreatment of taxpayers, but by then Congress had enacted several changes, including creating a small office to look at the tax system from the point of view of taxpayers and how to make the system easier and fairer.
Ms. Olson said she hoped that her 509-page report would spur serious discussion on Capitol Hill about growing unfairness to honest taxpayers and the almost complete lack of I.R.S. capacity to do basic research into how the tax system affects them. Congress requires an annual report from the advocate listing in order of significance the biggest problems faced by taxpayers. Ms. Olson listed reform or repeal of the alternative minimum tax first, but it was her second recommendation, to withhold taxes from payments to independent contractors, that seems likely to stir the most opposition.
For years, the number of workers who are classified as independent contractors, rather than employees, has been rising. Debate has raged in economic conferences, Congress and in courthouses over whether this means more freedom for workers, especially those in intellectual jobs, to move about as free agents or whether it is in significant part just a tax dodge. Federal law requires that income, Social Security and Medicare taxes be withheld from the paychecks of employees, but not from payments to independent contractors.
Ms. Olson proposed a basic withholding rate of 5 percent on payments to independent contractors, with lower rates for those in low-margin businesses. She said her proposal would ''level the playing field'' between companies that comply with the law and those that evade taxes by not properly classifying workers as employees, from whose paychecks taxes are withheld, or by not reporting payments made to contractors.
Ms. Olson also said it would be fair to individuals by reducing the number of people who do not report part or all of their income and may not even file tax returns because there is no record of their income. She said it would also reduce burdens on people who fail to set aside money for taxes and end up in debt to the government.
A labor lawyer who represents the management side, Nancy Joerg in St. Charles, Ill., said the proposal was the wrong way to attack tax cheating among entrepreneurs who file a tax return with a Schedule C, which is used by many small businesses to report income and expenses.
''There are many legitimate contractors,'' said Ms. Joerg, a partner in Wessels &amp; Pautsch, ''and to categorize all of them as tax cheats and take away all of the entrepreneurial advantages of being an independent contractor'' and ''imposing additional costs onto independent contractors just to discourage the classification of people as independent contractors is misguided.''
Ms. Joerg said Schedule C tax cheating would diminish with ''more employer education'' about how to properly classify people as employees or independent contractors and more enforcement of existing rules.
William F. Gale, a Brookings Institution tax economist who often does freelance consulting, said the withholding proposal ''is a great idea.''
''I am certain that a lot of Schedule C tax cheating is going on,'' he said, citing his own experience with companies that did not want to issue him a Form 1099, which shows money paid to independent contractors. ''A 5 percent withholding rate is not going to bankrupt anybody, but it is going to provide a record of the payment so the taxes get paid.''
The most pressing need, the report said, is repeal of the alternative minimum tax, which critics call the stealth tax because it reduces the deductions that individuals receive for themselves, their spouses and children, their state and local property taxes and some medical bills -- and can even wipe out the standard deduction.
''The A.M.T. is bad policy and its repeal would simplify'' the tax code, Ms. Olson wrote.
The tax, first enacted in 1969, was intended to make sure that very high-income taxpayers cannot escape all income taxes. In 1966, there were 155 taxpayers who made the equivalent of $1 million or more in today's dollars who paid no income taxes, the Treasury disclosed in 1969. The alternative minimum tax was set up for these people.
But by 2010, an estimated 33 million Americans will pay this tax, most of them middle- and upper-middle-class taxpayers who will lose their deductions.
Repeal would allow about 1,500 people with incomes of more than $1 million at the end of the decade to live tax free, according to a computer model that Mr. Gale helped develop.
He said that if the tax were reformed by removing routine deductions taken by the middle class, then only 300,000 taxpayers would pay the tax and about 400 people with million-dollar incomes would pay no tax.
Ms. Olson said a serious research capability could answer that and many other questions and help Congress enact a fairer and more effective tax code.
