SINCE Steve Jobs's return to Apple in 1997, the company's most important new products have all begun with the letter i. There was the iPod, of course, and the iMac, and groundbreaking programs like iPhoto (for digital photos), iMovie (for camcorder video), iTunes (for organizing music) and iDVD (for creating homemade DVD's). In every case, Apple's goal was obvious: to create products so simple and creative that people would say, ''iWant, iLove, iBuy.''
At the Macworld Expo in San Francisco last week, Apple unveiled a new version of its ''i'' software suite, now called iLife '04. Because it's on the biggish side (several gigabytes in all), it will no longer be a free download. You'll have to buy it for $50 or get it preinstalled on a new Macintosh.
Each program in the updated suite (except iTunes) offers about a dozen enhancements. For example, the new iMovie offers video trimming with an ''undo'' feature right in the storyboard strip. The iDVD program introduces 20 new professional-looking templates for your DVD menu screens, and can now fit two hours of amazing-looking video onto a disc.
For iPhoto 4, the chief improvement is speed, enough to handle 25,000 photos per collection without bogging down. (Its predecessor, iPhoto 2, got draggy at about 2,000 pictures. For new parents and pet owners, that's about a day's worth of shooting.)
But iLife '04 (for the Mac OS X operating system) also includes a new program called GarageBand. It's designed to let people with even the feeblest musical talent, or even musical interest, create professional-sounding digital recordings. It puts at least as much power into amateur hands as its i-predecessors; all it lacks is the traditional first initial.
You can build a song using three distinct tools. First, GarageBand comes with 1,100 loops: snippets recorded by studio musicians (bass, drums, guitars, strings, keyboards, mallet instruments, horn and string sections, and synthesized choirs). You can drag these snippets into a sequence as though they're tiles, stretch the blocks on the screen to make them play over and over, and layer one instrument upon another. It's a lot of instant gratification, even if you don't know a quarter note from a quarter-pounder.
The loops almost always sound good together -- even when you layer Island Reggae Drums 03 with Nordic Fiddle 01. That's because all of the loops play essentially the same, unchanging chord. (Of course, these days, building a song whose harmony never changes is no barrier to commercial success, as Pink demonstrated with ''Get the Party Started.'')
You can transpose these loops, making them play higher or lower, and even change their tempo. (Indeed, that's one of GarageBand's most impressive bits of magic; how can software make a digital recording play in a different key, or at a different tempo, without distorting it?) Still, that's not quite the same thing as complete freedom to choose chords or melodies. In terms of compositional choices, nonmusicians are pretty much limited to fooling around with when various instruments play, not what.
GarageBand's second primary tool requires a little more training. Using your Mac's U.S.B. jack, you can plug in a MIDI keyboard, guitar or drum pads. (MIDI stands for musical instrument digital interface, and refers to a standard connector for plugging electronic instruments into computers.)
For $100, for example, Apple will sell you a four-octave, touch-sensitive MIDI keyboard that produces no sound of its own. But when plugged into GarageBand, its plastic keys trigger (from the Mac's speakers) the sound of a $50,000 Yamaha grand piano, an orchestra full of strings, the brassy sting of rock-hall trumpets, or any of 185 other sampled instrument sound variations.
At this point, GarageBand is a 64-track digital tape recorder. The program can even count you in with clicks -- the software equivalent of, ''And-a one! And-a two! And-a three! And-a four!'' -- and provide a metronome as you play.
As in more expensive MIDI sequencers (recorders) like Cakewalk, you can then clean up your mistakes by editing the notes, which appear as horizontal bars on a piano-roll grid. You can also perform an old favorite trick of electronic musicians: recording your performance at low speed and then playing it back at a much faster tempo, so that you sound like a virtuoso.
GarageBand's third core feature is direct-to-hard-drive recording. You can sing or play a real-world instrument directly into your Mac's microphone as GarageBand records your performance, and even ''sweeten'' it with studio effects like reverb and chorusing. You can't edit these recordings, except to delete muffed sections and re-record them. You can, however, sing into one track after another, eventually turning yourself into a barbershop quartet, octet or 64-tet.
Using these three musical sources in combination -- prerecorded loops, sampled sounds, live recordings -- you can build a rocking little band right in your Mac. Then you can adjust the relative volume levels of the tracks, add fade-ins and fade-outs, specify the balance of each instrument in the left-to-right stereo field, and finally export the finished product to iTunes. From there, you can download your masterpiece to your iPod, export it as an MP3 file for mailing to friends, use it as royalty-free background music for a movie or presentation, or burn your own CD.
Of course, none of GarageBand's three personalities are particularly new. Loop building is available in Sonic Foundry's Acid Pro 4.0 ($400) or Apple's own $300 program, Soundtrack. MIDI recording has been around for years in programs like Cakewalk and Cubase. Direct-to-disk recording is the norm in the recording and movie industries, too (Pro Tools and Digital Performer, for example).
But judging by their delighted applause, most audience members at Apple's GarageBand demonstrations last week were witnessing these software categories for the first time. This, of course, is precisely Apple's i-software specialty: turning what were once rarefied, expensive, technical tools into simple, inexpensive, everyday programs.
In some places, Apple stripped GarageBand down a tad too far. For example, the program desperately needs some sort of bookmarking feature. And the editing window never shows more than two octaves at a time, which makes it hard to edit piano parts.
The program's heavy pop music orientation can be frustrating, too. The instrument sounds, for example, don't include such expressive choices as trumpet, clarinet, harp or solo violin. (Buying Apple's $100 Jam Pack doesn't help. This expansion pack offers 2,000 more loops, 15 more guitar-amp simulations, 100 more audio effects, and 100 additional instrument sounds. But the new samples are all in the same categories: guitars, vibraphones, drums, basses and keyboard instruments.)
Similarly, GarageBand can quantize your performances -- that is, clean up the timing of recorded notes by nudging them into alignment with the closest sixteenth note, eighth note, or whatever -- but only an entire ''take'' at a time (you can't quantize only a few selected notes). Most seriously of all, GarageBand doesn't let you create tempo changes. Your song can never speed up or slow down, which puts a severe limit on musical expressiveness.
But even in version 1.0, GarageBand is an exciting breakthrough. Not so much for established musicians (although even they may find it useful for practicing, experimenting with arrangements, and rough-draft composing), but for musicians who are yet to be established.
In the ''American Idol'' era, it's clear that commercial talent, if not great musical talent, is always out there, untapped and undiscovered. How can a gifted singer or talented play-by-ear instrumentalist reach what could be a grateful audience? Not by mailing out demo tapes recorded with the church accompanist, that's for sure.
It won't be long before the GarageBand creations of no-name singers and players start popping up on Web sites -- indeed, it won't be long before Web sites start popping up just to accommodate them -- bypassing the talent scouts and gatekeepers of the American recording industry. GarageBand and the Internet give tomorrow's stars their own democratic recording and distribution channels.
That prospect of new artists growing from grass roots is probably what inspired Apple to name the software GarageBand, abandoning its lowercase i naming tradition. But when you consider both the fledgling state of the 1.0 version of this program and the immense musical and commercial forces it could one day unleash, you might conclude that there is, after all, an i-name that might have suited this remarkable software: iPotential.
STATE OF THE ART E-mail: Pogue@nytimes.com
