On the first day of his trial, the confessed killer of Sweden's foreign minister, Anna Lindh, denied on Wednesday that he had intended to murder her but said he could not ignore voices in his head telling him to attack.
Ms. Lindh, who was 46, died of multiple stab wounds one day after she was attacked in a Stockholm department store while shopping on Sept. 10. She had no bodyguard with her at the time, and her death shocked a nation that never quite came to terms with the unsolved murder of Prime Minister Olof Palme in 1986.
''I couldn't resist the voices,'' Mijailo Mijailovic, a 25-year-old Swedish citizen of Yugoslav descent, said in a subterranean high-security court near the Stockholm city center. He was arrested on Sept. 24.
The police are taking pride in bringing quick resolution to a case that reopened the self-questioning inspired by Mr. Palme's death.
Clad in a black sweatshirt and track-suit pants, Mr. Mijailovic, lightly bearded and with close-cropped hair, sat on the front bench of a brightly lit courtroom, sometimes fidgeting but speaking in even and unemotional tones after prosecutors used images taken by surveillance cameras to coax his memories of the day he stabbed Ms. Lindh.
In a confession made public last week, after earlier insisting that he was innocent, Mr. Mijailovic said he believed that the voices in his head came from Jesus Christ. He said the voices spoke in Serbian.
Prosecutors displayed photographs of the red-handled knife with its slightly bloodied four-inch blade that Mr. Mijailovic said he had thrown away as he fled the NK department store after attacking Ms. Lindh. At the time of the killing -- just before a referendum in which Sweden rejected adoption of the euro single currency, against the advice of pro-euro figures like Ms. Lindh -- some people questioned whether he had acted for political reasons. Ms. Lindh, a Social Democrat, was one of Sweden's most popular politicians and had been thought of as a potential prime minister.
But under questioning from the chief prosecutor, Krister Petersson, Mr. Mijailovic denied any political motivations. ''I'm not interested in politics,'' he said. ''It could have been someone other than Anna Lindh.''
Indeed, Mr. Mijailovic's defense lawyer, Peter Althin, demanded that murder charges against his client be withdrawn, since he had not planned the killing in advance and had not intended to take a life. ''Did the voices say anything about killing?'' Mr. Althin asked Mr. Mijailovic. ''No,'' he replied. ''Just attacking?'' Mr. Althin asked. ''Yes.''
The images from surveillance cameras showed Mr. Mijailovic crisscrossing the atrium of the department store. The images did not show the attack.
Prosecutors insisted that the stabbing had been premeditated, arguing that the images from the cameras showed Mr. Mijailovic stalking Ms. Lindh for 14 minutes. They also said sophisticated tests had revealed Mr. Mijailovic's DNA on the knife used in the killing, while traces of her blood had been found on his clothes.
Mr. Mijailovic insisted that he had not been following Ms. Lindh and had seen her only by accident. ''I was on my way out, but I took a wrong turn,'' he said. ''I saw Anna Lindh. Then the voices came.''
If convicted of murder, Mr. Mijailovic could be sentenced to a maximum sentence of life imprisonment. But his lawyer is expected to seek a psychiatric report that could lead to his committal to a medical institution instead.
