For the second consecutive year, Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan had more semifinalists in the Intel Science Talent Search than any other school in the nation.
Stuyvesant, on Chambers Street in Lower Manhattan, had 19 semifinalists, matching its number of last year. A total of 527 high schools entered the competition this year, and Stuyvesant is No. 1 for the 7th time in 11 years.
''We've won before, but this is our centennial year so it couldn't be better,'' said Stanley Teitel, the principal at Stuyvesant.
Among the nation's 300 semifinalists, 155 were from New York State, 3 were from New Jersey and 7 were from Connecticut. Montgomery Blair High School in Silver Spring, Md., was second in the number of semifinalists, with 13.
Other New York schools in the metropolitan area with more than five semifinalists are Byram Hills High School, Armonk, 6; Bronx High School of Science, 6; Midwood High School, Brooklyn, 6; Ward Melville High School, East Setauket, 11; John L. Miller-Great Neck North High School, 6; and Paul D. Schreiber High School, Port Washington, 8.
Over all, a record 1,652 students applied for the awards this year. The 300 semifinalists will receive $1,000 each, and schools will receive $1,000 for each of their semifinalists. Forty finalists are to be announced on Jan. 28. After attending competitions at the Science Talent Institute in Washington, they will be awarded scholarships totaling $530,000.
Mr. Teitel said 120 seniors at Stuyvesant submitted papers for the competition, formerly known as the Westinghouse Science Talent Search. Some of the winning entries included titles such as ''Hybrid Propulsion System Utilizing Solar Energy for Jet Aircraft'' and ''Parents and Their Adolescents: Cross Sectional Comparison of Knowledge About Each Other's Wishes in End-of-Life Health Care.''
The latter is the title for research conducted by Philip Michael Fogel, 17, of Hollis Hill, Queens. As soon as he and other Stuyvesant semifinalists were released from picture-taking after the announcement, Mr. Fogel pulled out his cellphone to tell his parents about the award.
''It's a dream come true,'' he said, adding that he has long been fascinated by medical ethics.
Another Stuyvesant student, Naazia Amina Husain, 17, said that she had tried to convince herself that not winning the competition would be ''no big deal,'' but that she could hardly contain herself after being named a semifinalist.
''I'm really happy. I'm ecstatic, actually,'' she said. Stuyvesant has 741 seniors this year and a total enrollment of 3,043.
''The goal really is not to have more winners but to have more participation,'' said Mr. Teitel, the principal, who noted that the 120 papers submitted by his students came from about a sixth of the senior class.
