''It was not a show about fashion,'' Robert Burke, the fashion director of Bergdorf Goodman, said this evening, after the standing ovation had subsided for Tom Ford's farewell men's wear collection for Gucci. Yet it was, as Mr. Burke was quick to add, everything that fashion can be. It was theater and politics and sex and provocation, in a way that people have come to expect from Mr. Ford, who was mobbed backstage by a claque of well-wishers.
If the event had a faint melancholy flavor it was due to a sense that Mr. Ford may decide to cash in his fashion chips altogether once he leaves Gucci later this year, after his two women's collections, and may head for Hollywood with his companion, the Vogue Hommes editor Richard Buckley, to direct movies, leaving the style scene without its favorite conjurer.
There has always been a decidedly magical aspect to Mr. Ford's trajectory, which followed the designer's fortunes from the days when he was a pretty but unproven long shot brought in to revive a derelict brand-name label to the point where his marketing techniques were taught in seminars at the Wharton School. If, in the Madison Avenue formulation, sex sells, Mr. Ford proved himself a master pitchman for the active libido. For a gay man who came to maturity during the grim age of AIDS, this accomplishment was not inconsiderable.
Both the text and the subtext of tonight's show were sex roles, as always with Mr. Ford, and, not incidentally, masculinity rendered as pastiche. In the past Mr. Ford has mined all manner of manly stereotypes, from 1970's gigolos to Rat Pack smoothies and mustachioed porn stars. For his final Gucci men's show, during the week of Milan collections for fall 2004, he created an amalgam of these types and arrived at a stylized version of the Hugh Hefner hedonist: louche, debonair, cigarette smoking and with a tumbler of Johnny Walker Black Label always, literally, at hand.
Before the English model Will Chalker made the first entrance of the show, carrying a whisky, the runway at the Hotel Diana was briefly darkened to allow a group of scantily clad dancers to scurry into position at one of five stripper poles. The music, when it began, was a mixed tape by the D.J. Mr. Wilson that combined a raunchy club hit by the singer Khia with a response song by the artist Too Short, the lyrics to either one of which might be printable in these pages if hell ever happens to freeze.
Department store buyers said the collection was not conspicuous for its commercial prospects. Mr. Ford ''always said that Gucci was hard-core sex and Yves Saint Laurent was seduction,'' said one buyer, referring to the two lines Mr. Ford designs. ''For this show, he was able to do the sex in your face in a way that he never could before.''
Even so, the clothes had everything necessary to propel sales of the accessories, scent, footwear and luggage that remain the backbone of Gucci's business. Italian manufacturers may still excel at the production of goods that merit the term luxury. But what they have often lacked is the old-fashioned Madison Avenue savvy required to lure consumers into signing on to the putative lifestyle image of a brand.
To see Mr. Ford's presentation of crisp jackets, fitted cardigans, chalk-striped suits, notched lapels, tunic sweaters, blue velvet smoking jackets, lizard-skin loafers, zip-front cardigans, silk jacquard scarves worn inside of shirt collars and Chesterfields detailed with body tracing seams was to enter a fully realized fantasy of what it means to be not just male, but a Gucci man.
That person may be a rat, a lounge lizard, a lush, a user, an over-deliberate sophisticate, a kind of joke on masculinity, but as a type he remains persuasive. Consumers continue to identify with Gucci in a way that it is hard to associate with many products not tied to some form of addiction. There is the Marlboro man, and there is the Gucci man. One is almost as readily recognizable as the other. The fact that this is so might be considered Tom Ford's contribution to fashion and, in an odd way, to culture.
Review/Fashion
