St. John's is unlikely to set records that players and fans will want to celebrate this season, but the team is starting to collect the ones to forget.
The Red Storm fell to Miami, 70-64, last night, ensuring St. John's first losing season at Alumni Hall since the building opened in the 1961-62 season. St. John's has a 1-3 record at its intimate campus home with one regular-season game left, against West Virginia on Jan. 28.
It is the kind of legacy that Grady Reynolds did not want to think about. ''It's another defeat,'' he said. ''We're trying to do what we can do.''
Alumni Hall has usually been reserved for nonconference patsies and the weak draws in the Big East, but there are no gimmes now for the Red Storm (4-9, 0-3 Big East).
Against Miami (11-5, 1-1), St. John's led for only 13 seconds in the second half, and could not overcome 19 turnovers and a game-ending 2-for-13 shooting freeze that matched the weather. St. John's has lost three straight for the first time this season.
Robert Hite scored 18 points, Guillermo Diaz had 15 and Darius Rice 14 to help Miami win its final regular-season game against St. John's as a member of the Big East. Miami moves to the Atlantic Coast Conference next season.
It was probably not in the Red Storm's best interest to run with the Hurricanes, but St. John's fell for the temptation of easy baskets. The Red Storm shot 58.5 percent well into the second half before it went cold.
Reynolds and Elijah Ingram finished with 16 points apiece, and the freshman Daryll Hill had 14, and 6 assists, as well as 5 turnovers.
The Red Storm drew to 66-62 with 1 minute 22 seconds to go. But Miami's William Frisby, coming off an eight-game suspension for undisclosed reasons, blocked a close shot by Lamont Hamilton and and Rice raced the other way with a game-sealing layup.
''It's time for us to make key plays at key times,'' the interim coach Kevin Clark said. ''You can't fault this team for their efforts.''
The Red Storm, showing rare shooting form (53.6 percent), stayed ahead in the first half until Hite stole the ball and raced in for a dunk with a few ticks remaining to nudge Miami ahead, 34-33.
The late turnaround had to have been disheartening for St. John's, playing against a Miami team that had built its record against nonconference no-names like Lubbock Christian and Louisiana-Monroe.
But in the discomfort of home, nothing is to be expected.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
