Still untangling themselves from their decision not to pursue Vladimir Guerrero more aggressively, the Mets moved closer yesterday to signing a right fielder who fits more easily into their budget and whose questions are legal, not medical, as they neared a one-year deal with the former Yankee Karim Garcia.
The Mets are still dogged by questions about Guerrero. The players association has not fully accepted General Manager Jim Duquette's explanation Tuesday that he misspoke in telling reporters Saturday that the Mets had access to medical records on Guerrero's back that caused them to limit their guaranteed proposal to three years. A herniated disk sidelined Guerrero for seven weeks last season and Andrew Rokito, the Mets' physician, had one conversation with Barth Green, the doctor who examined Guerrero this off-season and provided a clean bill of health.
''We're going to investigate through the commissioner's office to see if the basic agreement was violated and Vladimir's rights were respected,'' Michael Weiner, a union lawyer, said yesterday by telephone.
The basic agreement prevents teams from sharing medical information on free agents.
Duquette's comments would have been damaging had they interfered with Guerrero's negotiations with the Angels. But on Monday he passed a physical and signed a five-year, $70 million contract.
The Mets are close to making more humble announcements. They were nearing deals with Garcia and Todd Zeile, who would return to the team and serve as a reserve infielder. Duquette, monitoring the renovations at the team's spring training complex in Port St. Lucie, Fla., yesterday, said through a spokesman that negotiations with both players were moving forward.
Garcia, a left-handed hitter, hit .262 with 11 home runs for the Indians and the Yankees last season, including .305 with 6 home runs in 151 at-bats with the Yankees. He would most likely make Timo Perez a reserve outfielder and either platoon with Roger Cedeño or have the chance to win the everyday job.
''If they viewed him as what they already have, they wouldn't have signed him,'' said Garcia's agent, Bobby Barad, who said that a deal was close and that Garcia could take a physical next week.
The Bergen Record reported yesterday that the Mets had nearly completed a one-year, $850,000 deal with Garcia. Barad said that by combining guaranteed money and incentives, the contract was in that range.
Never graceful, Garcia should still be an improvement defensively over Cedeño. The Yankees were surprised at how much ground Garcia covered, but his best asset was a strong throwing arm.
Garcia, who was not offered a contract by the Yankees, needs to resolve charges that he fought with a groundskeeper in the Yankees' bullpen at Fenway Park during an American League Championship Series game on Oct. 11. Garcia, the former Yankees reliever Jeff Nelson and the groundskeeper, Paul Williams, pleaded not guilty Jan. 7 to charges of assault and battery. A pretrial hearing was set for Feb. 5 for the players and Feb. 24 for Williams.
''I don't think anyone views this as anything that would affect his baseball life,'' Barad said.
Securing Garcia and Zeile would leave the back of the starting rotation as the Mets' only unaddressed need, and the Mets will probably attend workouts for the Cuban right-hander Maels Rodriguez on Jan. 22 in San Salvador and Scott Erickson, who missed last season after having elbow surgery, next week in Arizona.
The Mets and the Yankees were 2 of 26 teams that sent representatives to watch Shingo Takatsu, the career saves leader in Japan, throw yesterday in Irvine, Calif., the agent Joe Urbon said. Takatsu met with the Yankees in November and will decide by Jan. 26 whether to accept a $2.4 million offer to return to the Yakult Swallows or pitch in the United States, most likely as a setup man.
BASEBALL
