A FEW years back, when work would spill outside of office hours, Oren Michels would set up his laptop on the desk in the spare room of his home in Lafayette, Calif. While the rest of his family was watching a movie or sitting together in the living room, Mr. Michels, now the president of Colt Express Outsourcing Services, a human-resources benefits administration firm in Walnut Creek, Calif., would sit alone in a separate room, tethered to the Internet by a cable.
But lately he shuns the spare room and his desk. Thanks to the wireless home network he has set up with a technology called Wi-Fi, Mr. Michels can gain access to the Internet -- and his work -- with a laptop anywhere in the house. Or even on the back porch.
''It took me out of my home office and put me wherever I wanted to sit,'' said Mr. Michels, a 40-year-old father of two. ''Now I can sit on the couch doing e-mail while my family is watching television and not be accused of being anti-social.''
''I absolutely never sit at my desk in my office anymore,'' he added. ''Wi-Fi does allow me to be part of the family thing.''
Others, too, are finding that a wireless network can add flexibility to working at home and sometimes ease the integration of work and family life.
''In a society with both partners in a family working, the more you can do at home, the better it is,'' said Michael Heylin, a consultant who provides computer services to small businesses and home offices in the San Francisco area. ''Wi-Fi makes it easier.''
Cinda Voutselas certainly thinks so. Ms. Voutselas, who lives in Marin County, north of San Francisco, and works as a project manager for a software development firm, takes her three young sons to day care most days and then returns to the office that her husband, Chuck, set up in their garage.
When one of her 2-year-old twin sons wasn't feeling well and had to stay home recently, she was confident that she could still get back to her customers in a timely manner. Using Wi-Fi, she connected to her clients from the living room, where she was also able to keep an eye on the ailing son, Andros.
''Wi-Fi is great when my kids are sick,'' Ms. Voutselas said. ''I don't have to be in the office.''
Even if the children are well, not having to stay secluded from them in a home office can be important for parents who work from home.
Susan Majerus, vice president for brand strategies at the Intelec Group, a public relations firm, works from an upstairs office in her home in Cape Check, Ariz. ''If my son is downstairs doing his homework at the kitchen table, I can go downstairs and sit with him,'' she said. ''He's doing his work and I'm doing mine.''
Today, setting up a Wi-Fi network is relatively inexpensive -- Wi-Fi cards and access points can be had for less than $100 apiece -- but is not without its complications, including network security. ''I had some problems setting up the encryption to ensure security,'' Ms. Majerus said. ''I had a friend come in to help me with that.''
Wi-Fi can also encounter obstacles in older homes. ''The older the construction, the less likely it is that the radio waves will pass through the walls,'' said Mr. Michels, who recently set up a wireless network for a friend in a new house in the San Francisco Bay area.
Other potential sources of interference include microwave ovens, some mobile phone models and nearby competing Wi-Fi networks -- problems hard to predict and sometimes resolved only by trial and error. ''Sometimes you get a good connection and sometimes you get a mediocre connection,'' said Ms. Voutselas, adding that signal strength had no apparent relationship to how far she was from the wireless access point that sends out the Wi-Fi signals.
Ms. Majerus said she often had interference on her Wi-Fi network. And neighbors have Wi-Fi as well, forcing her ''to constantly change channels on the connection,'' she added.
Setting up a Wi-Fi network can lead to a domestic-technology squabble even for the tech-savvy. Mr. Heylin, who makes his living setting up networks in other people's homes and small offices, has not been able to get his Wi-Fi network to extend into his own living room, which is on the other side of his office wall. He has come across similar situations in certain homes and apartment buildings in which Wi-Fi signals won't carry even a few yards.
''With a wired network, you never worry about these things,'' Mr. Heylin said.
Still, for all the caveats, users often say the main advantage that Wi-Fi provides in the home-office balancing act is sometimes also the main drawback: it makes it too easy to do more work.
''There's a real problem in separating work from play these days, and Wi-Fi doesn't help,'' said Stephen Fogarty, the president of Sextant Business Solutions in Sparta, N.J., a services firm that helps companies make the transition from older technology, like mainframe computers. ''You have the office with you wherever you are.''
Greg Heaps knows what Mr. Fogarty means. Mr. Heaps, vice president for marketing at Cerberian, a software-security firm in Draper, Utah, uses Wi-Fi at home and said that to his surprise, ''I found myself doing work on Thanksgiving.''
Seth Kaplan, who runs Kaplan Associates Public Relations from a home office in Sudbury, Mass., said that his Wi-Fi connection made him more confident about his ability to finish work when it suits his personal life but also sometimes prompts his wife to say, ''Get away from that machine!''
''I tend to get trapped in front of the PC,'' he admitted.
Once people start using Wi-Fi, there seems to be no turning back.
''Sometimes I realize that I've pushed it too far and that Wi-Fi has given me too much access to work,'' Ms. Majerus said. ''But I would hate to go backwards.''
Rather than spurning new-found wireless freedom, many recommend a little discipline.
''We have to be in control ultimately and get our priorities in order,'' Mr. Heaps said. ''You have to say, hey, the e-mail will be there tomorrow. My family is more important.''
''It's a discipline,'' said Mr. Heaps, a father of four. ''You have to know when to turn it off.''
If the user can strike the right balance, Wi-Fi can be liberating.
''We had people over the other weekend and were talking about not having a guest room,'' said Mr. Michels, the president of the benefits-administration firm. Now, with Wi-Fi, ''it's only a matter of time'' before he puts a guest bed in the spare room he uses as an office, since he can take his work elsewhere.
''But I still haven't figured out what to do with all the papers on my desk,'' he mused. ''They haven't done Wi-Fi for papers yet.''
Correction:  January 17, 2004, Saturday  An article in Circuits on Thursday about the use of wireless networks in adding flexibility to work at home gave an incorrect hometown supplied by the company Web site of Susan Majerus, a public relations executive who uses such a system. She lives in Cave Creek, Ariz., not Cape Check.
