A New Jersey high school cheerleader's dream trip to Hawaii to perform during the Hula Bowl this weekend ended early Monday when she fell to her death, apparently accidentally, from an upper balcony at a resort hotel on the island of Maui, the authorities said yesterday.
While detectives in Hawaii pressed their investigation for an explanation of the mysterious plunge that killed the cheerleader, Lauren Crossan, classmates, cheerleading teammates, friends and teachers in Randolph, N.J., struggled for a second day to accept the death of a vivacious young woman with an ever-present smile.
"They're still grieving,'' said Richard Martone, the vice principal of Randolph High School, in western Morris County. "You walk by and they're in groups in the hallway, still crying and hugging each other. They're still trying to deal with it. It's going to take some time. She was an energetic, outgoing, positive young woman. We all knew her here, and here she was wonderful.''
Over the weekend, Ms. Crossan, 18, and two other Randolph High cheerleaders, Michelle D'Aconti and Mandy Mason, left their home in a jubilant mood, friends said, for a week of festivities on Maui with hundreds of other cheerleaders from around the country who had won national competitions last June to perform at halftime of the Hula Bowl on Saturday. To help finance their trip, the three sold candy and obtained sponsors in recent weeks.
Within hours of their arrival at the Hyatt Regency Maui on Kaanapali Beach, Ms. Crossan's nude body was found about 7:45 Monday morning in shrubbery at the base of one of the hotel's three residential towers.
Last night, an Associated Press report quoted the Maui County medical examiner as saying that early toxicology results found the presence of alcohol in Ms. Crossan's system. ''We don't have the quantity yet,'' Dr. Anthony Manoukian, the medical examiner, told The A.P.
In a statement issued earlier yesterday, the Maui Police Department said that she had died of "multiple traumatic injuries consistent with a fall.''
The statement by the police said foul play was not involved and that Ms. Crossan's death had been classified as an accident.
The statement, issued by Lt. Jamie J. Becraft, a police spokesman, said Ms. Crossan befriended a male guest at the hotel sometime late Sunday and eventually went to the ninth-floor room of two young men from Folsom, Calif., identified as Eric B. Larson, 20, and Donald L. Devorss, 19. Lieutenant Becraft said detectives believed that she fell from the balcony of their room.
Detectives detained and questioned both men for several hours and then released them on Tuesday without filing any criminal charges, the lieutenant said.
Earlier yesterday, The Honolulu Star-Bulletin quoted another Maui police lieutenant, Tivoli Faaumu, as saying the police had found Ms. Crossan's clothing in the young men's room. The Star-Bulletin quoted Lieutenant Faaumu as saying the two young men had told detectives that Ms. Crossan was in their room when they went to sleep early Monday and was gone when they woke up.
The paper reported that Lieutenant Faaumu had said the two men initially made some ''inconsistent statements'' to detectives but that the inconsistencies were resolved during additional questioning.
Neither Lieutenant Faaumu nor Lieutenant Becraft responded last night to telephone messages seeking an explanation of the inconsistencies, and how and why Ms. Crossan had become undressed.
The Star-Bulletin also said Ms. Crossan had called her group's chaperone for the trip, the mother of one of the two other Randolph cheerleaders, about 1:30 a.m. Monday to say she was returning to the cheerleaders' room in the hotel. When she failed to come back, her friends started looking for her but could not find her, the newspaper said.
The general manager of the hotel, Barry Lewin, said yesterday that Ms. Crossan and her friends were staying in the hotel's Atrium Tower. Her body was found outside a nine-story adjacent building called Lahaina Tower. The two California men were staying in the Lahaina Tower, Mr. Lewin said.
Officials at Randolph High said they learned of Ms. Crossan's death on Monday evening and started making arrangements for guidance counselors to meet with grief-stricken classmates on Tuesday. On Tuesday night, the Rev. John Connell, a priest at the Resurrection Parish, a Roman Catholic church in Randolph that Ms. Crossan's family attends, held a candlelight vigil in her memory that he said drew about 400 people, including family members, classmates and friends.
A youth minister, Dolores Hallock, asked if anyone wanted to share any thoughts about Ms. Crossan. But the invitation was met with silence; everyone was apparently too stunned to speak, Father Connell said.
Then the mourners were invited to light candles near the altar in Ms. Crossan's memory. Many came forward, sobbing.
''You deal with the mystery of losing someone so young and then you add to that the mystery of how it happened,'' Father Connell said. ''It's just overwhelming.''
