The president and Congress should immediately begin work to achieve health insurance coverage for all Americans by 2010, the National Academy of Sciences said on Wednesday.
''It is time for our nation to extend coverage to everyone,'' the academy's Institute of Medicine said, in a report intended to put the issue back atop the national agenda.
The report, summarizing three years of work by a panel of 15 experts, concluded, ''Universal insurance coverage is an important and achievable goal for the country.''
The academy is an independent, nonpartisan body chartered by Congress. It did not endorse a specific legislative proposal or estimate the cost of its recommendations. But Mary Sue Coleman, the president of the University of Michigan, who was co-chairwoman of the panel, said, ''The economic cost to the country from the poorer health and premature deaths of uninsured people is in the range of $65 billion to $130 billion a year.''
The report pointed out that because uninsured people received much less medical care than those with insurance, they tend to be sicker. About 18,000 people die each year as a result of not having insurance, it said.
Since President Bill Clinton's plan for universal coverage failed in 1994, Congress has taken steps to expand coverage for children and for people who lose or switch jobs.
But the panel said such incremental steps were inadequate. ''Comprehensive reform of the health insurance system, rather than expansion of the safety net, is essential,'' it said.
Most of the options considered by the panel assume that private insurers will continue to provide coverage for millions of Americans. But the report said that ''federal leadership and federal dollars are necessary,'' and it suggested a larger federal role than many conservatives would accept. For example, it said, the federal government should set nationwide standards to establish ''a uniform minimum level for coverage and benefits.''
Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, said that universal coverage by 2010 was ''not realistic.''
At a meeting with reporters on Monday, Mr. Thompson said: ''I just don't think it's in the cards. I don't think, administratively or legislatively, that it's feasible.''
On Wednesday, Mr. Thompson added that the Bush administration was ''committed to helping as many Americans as possible, as quickly as possible.''
Bob Dole, the former Republican leader of the Senate, endorsed the academy's call to action.
''If properly framed, the lack of coverage for 43 million Americans can be one of the big, big issues in the election'' this year, Mr. Dole said.
Another Republican, Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the Senate majority leader, commended the panel. But he said, ''I am concerned that the report may not focus enough on the reasons why health care costs continue to rise and how to pay for any reform.''
Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, said he hoped to reignite a national debate on ways to guarantee health insurance for all. ''It's doable,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''It's essential. This is, I believe, the single most important domestic issue facing our country.''
Dr. Arthur L. Kellermann, co-chairman of the panel, said: ''This is not just an issue for the uninsured or the least fortunate among us. It's a matter of enlightened self-interest for everyone.''
