THE ground is frozen solid, but at least the sky does not get dark now at 4 p.m., the way it did just a few weeks ago. The geraniums in my window are putting out new leaves, and we gardeners are quickening too. We are hearing the siren call of the catalogs and poring over them long into the night. It is almost as if, by morning, we expect cascading river birches, orange coneflowers and blue bamboo to be flourishing in the garden. A midwinter night's dream.
We are hungry for something new. But also for something so old it has been rediscovered. And the plants we had to have two years ago, like Scabiosa Butterfly Blue or Verbena Homestead Purple, are now so out of fashion, you can't find them even at Target and Wal-Mart.
Tony Avent, the president of Plant Delights Nursery in Raleigh, N.C., watches the peaks and valleys of plant fashions like a commodities trader. Daylilies are no longer faddish (thank you, Lord). Hostas are out, too (finally). ''If you introduced a new hosta at the Perennial Plant Association, you'd be booed off the stage,'' Mr. Avent said. But wait a few years and even hostas will be in again.
So what seems new? The craze continues to center on tropicals (in pots and in outdoor beds) and hot colors. Barry Yinger, a plant explorer and new products manager for Hines Horticulture, a wholesale nursery in Irvine, Calif., remembers when no one wanted bright colors. People, he said, wanted to conform, ''like the 1950's.'' Now people want to be bold, with colors to match. Instead of mauvy, misty English plantings, try some bright orange cannas. If you have to have mauve, try something exotic and spiky, like the violet prickly pear, Opuntia violacea Santa Rita, already out of stock at Yucca Do Nursery in Hempstead, Tex. (www.yuccado.com, 979-826-4580).
Mr. Yinger has a mail order nursery, Asiatica, in Pennsylvania, which sells rare Asian plants (www.asiaticanursery.com). Last summer he got the same hot, wet growing conditions we all had in the Northeast, days that felt more like Bangkok than Bayonne.
If we get that again this year, why fight it? Why not plant bananas, canna, elephant ears and crinums -- even if they die with the first frost. ''Go for something seasonal and enjoy it,'' Mr. Yinger said. His latest love is Crinum pendunculatum Festive, a variegated crinum with upswept leaves, which can grow to nine feet over a period of years. Besides, you can always wheel your tropicals indoors for the winter.
The trouble is, we can't even count on another warm, wet summer in the Northeast. But switching from drought to wet to drought again will make us all better gardeners. Mr. Avent, for one, grows drought-tolerant yuccas on the dry top of his raised bed, and moisture-loving pitcher plants on the bottom, where it is damp.
At the moment, Renny Reynolds, a garden and event designer, is obsessed with creating a yellow garden. With Jack Staub, he is constantly adding plants to Hortulus Farm, their 100-acre place in Wrightstown, Pa. He just ordered a golden-leafed bean-tree, Catalpa bignonioides Aurea, and a golden-leafed locust tree, Robinia pseudoacacia Frisia from Forestfarm, one of his favorite nurseries in Williams, Ore. (www.forestfarm.com, 541-846-7269).
John Elsley, the director of horticulture at Klehm's Song Sparrow Perennial Farm, in Avalon, Wis. (800-553-3715, www.songsparrow.com), says we should get over our infatuation with pampered English roses and delphiniums and instead get on with planting sturdy, versatile natives. One of Mr. Elsley's new favorites is a cascading form of river birch, Betula nigra Summer Cascade.
Those who can feel another dry summer coming might want to order some of the new Echinaceas or coneflowers, now available in startling pinks and clear oranges. Ruby Giant produces five-inch-wide, clear-pink, fragrant flowers. Echinacea Art's Pride, or Orange Meadowbrite, is the first orange coneflower. Many companies, including Plant Delights Nursery (www.plantdelights.com, 919-772-4794) and Wayside Gardens, in Hodges, S.C., (www.waysidegardens.com, 800-213-0379) are offering them this year. An endearing oddball, Echinacea purpurea Doubledecker, has a second set of pink petals in its cone; Jelitto Perennial Seeds (www.jelitto.com, 502-895-0807).
Gardeners in search of rugged, versatile beauties might also consider Rozanne, a hardy geranium that stands up to heat and humidity and is now widely available. I fell for Lily formosanum, a giant white lily sold by Plant Delights that flowers from seed the first year. It will reach two feet the first year, seven the third. ''It seeds itself around our bog, but it will grow in the worst, driest area,'' Mr. Avent said. It grows in shade, too, but with less sun it won't stand up. ''Like a good drunk, it needs somebody to lean on,'' he said.
Another plant that will take wet or dry conditions is Georgia Pancake, a prostrate form of amsonia (or blue star), which will ramble beneath other plants and keep weeds down. The soft green needle-like foliage and pale blue flowers make a great contrast under an agave cactus, which no one wants to weed.
Thanks to tissue culture, hardy ferns are plentiful. Ghost is a cross between an American Lady and a Japanese Painted fern. It grows to about three feet, with ghostly gray-green fronds, and can be found along with other ferns at Hardy Tropicals, in Chimacum, Wash. (360-531-0804, www.hardytropicals.com).
And how about planting a drought-tolerant lawn? My own heart was stolen by Hachita, a blue grama grass that thrives in both sandy soils and clay. It grows to about four inches, before sending up seed heads on delicate 15-inch stems. (Available from High Country Gardens, in Santa Fe, N.M.; www.highcountrygardens .com, 800-925-9387.)
And please, try to kick the impatiens habit. ''It's so boring, like white gravy,'' Mr. Yinger said. But even impatiens can be dressed up this summer. His advice is to go ahead and stick ''some crazy caladiums'' into the planting bed with them.
NATURE
