LEAVE it to the Dutch to make suburbia cool.
The Netherlands, a country that has set the international design standard for everything from glassware to corporate headquarters, made its first comprehensive attempts to grapple with suburban sprawl eight years ago. With new developments gobbling up land between the country's major cities, government officials laid out regulations, known as Vinex guidelines, on zoning and planning for the 750,000 new suburban housing units they predicted would have to be built over two decades. They called for new suburbs to be placed as close as possible to existing cities, and gave fresh power to private developers at the expense of government housing agencies.
Along with a few real-estate scandals, the guidelines have produced plenty of unremarkable architecture. Here in Ypenburg, a Vinex development stitched together from parts of four existing towns between Delft and The Hague and set eventually to include more than 11,000 units, the new houses look for the most part like those in a conventional American suburb, with rows of reassuringly old-fashioned homes and patches of lawn.
But one particular section of Ypenburg, a piece of land sliced through with canals and known as Subdivision 10, has been attracting international attention for its inventive blend of contemporary design, dense and decidedly urban in spirit, and the open community spaces and parkland often found in suburbs. The subdivision remains a work in progress; while the first tenants moved in a little more than two years ago, some sections, including one designed by the Amsterdam-based architect Herman Hertzberger, are still under construction. Even in its unfinished state, the subdivision suggests something rare, even in the Netherlands: a suburb with architectural flair.
Throughout the subdivision, cars are pushed to the periphery, gardens are open to neighbors and walking paths meander among houses. The canals divide the area into several islands, each with its own interpretation of suburban living. The result is communal and picturesque. When the weather is nice, the courtyards are filled with the sound of children's laughter as they make their way to playgrounds.
''We came here because my wife fell in love with the design,'' said one resident, Ton Hogervorst. From where he stood in his backyard, there was not a car or a paved surface in sight. Extensive plantings helped soften the hard edges of the rooflines, which stood dramatically against the sky.
Designed by five well-regarded Dutch firms, Subdivision 10 features a remarkable variety of architecture on a site only a few football fields long. One of those firms, the young Rotterdam office MVRDV, produced the master plan, as well as the design of the first group of houses to be completed. It collaborated on the project with Amvest, a large Dutch developer.
MVRDV's master plan for Subdivision 10 has been praised for the way it challenges the cookie-cutter sameness of most suburban developments. It is ''remarkable even by Dutch standards,'' said Aaron Betsky, director of the Netherlands Architecture Institute, which awarded the units designed by MVRDV its N.A.I. Prize in December 2002 as the best project that year by Dutch architects under the age of 40. The jury called the design ''a very elegant reaction against uniformity.''
At the same time, the participating firms have been chided for lavishing so much of their attention -- and so much of a modest budget -- on the facades of the buildings and common grounds. The architects have seemed more concerned, critics suggest, with how the project would look in a magazine than with what its residents would make of the buildings, or how well they would age.
The subdivision ''is quite clever and very witty,'' said Mechthild Stuhlmacher, a Dutch architect based in Rotterdam. But the quality of the interior spaces, she said, is ''very ordinary, very cheap.''
Karin de Man, who a year and a half ago bought one of the subdivision's few separate single-family houses -- most of the units are apartment blocks or town houses -- said she and some of her neighbors had experienced persistent leaks through their roofs and doors. She also complained that there were not enough barriers to keep small children from the canals, a pressing issue, she said, given that a 3-year-old drowned last year in a neighboring subdivision. ''It's really dangerous,'' she said. ''There aren't any safety mechanisms built in.''
Other residents lamented that maintaining the design unity of the common areas requires that they not fence off their yards or alter the outside of their homes, among other prohibitions. ''We did make a decision early on to concentrate on the idea of exterior atmosphere,'' said Jacob van Rijs, an MVRDV architect. ''The cost of that was that we didn't have as much to spend on the interiors.''
Still, there is no mistaking that these houses possess an architectural charisma that is almost unheard of by American suburban standards. That's particularly true given that they are pitched not to some elite clientele with expensive architectural tastes, but squarely to the Dutch middle class.
Of the subdivision's 768 units, 58 percent will be rentals, with about two-thirds of those market-rate apartments and the rest subsidized by the government. (A small number of apartments were set aside for disabled tenants.) The remaining 322 units are owner-occupied, with some detached houses selling for more than half a million dollars.
Despite a punishingly tight budget, MVRDV produced in its section a striking collection of clean-lined gabled buildings faced in a range of eye-catching materials, from green and blue polyurethane to red tile. Each one suggests a child's sketch of a house or a board game piece blown up to huge scale.
Owner-occupied units are mixed together with the rentals. ''The difference between rich and poor is not so evident,'' Mr. van Rijs said.
Across one of the shallow canals is a more communal group of apartment blocks by the Amsterdam architect John Bosch that have deep brown brick exteriors and courtyards with walls covered in bright green panels and wires that will eventually hold creeping vines. Many of the units designed by Mr. Bosch, which share courtyards in the front, have private balconies in back opening onto one of the canals.
Nearby is a more upscale collection of boxy units designed by the Amsterdam firm Claus and Kaan and called Rietvelden, after the Dutch modernist master Gerrit Rietveld. A fourth section, a handsome and resolutely horizontal arrangement of black-and-white apartment blocks by Mr. Hertzberger, is due to be finished a few months from now, and will include 52 rental units and 108 for sale. That section, in particular, has density that suggests urban far more than suburban architecture.
In the end, design critics may value the development's design more than the residents do. Perhaps because high-quality design is so ubiquitous in the Netherlands, many put architecture below proximity to schools and jobs on their list of priorities. ''It's very difficult to get housing in this whole area,'' explained Michel de Neef, 36, who lives in one of the MVRDV units. ''And it's nice for all of the children. They can play freely here because there is no car traffic.''
Corne van Geest, a 29-year-old physical therapist who lives in one of the apartment blocks with the green courtyards designed by Mr. Bosch, said he had chosen the spot because it was near both The Hague and Naaldwijk, the small town where he works. Though his apartment turns a dramatic face toward the outside world, there was nothing remarkable about the inside, with its linoleum in the kitchen and vertical blinds covering the sliding glass door in the living room. The design detail Mr. van Geest said he was most excited about was a cabinet that he had built and installed in an upstairs room with his father.
Margreeth Slok, who along with her 12-year-old daughter, Anna, was among the earliest residents in the MVRDV section, said she pays the equivalent of about $800 per month for three bedrooms on two floors topped by an attic. In Anna's room, posters of the rappers Eminem and 50 Cent covered plain wallboard. It looked like the kind of middle-American suburb where a Courtney or Max might live. But if you stepped over the piles of clothes on the floor and looked out the window, a memorable architectural panorama came into view.
Indeed, if a suburb with this sort of design pedigree opened near New York or San Francisco, one could imagine the hipster couples with their designer baby strollers lining up to sign a lease.
Mr. Betsky said that the whole of Subdivision 10 offered lessons for any developer of American suburbs who hoped to give them some personality and sense of place: ''It's tied directly to the natural setting and to nearby urban services, and it mixes different income groups -- all those things that American suburbs can't get right,'' he said.
The irony is that the Vinex program represents an effort by the Dutch to make their suburbs conform more closely to America's. Government officials deliberately planned it as a low-rise suburb on the edge of existing cities, but private developers essentially took charge of the new projects.
The result has been a substantial shift in the traditional balance between government planners and builders, said Naomi Felder, an architect in Mr. Bosch's office. ''All of a sudden contractors and developers have the most money and power in the building process,'' she said.
Still, it was only because of public involvement that Ypenburg wound up with architectural character. The Hague owned the land, and held competitions for each subdivision. Developers teamed up with architects, as Amvest did with MVRDV, in an effort to promote some architectural innovation.
In other new suburbs where there is less government control, Ms. Felder added, the results are usually mediocre. ''In most Vinex areas, what happens is you get lots of traditional single-family houses with a tilted roof and a private garden,'' she said. ''Developers always think that will sell the best.''
That has always been the easiest explanation for why American suburbs have rarely taken any design chances: There is a limited market for daring architecture on the scale of a large development. In fact, many suburbs in the United States are designed without the direct involvement of any architects. But Chris Mayer, director of the Paul Milstein Center for Real Estate at Columbia University, said he expects Americans to become more appreciative of bold design in their suburbs. ''I don't think the name of the architect is going to be important at this point for most consumers,'' he said. ''But more and more, Americans don't want to live in a place where every house looks exactly the same, and as you drive home you can't even tell which driveway is yours.''
Mr. Bosch said his design for Ypenburg attempted to avoid precisely that sort of suburb. ''We really tried to get away from this typical approach, where there is no architectural identity, and if you don't know the name of the street where you're going you can get easily lost,'' he said. ''We wanted to create a new suburb that wasn't parasitic on historical architecture and didn't buy into this fake notion of trying to look like luxury housing.''
As for criticism that he and the other architects who worked within the MVRDV master plan devoted too much energy and budget to their striking exteriors, Mr. Bosch shrugged it off. ''The reality is that 99 percent of suburban projects look awful inside and out,'' he said.
DESIGN DISPATCH  Correction:  January 29, 2004, Thursday  Two picture credits with a front-page article in this section on Jan. 15 about Ypenburg, a suburban development in the Netherlands, misstated the photographer's surname. He is Marco Hillen, not Gillen.
A picture with the continuation of the article, showing the interior courtyard of an apartment building, carried an erroneous credit. The photographer was Mr. Hillen.
