A car bomb exploded outside this city's police headquarters on Wednesday morning, killing the driver and at least 2 Iraqi bystanders and wounding 26 others, most of them policemen, said police officers and the director of the local hospital.
Bearing down on the station in a green sedan, the bomber tried ramming his car through the front gate at about 8 a.m., only to be met with gunfire from policemen outside, police officers said. The car then detonated outside the station's outer wall, sending shrapnel and body parts from the bomber flying. The blast shattered the doors and windows of the police station and the windows of a secondary school next door, where two students, a teacher and an assistant principal were wounded.
''This is not a kind of resistance,'' said Hadi al-Karkhi, the director of the school, as another man picked up the remnants of a human jaw, with several teeth still intact, from the grass in the school's front yard. ''I have a message for the suicide bombers. You go find the American camps. You don't have to come here, to the schools, to the civilians. I'm a member of the Iraqi Islamic Party, and I denounce such actions, such oppression.''
Other body parts were also scattered outside the school, which is usually attended by 750 students. Charred metal bits from the car had landed in the school's inner courtyard and atop its roof. Local administrators had just moved the school to this location a month earlier.
Two other improvised bombs were found in the area after the car bomb exploded, and they were defused, said Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, a spokesman for the coalition military forces. The two people killed in the bombing were an elderly man in the area and a street cleaner, said Sarmind Jawa, director of the city's hospital.
Baquba is about 30 miles northeast of Baghdad inside the so-called Sunni Triangle, where guerrilla fighters continue to mount ambitious attacks on American-led military forces. The town is populated by Sunni and Shiite Arabs, and there are signs that sectarian violence could be emerging here. Last Friday, a suicide bomber armed with an explosive fashioned from a propane tank blew himself up outside a Shiite mosque as prayers were ending, killing 5 people and wounding 37.
The crater left by the car bomb on Wednesday morning was relatively shallow, measuring only half a foot deep and four feet across. A shattered police car sat about 50 feet away, one front fender hanging limply from the frame, bits of glass covering the seats. American soldiers from the Fourth Infantry Division had blocked off parts of the area with Humvees, and two Apache helicopter gunships flew low overhead.
Several policemen standing by the debris of the station's outer wall griped about the lack of security measures. There are no concrete walls or barriers set up around the headquarters, they said, as there are around other stations in the area.
''We put up this barbed wire according to the recommendation of the coalition forces, but it's clearly not enough,'' said one of the police officers, Umad Kadum Rahmin. ''Why didn't anyone do anything about it?''
The policemen began pushing back a large crowd gathering on the wide road in front of the station. One police officer carrying an AK-47 suddenly leveled it at a wiry man wearing a gray coat. The officer grabbed the man from the crowd, frisked him, then let him go.
''His features looked suspicious,'' said the officer, who declined to give his name. ''I'd never seen him before. He put his two hands in his pockets.''
General Kimmitt said there was an average of just over three attacks a day on Iraqi security forces, and one a day on Iraqi civilians. Guerrilla fighters are attacking the occupation military forces about 17 times a day, he added.
One of the more ill-fated assaults came on Tuesday, when a group of insurgents engaged in a firefight with American soldiers near the town of Samarra, 60 miles north of Baghdad. The soldiers killed eight fighters and wounded one, General Kimmitt said. Twenty-six insurgents were captured, he said.
He added that soldiers had also captured Khamis Sirhan al-Muhammad, No. 54 on the American military's list of 55 most-wanted loyalists of Saddam Hussein's deposed government. Mr. Muhammad was caught on Jan. 11 in the town of Ramadi, in a hostile area west of Baghdad. General Kimmitt said Mr. Muhammad was ''an enabler for many of the attacks against Iraqis and coalition forces.''
Elsewhere, two Pakistanis and a Turk traveling with a convoy carrying supplies for occupation forces were killed after they came under fire near Tikrit, Reuters reported, citing United States military and Iraqi police sources. The assailants escaped in their vehicles, said Maj. Josslyn Aberle, a military spokeswoman.
Reuters also reported that a total of 62 Bulgarian soldiers had quit a 480-member peacekeeping unit that is scheduled to be sent to Iraq.
In Washington, the State Department announced the appointment of Francis J. Ricciardone, currently ambassador to the Philippines, as director of the department's policy on Iraq. American officials said that when the American occupation ends officially, the main civilian United States presence in the country will be coordinated by the State Department rather than the Pentagon.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENTS
