More than 450 game wardens, medical workers and volunteers wearing fiberglass protective vests and carrying nets, ropes and guns set out Wednesday to conduct a tiger census in the Sundarbans delta in eastern India.
The 3,700-square-mile delta, the world's largest mangrove forest, is divided roughly in half between India and Bangladesh. For the next week, 23 teams will scour the forest and collect tiger footprints, traveling mostly by boat and doing their best to avoid attack.
''Tigers here are more aggressive because they have to live in a harsh habitat of water and mud,'' Predeep Vyas, field director of the Sundarbans tiger reserve, said Wednesday in a telephone interview. ''We have to be very careful in doing the work.''
The census is part of Project Tiger, a program the Indian government began in 1973 to stem poaching, which had decimated the country's tiger population. Tigers are valued in the booming markets for ancient Chinese folk remedies made from animal parts.
While Indian wildlife groups estimate that as many as 285 tigers died in ''unnatural circumstances'' from 1994 to 1998, tiger populations have recovered. According to censuses conducted every three to four years, the total number of tigers in India grew to 3,642 in 2001 from 1,817 in 1972. The country now has 27 tiger preserves spanning 15,400 square miles.
This year, Bangladeshi game wardens will take part in the Indian tiger census for the first time, Mr. Vyas said, as Bangladesh hopes to carry out its first tiger census in its half of the delta.
Mr. Vyas said the workers, traveling in boats in teams of 8 to 10, use binoculars to spot tiger tracks. When the boats approach shore, two armed guards jump off first. As medical teams stand by in case of an attack, other workers erect safety nets to prevent tigers from lunging out of the dense underbrush.
Other team members measure the distance between the tracks to gauge the animal's size, note the direction the tiger was heading, record vegetation in the area and make a plaster mold of the footprint.
In the 2001 census, 245 tigers were found in the Indian half of the delta, a slight decrease from the 263 found in 1997.
