President Bush on Tuesday defended the war in Iraq to cheering troops here and then had lunch with a National Guard unit on its way to Baghdad, a visit that combined Mr. Bush's role as commander in chief with his political need to rebut attacks on his own service record and foreign policy.
In a quick visit to Fort Polk, home to more than 6,300 troops who are in Iraq and a staging ground for thousands more on the way, Mr. Bush cast the war as an integral part of the broader effort to defeat terrorism. In a signal of the prominence that the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks are likely to play in his re-election campaign, Mr. Bush harked back to the days immediately after the terrorist strikes and suggested that he should be judged primarily by his response to the threat from Al Qaeda.
''I have a duty to protect the American people, and my resolve is the same today as it was on Sept. 12, 2001,'' Mr. Bush told the troops. ''My resolve is the same as it was on the day when I walked in the rubble of the Twin Towers. I will not relent until this threat to America is removed and neither will you.''
After weeks in which many Republicans have urged Mr. Bush to be more aggressive in countering Democratic criticism, the president made it clear that he had no second thoughts about invading Iraq to depose Saddam Hussein, despite the failure so far to find any of the banned weapons that he had cited as a primary reason for going to war.
He also revived his assertion that Iraq had become ''the central front in the war on terrorism,'' citing the interception of a letter that American officials have concluded was written by Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a Jordanian who has long been under scrutiny by the United States for suspected ties to Al Qaeda. The letter sought help from Al Qaeda to wage a ''sectarian war'' in Iraq.
War critics say that Mr. Bush overstated the links between Al Qaeda and Mr. Hussein before the war, and that terrorism in Iraq has increased since the war because of the presence of American forces there.
Mr. Bush concluded his three-hour stop here by meeting with families of soldiers killed in Iraq.
Republicans had expected Mr. Bush to enter the general election campaign benefiting from his leadership in the war on terrorism. But the continued deaths of American troops in Iraq, the apparent absence of stockpiles of banned weapons there and the questions about Mr. Bush's service in the Guard in the Vietnam era have all eaten into his support.
The White House press secretary, Scott McClellan, told reporters on the way here that the Fort Polk trip had been arranged ''several weeks'' ago, before Democrats raised questions on whether Mr. Bush had fulfilled all his duties as a pilot in the Texas Air National Guard in the Vietnam era. Several officials at Fort Polk said they first learned last week of Mr. Bush's plan to visit.
On Friday night, the White House released hundreds of pages from Mr. Bush's military files in an effort to prove that he had shown up for training at a base in Alabama in 1972 and 1973, the period in dispute. Democrats have used the matter to draw a contrast with their front-runner, Senator John Kerry, who was decorated for bravery in Vietnam.
Mr. Bush did not directly address the issue here. But the White House arranged for him to have lunch under a tent with about 500 members of the 39th Brigade Combat Team, a National Guard unit that is about to leave for a yearlong tour in Iraq.
In discussing Iraq and its weapons programs, Mr. Bush noted that he was not alone in judging Mr. Hussein to be a threat to the world. ''My administration looked at the intelligence information and we saw danger,'' he said. ''Members of Congress looked at the same intelligence, and they saw danger. The United Nations Security Council looked at the intelligence, and it saw danger.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
