The city's Department of Education has served the public advocate with a Freedom of Information request, seeking information about problems in the special-education system cited last week by the advocate, Betsy Gotbaum.
Such requests are usually filed by citizens, news outlets or advocacy groups seeking information that is otherwise inaccessible.
''I think this is an unusual step by the Department of Education,'' said Gene Russianoff, a senior lawyer for the New York Public Interest Research Group. ''They really should think long and hard about going down the road of F.O.I.-ing an independent elected official,'' he added, referring to the acronym for Freedom of Information.
Last week, Ms. Gotbaum held a news conference to describe severe problems in special education, which was overhauled after the schools were taken over by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and his schools chancellor, Joel I. Klein. Her findings, first reported in The New York Sun, included a backlog in referrals and evaluations.
Ms. Gotbaum also said she had been told that some school officials had been directed to delay or limit special-education referrals.
Early yesterday, she said that she believed the department was trying to find out which school officials had complained to her. ''I believe the reason they want names is they want to punish people,'' she said. ''If they want to know about the issues, all they have to do is ask us to come in and sit down.''
The information request, dated Feb. 9, seeks ''all documents, including correspondence, e-mails, reports'' that Ms. Gotbaum's office used to prepare its findings.
Yesterday afternoon, the department released a statement by Chad Vignola, chief counsel to the chancellor, saying it had ''no interest in individuals' names or identities,'' and that under the Freedom of Information Law, which includes privacy provisions, Ms. Gotbaum was free to redact them.
''If the public advocate really wants to serve the interests of children with special needs, she should provide the information, rather than trying to hide it,'' the statement said.
Jill S. Levy, president of the Council of School Supervisors and Administrators, issued a statement criticizing the department. Referring to department headquarters at the Tweed Courthouse downtown, she said, ''Rather than encourage people to come forward with situations that might be addressed by the administration, the impact of this F.O.I.L. request further insulates Tweed and the Department of Education from the public.''
Laurel W. Eisner, who served as general counsel to Ms. Gotbaum's predecessor, Mark Green, said she could not definitively recall receiving any Freedom of Information requests from city agencies or bodies.
Even if names are deleted from Ms. Gotbaum's correspondence, Ms. Eisner said, the request could deter potential whistleblowers. ''There's a chilling effect,'' she said.
Mr. Vignola said the request was necessary ''to try to figure out whether there is any merit to her concerns.'' He added, ''If all she's doing is political grandstanding, we need to know that.''
