Two construction cranes collapsed yesterday at the Sikorsky Bridge in Stratford, Conn., fatally injuring one worker whose crane plummeted into the icy waters of the Housatonic River.
The worker, an out-of-state resident whose identity was being withheld by the authorities until his family is notified, was working on the demolition of the old bridge from a barge on the southbound side shortly before noon when the collapse occurred, said Sgt. Paul Vance, a state police spokesman.
The two cranes were lifting a steel bar ''when something happened -- we don't know what,'' Sergeant Vance said, causing one crane to topple into the water and the boom of the other crane to fall across the barge and onto the shore. The second crane operator was unharmed, Sergeant Vance said.
The company handling the bridge project, Balfour Beatty Construction Inc., said it was investigating the accident. The crane operator had worked for the company for 12 years, Balfour Beatty said in a statement.
The bridge, which connects the Merritt and Wilbur Cross Parkways, is legendary for its traffic jams. About 62,000 drivers cross it daily. By the spring of 2006, two new three-lane bridges will be completed that will replace the 1940's bridge, which had two lanes in each direction. The project will cost $87.3 million.
Last fall, the new northbound bridge opened, offering temporary access for traffic in both directions and a smooth-paved surface. The old bridge had an open-grated steel construction that made for a wobbly ride in dry conditions and caused cars to skate sideways in wet weather.
Traffic was stopped for less than an hour yesterday after the accident. Co-workers pulled the crane operator out of the river, the police said. As required by law, a boat moored at the construction site was available for transporting the man to shore, the police said. He was taken to Bridgeport Hospital and was pronounced dead in the emergency room, Sergeant Vance said.
Since 1991, the Merritt Parkway has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places, in part because of the rare design of its overpass, which includes iron work grapevines and Art Deco motifs. The new bridge was designed to capture some of that flavor and will feature a variety of decorative pylons, an elaborate rail system, and gas-lamp style lighting, officials have said.
Investigators from the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration and numerous other state and local agencies continued to examine the scene yesterday afternoon, rescue workers said.
