HIGHLIGHTS
LONDON: BRIT AWARDS -- As Beyoncé's eyes popped and her jaw dropped in mock horror, Britain poked fun at Janet Jackson's Super Bowl breast-bearing antics on the biggest night on the British pop music calendar. Appearing out of a puff of smoke and adorned with what was said to be nearly half a million dollars' worth of diamonds to sing her hit ''Crazy in Love'' before accepting the prize for best international female at the Brit Awards in London, Beyoncé gasped as a male dancer flashed his Union Jack shorts at her, the BBC reported. At the ceremonies Justin Timberlake was named best international male; the glam rock band the Darkness was named both the best British group and rock act; Dido won the award for best British single; and Busted was named best pop act. The lifetime achievement award went to Duran Duran. Other major winners included Dizzee Rascal and Daniel Bedingfield. Among the performers were the rapper 50 Cent, the rock group Muse and, in collaboration, Missy Elliott, Alicia Keys and Gwen Stefani.
MUSIC MAKERS -- Contradicting press reports in Hong Kong, a promoter said yesterday that a concert scheduled there next month featuring David Bowie, left, is not imperiled by a band member's outspoken support of Falun Gong, a sect banned in China. ''It is absolutely not going to be canceled,'' Colleen Ironside of Live Ltd., the promoters, said of the concert, Agence France-Presse reported. ''Bowie is coming; nothing is going to stop him.'' . . . Motorhead, the rock band once listed by the Guinness Book of Records as the world's loudest, is about to shake the rafters of the Royal Opera House in London, Agence France-Presse said yesterday, citing a report in The Guardian. Its weekend concert is part of a series of events to showcase the cultural breadth of the city.
ROME: VATICAN AND GIBSON CHALLENGED -- Abraham Foxman, the national director of the Anti-Defamation League, urged Vatican officials at a meeting in Rome yesterday to instruct the world's Roman Catholics that the Mel Gibson film ''The Passion of the Christ'' is ''Mel's gospel,'' not the church's. He also challenged Mr. Gibson to add a postscript to the film to tell audiences it should not be perceived as anti-Jewish. In an interview with Reuters Television, Mr. Foxman said ''The Passion of the Christ,'' which opens on Feb. 25, Ash Wednesday, and depicts the last 12 hours in the life of Christ, ''is the old medieval classical interpretation of deicide, which blames the Jews, and it will be seen by millions of viewers.'' He said he had asked Vatican officials to instruct bishops around the world to issue statements locally to tell their faithful that the film is an artistic work, not a pure portrayal of gospel accounts. He said: ''I would hope that the Vatican and the Catholic Church would stand up to defend its teachings, because in fact what the film is is an interpretation that challenges what the church has been teaching for the past 40 years.'' In an interview with Diane Sawyer broadcast on Monday on ABC's ''Primetime Special Edition,'' Mr. Gibson denied that his film is anti-Semitic. ''To be anti-Semitic is a sin,'' he said. ''It's been condemned by one papal council after another. To be anti-Semitic is to be un-Christian, and I'm not.''
SHANGHAI: 'COLD MOUNTAIN' CENSORED -- Chinese censors have taken the figurative scissors to the ''Cold Mountain'' in advance of its opening in April, The Associated Press reported yesterday. The prohibited scenes in the Civil War film starring Nicole Kidman, Jude Law and Renée Zellweger were ''not in accord with national conditions, not in accord with Chinese tradition and not in accord with Chinese customs,'' said a spokesman for the State Administration for Broadcasting, Movie and Television Administration, who spoke on condition of anonymity. The film has received seven Oscar nominations.
MOSCOW: PASTERNAK PUBLICATION -- Banned for 30 years under the Soviet Union, the entire works of the Nobel Prize-winning Russian writer Boris Pasternak, the author of ''Doctor Zhivago,'' are to be issued in Russia for the first time, the publishers said yesterday. Agence France-Presse reported that the first two of 11 volumes have already been issued by Slovo, the publishers, and nine more are to be released by next February to commemorate the 115th anniversary of Pasternak's birth.
WELLESLEY: SHAKESPEARE MARATHON -- What was going on at Wellesley College over the Presidents' Day weekend? Nothing less than a marathon reading of the works of William Shakespeare -- 39 plays, 154 sonnets and 5 narrative poems -- in 22 hours and 5 minutes. The readings in five rooms in Shakespeare House, home of the college's Shakespeare Society, began with the prologue to ''Henry V'' at sundown Sunday and finished with ''Hamlet'' at 3:21 p.m. the next day. It was a project of the 31-member Shakespeare Society, augmented by more that 150 people from the college and the Wellesley, Mass., community.
FOOTNOTES
In a one-time-only event, Brian Dennehy, Christopher Meloni, Amanda Peet, Paul Rudd and Susan Sarandon are to appear on March 8 in ''Autobahn,'' an evening of five new one-act plays written and directed by Neil LaBute. This benefit for the MCC Theater, producers of the Pulitzer Prize-winning ''Wit,'' is to take place at the Little Shubert Theater, 422 West 42nd Street, Clinton.
