The Rangers are 11 points behind the Islanders and Montreal, who are tied for the last two playoff spots in the Eastern Conference, with 23 games remaining in the regular season. If the Islanders, who have one fewer victory than the Canadiens, play .500 hockey, the Rangers would have to win 18 games to qualify for the playoffs.
Even if the Rangers defeat the Islanders for the fifth consecutive time this season Thursday night at Madison Square Garden, it seems clear that the Rangers are headed for their seventh consecutive season without a playoff berth, despite a league-record payroll that is close to $90 million.
As the March 9 trading deadline nears, the pressure mounts on Glen Sather, but he remains steadfast that he will not step down as coach.
''I'm coaching the rest of the year,'' Sather said Tuesday at practice.
Sather quickly followed that assertion by saying: ''Who knows? But I don't expect to make any changes at this point.''
Sather, who is in his fourth season as the Rangers' president and general manager, stuck to his contention that injuries have once again dropped the Rangers out of playoff contention.
''I'm even reluctant to mention that fact,'' Sather said. He feels that whenever he cites injuries, the news media argues that he is using them as an excuse for the club's failures.
But the fact remains that the Rangers are farther away from a playoff berth this season than in any of their three previous seasons since Sather was hired.
The Rangers (21-27-7-4) are 3-11-2-0 over the last 16 games and have 53 points in 59 games.
Through 59 games last season, the Rangers were 22-28-7-2 for 53 points, 5 points out of a playoff berth. Two seasons ago, the Rangers were 27-25-4-3 for 61 points, and in eighth place. Three seasons ago, the Rangers were 25-29-4-1 for 55 points, 6 points out of a playoff berth.
''I'm not ready to throw in the towel,'' Sather said. ''The worst thing for us to do right now would be to concede, to give up, to quit. My answer is let's get the team healthy.''
Considering the Rangers have not won three consecutive games this season, and have not won two straight games since Dec. 29-30, it would seem unlikely that they would earn their first playoff berth since 1996-97.
When asked why he thought the Rangers could put together a significant winning streak when they have not been able to do so all season, Sather said the Rangers have the All-Star right wing Jaromir Jagr.
Jagr, who missed the last two games with groin problems, expects to play against the Islanders. Even so, the Rangers have lost six of their nine games with Jagr in the lineup since he was obtained from the Washington Capitals on Jan. 23.
About 45 minutes into Tuesday's practice, Jagr took a brief spin on the ice wearing new skates. Jagr, who hopes to practice on Wednesday, then changed skates and briefly skated on his own at the end of practice.
''I didn't skate very hard,'' he said afterward. ''I just went slow, because I have two days. I didn't feel any pain. But I didn't try very hard.''
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers Coach GLEN SATHER has not spoken to ERIC LINDROS this week, but he said that Lindros, who is sidelined with his eighth concussion, ''wants to come back and play.'' . . . Goaltender MIKE DUNHAM, who was scratched from Monday's 4-1 loss to Ottawa, practiced on Tuesday. Sather said he expected Dunham to start against the Islanders, a team Dunham has not lost to since the Rangers obtained him from Nashville on Dec. 12, 2002. . . . Defenseman GREG de VRIES, who also missed Monday's game because of the flu, did not practice on Tuesday.
HOCKEY
