While Nets Coach Lawrence Frank is trying to get his name into the N.B.A. record book, Atlanta Hawks Coach Terry Stotts is just trying to survive.
Stotts is the only Eastern Conference coach who remains in place from the group of 15 that ended last season. Now, his own status is tenuous pending the sale of the 18-35 Hawks.
Frank inherited a Nets team (31-20) that raced into the N.B.A. finals the past two seasons and stands a victory away from setting the record for consecutive victories at the start of a head coaching career. That 10th victory could come against the Hawks on Wednesday night.
Stotts, a longtime assistant coach, oversees a team that was among the league's least talented, even before the Hawks started purging contracts.
''I remind myself all the time that I'm a head coach of an N.B.A. team,'' Stotts said in a telephone interview. ''If you had told me 20 years ago, before I got into coaching, that I'd be head coach of an N.B.A. team, I'd be thrilled. To be an N.B.A. coach is a lifetime dream. I remind myself when we lose six, seven in a row, I've got to keep coaching them.''
Stotts, who played college basketball at Oklahoma, gave up a vagabond professional career in 1991 after playing for pro teams in Europe and the Continental Basketball Association. He joined George Karl on the coaching staff of the Albany Patroons of the C.B.A. and eventually followed him into the N.B.A., first as an advance scout for the Seattle Supersonics in 1992-93, and then on the bench beside Karl for five seasons in Seattle and four more in Milwaukee.
Stotts was interviewed for head coaching vacancies but found himself in an awkward position after Karl spoke out against untested former players getting jobs over dues-paying assistants like Stotts. He left Karl last season and joined Lon Kruger in Atlanta, not long after the Hawks hired Kruger over him for the top spot. Then, less than two months into the season, Kruger was fired and Stotts was promoted.
''I've gone through some unique experiences -- an ownership change, a general manager change, major trades,'' Stotts said of his tenure as the Hawks' coach, adding that he was ''a better coach and a stronger person for it.''
Last season, he took over an 11-16 team, lost 12 of his first 15 games, but finished with a 21-19 record. Though the Hawks have stumbled this season, 13 of their 18 victories have come against teams with winning records. And Stotts is content to do his job, even as rumors of his demise swirl.
As in Frank's case, coaching was not a last-minute career choice. Stotts's father, Frank, spent 10 years coaching high school basketball and 8 at the University of Guam.
''It's hard to get a head coaching job in the N.B.A., in college,'' Stotts said. ''I think you would like to be selective, but the reality is that when a job comes open for whatever reason, not many first-time head coaches have the luxury of saying no. You have to make the best of it.
''Lawrence is in a great situation. Everybody realizes it. I'm sure he does. As an assistant coach, you coach into the situation, coach every day and get better for the experience. Sometimes the experience is painful.''
PRO BASKETBALL
