The Federal Aviation Administration said Tuesday that it hoped to propose a rule this fall that would require airlines to take steps to cut the risk of fuel tank explosions like the one that destroyed Trans World Airlines Flight 800.
The rule would take effect in 2006, 10 years after Flight 800, a Boeing 747, exploded off Long Island, killing 230 people. It would be phased in over seven years and cover about 3,800 big jets registered in the United States and built by Boeing and Airbus. The agency has developed a system to reduce flammability, but the airlines or airplane manufacturers would be free to use other solutions, said John Hickey, the agency's director of aircraft certification.
For years after they understood the broad outlines of the cause of the Flight 800 accident -- ignition of the fuel tank by an electrical spark -- regulators discussed a variety of approaches. They considered changing fuel so it would be less prone to turn to vapor, the form in which it is flammable, and pumping inert nitrogen into the empty space in tanks when planes are on the ground. Both ideas were rejected as too expensive.
In December 2002, the F.A.A. demonstrated an onboard system that takes compressed air from the engines and runs it through a membrane that sorts the oxygen and nitrogen. The oxygen is dumped overboard and the nitrogen is pushed into the fuel tanks, decreasing the oxygen content to about 12 percent, from 21 percent in normal air.
''We're taking this step because we have found a practical solution,'' said Marion C. Blakey, the administrator of the agency. ''Once planes are equipped with inerting technology, we can close the book on fuel tank explosions. It's a major moment in the safety of aviation.'' The safety repair is unusual in the extent to which the agency used in-house engineering to solve the problem.
Airlines might still oppose the step because of its costs. The system would probably cost $140,000 to $220,000 a plane, officials said, plus $14,000 annually for operating costs. Depending on the size of the plane and its fuel tanks, the system will weigh 100 to 200 pounds, and will require the engines to use extra fuel to provide compressed air, Mr. Hickey said.
Boeing has said it will use inerting technology in its 7E7, which is still being designed. The F.A.A. would like the new rule to apply to the Airbus A380, which is supposed to fly for the first time this year.
Asked why some planes would not be equipped with a preventive system until 2013, Ms. Blakey said the installation could be done only during major maintenance. But she said the F.A.A. had already issued scores of orders for inspecting or replacing wiring or other electrical components to reduce the risk of tank explosion. The agency's original strategy for guarding against fuel tank explosion was to exclude any possibility of spark, but Ms. Blakey said that with three fuel tank explosions in the last 14 years the agency did not believe that approach was reliable.
She added that the fuel tank accidents were occurring at the rate of roughly one every five years. That raises the possibility of another one before a solution is carried out.
The chairwoman of the National Transportation Safety Board, Ellen Engleman-Connors, praised the decision. Jack Evans, a spokesman for the Air Transport Association, the trade group for airlines that operate large planes, said the airlines ''certainly support research into fuel inerting systems.''
Some of the airlines had hoped that if an inerting system were required rules on electrical safety would be relaxed, but Mr. Hickey said this would probably not be true to any great extent.
At the time of the explosion of Flight 800, a Boeing 747 leaving Kennedy International Airport for Paris on a hot July evening, many said that it would be difficult for tanks to explode because the fuel-air mixture had too much fuel, or because the fuel was cold and would not turn readily to a vapor.
But tests by the National Transportation Safety Board after the explosion determined that the mixture was often within the range that would sustain an explosion. Flight 800 was delayed on the ground, with its air-conditioners running and giving off their heat to the center fuel tank. As the fuel warmed, its propensity to turn to vapor increased.
