The Democratic presidential nomination battle turned into a two-man contest on Tuesday as Senator John Kerry narrowly defeated Senator John Edwards in the Wisconsin primary. Howard Dean suffered a dismal third-place showing that Democrats said would effectively end his campaign.
The finish by Mr. Edwards startled Democrats here, as well as those in the Kerry and Edwards camps, who had been looking for Mr. Kerry to post another decisive victory in Wisconsin, based on his performance so far this year.
And it set the stage for what Mr. Edwards said he had long wanted after trying to break through what was once a crowded field: a clean two-way race with Mr. Kerry, played out over a relatively long period, until the next big primary day, March 2.
''The people of Wisconsin spoke loudly and clearly tonight,'' Mr. Edwards said in a jubilant speech to supporters. ''They want a debate. They want this campaign to continue.''
Mr. Kerry, who stepped out to give his victory speech as Mr. Edwards was speaking, knocking him off live television, made no mention of the thin margin.
''The motto of the state of Wisconsin is 'Forward','' Mr. Kerry said. ''And I want to thank the state of Wisconsin for moving this cause and this campaign forward tonight here in this great state.''
At 11:25 p.m., with 99 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kerry had 326,299 votes, or 40 percent, and Mr. Edwards had 282,581, or 34 percent. Dr. Dean received 150,180 votes (18 percent), while Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had 27,139 (3 percent), and the Rev. Al Sharpton gained 14,434 votes (2 percent).
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, said even before the polls closed that he would continue his campaign no matter what the outcome in Wisconsin, a state he once said he had to win.
''We are not done,'' he said in his speech on Tuesday.
But leading Democrats said that in light of his latest disappointing loss, they saw little hope for his continuing as a serious candidate. And while Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards turned their attention to March 2, when there will be 10 contests, Dr. Dean prepared to head back to his home in Burlington to determine where to take his campaign from here.
A critical question now, some Democrats said, is whether Dr. Dean, who has not won a single contest, withdraws from the race and throws his support to Mr. Edwards or Mr. Kerry. A survey of voters leaving the polls found that those who said they had once intended to support Dr. Dean split evenly between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards's strong showing came in a state with a maverick tradition, going back to when John F. Kennedy upset Hubert H. Humphrey in the 1960 Democratic presidential primary. It also came in a state where any registered voter may participate in the Democratic primary, and 40 percent of those who voted on Tuesday said they were not Democrats.
As in Iowa, Mr. Edwards appears to have gained strength in the final days of the campaign, in what many Democrats said was a testament to strong campaign skills. He won the endorsement of two of the state's major newspapers. And not incidentally, several Democrats said, he might have benefited from what had been Dr. Dean's central message, as he urged voters here not to rubber-stamp the Kerry nomination, and allow the process to continue.
''Everyone I talk to, conservatives and liberals, say we want to keep it going at least until sometime in March,'' said Mary Citizen, 59, who lives in West Bend, Wis., and was waving a flag at Dr. Dean's election-night party in a Madison hotel. ''Every time these guys get up on a stage they're throwing ideas at us. We're still shopping. It's not a done deal.''
Mr. Edwards's aides expressed confidence that the jolt of excitement that would accompany his showing would bring him enough favorable publicity to help compensate for any financial advantage Mr. Kerry might have. They argued that this two-week period would allow Mr. Edwards to capitalize on what his aides have long argued are misgivings among Democrats about Mr. Kerry, and give voters more time to get acquainted with Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards won the support of 50 percent of the Democrats who said they made up their minds over the last three days, according to the survey of voters leaving the polls. And should the race go on until March 9, Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, will be competing with Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, in four Southern states.
''We've been saying all along that voters are still looking for a choice,'' said David Ginsberg, Mr. Edwards's communications director. ''It's a pretty good thing to have a candidate that the more they see him, the more they like him.''
Mr. Kerry's advisers noted that Mr. Edwards had so far won only in the state of his birth, South Carolina, and expressed doubt that he could catch up. Before Tuesday, party leaders from across the nation had been urging Democrats to coalesce around Mr. Kerry as the party's likely nominee.
Mr. Kerry's victory here was apparently his narrowest yet; still, he has now won in 15 of the 17 states where there have been contests, in many cases by double-digit margins. He has displayed strength in all voters groups.
''I know this was closer than he thought, but to go from state to state, win for win, I just think that is a good thing for Senator Kerry,'' Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin, a Democrat who has not endorsed a candidate, said in an interview. ''That's a tremendous kind of momentum.''
Still, the developments here on Tuesday signaled that a race that many Democrats had seen as all but over would roll on -- at least into March. And while Mr. Kerry would appear in some ways to have a lopsided advantage over Mr. Edwards -- before Tuesday, he had 448 delegates compared with 161 for Mr. Edwards -- the result in Wisconsin, a swing state in a general election, seems certain to raise questions about the central claim of Mr. Kerry's campaign: that he is the strongest Democrat the party has to send up against President Bush.
Mr. Edwards's showing came as a surprise both because Mr. Kerry had swamped him in state after state and because a series of pre-primary polls showed Mr. Kerry with a large lead. Because of the open primary, Wisconsin is a difficult state to poll.
Still, the practical result was that anything less than a substantial victory by Mr. Kerry could be portrayed by his opponents as a setback, which is what was happening throughout the day as the campaigns got early glimpses of the results of surveys of voters leaving the polls.
Mr. Edwards suggested in an interview this week that Mr. Kerry's run of victories was a function of his riding the wave of support created by victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, and that his standing would erode under the scrutiny of Democratic voters. He argued that he tended to grow in strength the more time he spent in a state.
That said, Democrats contended that Mr. Edwards urgently needed to begin winning. Tuesday's contest was the sixth in which he placed second; he has come in fourth seven times.
And Mr. Kerry's advisers scoffed at the notion that Mr. Edwards had a legitimate claim on being part of two-man contest.
''I don't see this as a two-person race because we're running against someone who has won one state,'' a senior Kerry adviser said. ''This whole idea that you sort of cherry-pick the states you are going to compete in -- that's a vanity game, it's not a real game.''
Mr. Kerry said Tuesday, before the polls closed, that he would campaign aggressively across the nation. ''I'm not selectively picking one state or another to wage my campaign in,'' he said. ''I'm waging my campaign all across the country in all states.''
The survey of voters leaving the polls found that in Wisconsin, as almost everywhere else this year, voters were looking for a strong challenger to Mr. Bush.
Mr. Kerry did best with those for whom electability was most important -- getting 70 percent of their support. Mr. Edwards drew the support of about 45 percent of those who said caring was the most important quality.
The survey of voters leaving the polling places was conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the television networks and The Associated Press.
In Madison on Tuesday, Mary Crave, 47, an adult education teacher, said she voted for Mr. Kerry.
''He's the most electable,'' Ms. Crave said. ''I like Edwards, but I don't think he's ready yet to gather the troops. I'm sort of an anybody-but-Bush voter.''
Steven Kleiss, 36, a banker, said he voted for Mr. Edwards.
''He stayed the most consistent throughout the debates and the race,'' Mr. Kleiss said. ''It seems like the other candidates have shifted based on what's popular, but he stayed on message better.''
How the Poll Was Conducted
The poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters on Tuesday as they left voting places throughout Wisconsin.
It was conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J., and Mitofsky International of New York City for the National Election Pool, a consortium of ABC News, Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News.
The results are based on 2,238 voters in 40 randomly selected precincts across Wisconsin.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus three percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters in the Wisconsin Democratic primary.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error. In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on an election day, like the reluctance of some people to take time to fill out the questionnaire, may introduce other sources of error.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
