A federal jury in Alabama yesterday awarded a group of ranchers $1.28 billion in damages after it found that Tyson Fresh Meats, the country's largest beef packer, used illegal cattle contracts to artificially hold down the prices it paid them.
Hailed by its supporters as a ground-breaking antitrust ruling, the class-action lawsuit was brought several years ago by independent ranchers who argued that Tyson Fresh Meats, a unit of Tyson Foods, used contracts with the biggest feedlots and major ranchers to lower market prices for cattle, effectively undermining competition in the beef industry.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs said that the jury's decision, if upheld by higher courts, would benefit at least 35,000 smaller cattle ranchers.
Tyson said it would seek to have the decision overturned, first by the trial judge and, if that fails, by an appeals court.
''The verdict is a disappointment to our company and thousands of cattle producers who want to maintain the right to market cattle the way they want,'' the company said in a statement. ''We do not expect today's jury decision to materially impair our liquidity or affect operations.''
The company, based in Springdale, Ark., buys roughly a third of the nation's cattle for beef and is also a major poultry processor. It earned $337 million, or 96 cents a share, on sales of $24.5 billion during the fiscal year ended Sept. 27.
In New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday, Tyson's shares closed at $16.21, falling slightly over 1 percent.
During the four-week trial in Montgomery, Ala., the ranchers argued that the consolidation of the industry had helped Tyson win enough control of the market to manipulate prices and help undermine small and independent ranchers.
''There isn't an open, competitive market for us any more,'' said Michael Callicrate, one of the six ranchers who filed the lawsuit in 1996. ''The big packers took that away from us.''
David Domina, the Omaha lawyer who represented the ranchers, said that yesterday's decision meant that the packers' contract agreements were unlawful and that the practice must end.
''Packers who use these contracts from now on will do so at their own peril,'' Mr. Domina said.
The second half of the case to determine the limits on packer behavior in purchasing cattle will be argued before visiting United States District Judge Lyle Strom later this year.
The judge also indicated that he will issue a scheduling order for two other class-action suits filed by ranchers against two other large packing companies, Excel and Swift.
After two decades of consolidation, the four biggest packing companies -- which also includes National -- now slaughter and process more than 80 percent of the cattle in the United States. The rancher's share of each dollar consumers spend on beef, meanwhile, has shrunk from 60 cents to 40 cents, according to the ranchers.
While the central issue in the case was how the consolidation of the industry was depressing cattle prices, lawyers for the ranchers said the case was part of a larger attempt to push the government to enforce the 1921 Packers and Stockyards Act that was supposed to ensure against unfair practices in the industry.
''This is an industry fight between the big packers and the independent ranchers,'' said Joe Whatley, of the Birmingham, Ala., firm of Whatley, Drake. ''If we don't stop the kinds of practices Tysons has been engaged in, we're going to lose the small, independent producer.''
The cattle ranchers originally filed their suit against IBP Inc., which was later bought by Tyson Fresh Meats.
The National Cattlemen's Beef Association, the industry's leading trade group, declined to support the ranchers in their suit. Kendal Frazier, the association's vice president for communication, said that his members supported instead a study of meat marketing systems. ''We know there are concerns about changes going on in our industry,'' Mr. Frazier said, ''but we haven't taken a position on the case.''
Several senior lawmakers from farm states have long battled against consolidation in the meat industry.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Finance Committee, helped push legislation through the Senate aimed at increasing competition by preventing meatpackers from owning livestock. But the bill failed in the House.
He praised the court decision yesterday, saying it was an ''historic day for cattlemen.''
Senator Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, agreed.
''These ranchers and cattle feeders,'' he said, ''took on the packing industry themselves -- and won.'' In a statement, Senator Harkin called on the Agriculture Department and the Justice Department to ''start enforcing the market protections spelled out in the Packers and Stockyards Act.''
Alisa Harrison, press secretary for Agriculture Secretary Ann M. Veneman, said the department's lawyers were studying the case.
''We will review the decision to determine its impact on our programs,'' Ms. Harrison said.
Neil Harl, agriculture economist at Iowa State University, said that the meat packing industry has had ''consistent and long-running problems with anticompetitive practices.''
In recent years, Mr. Harl said, the marketing contracts destroyed the old system of open bidding and cash markets. ''The really critical factor is competition,'' Mr. Harl said. ''This ruling should lead to more competition.''
