He wore a white tie with thin navy blue stripes, evoking his new allegiance. A giant Yankees logo hovered behind him, and more than 300 members of the news media -- about the total for a playoff game -- stared back at him.
Alex Rodriguez had always wanted this, always burned to play in an East Coast city where baseball sizzled year-round. He had spent three years with the Texas Rangers, playing for fortune and fame, and he started his first Yankees news conference yesterday with this word: ''Wow.'' It was an appropriate sentiment for a man who looked as if he had it all.
Rodriguez, who formally joined the Yankees on Monday in a trade for Alfonso Soriano and a minor leaguer to be named, does not quite have it all. He does not have his shortstop position, but he insisted that did not matter. Rodriguez will play third base, and Derek Jeter will play shortstop. Never mind that Rodriguez is a better defensive player and the reigning American League most valuable player.
''To me, it was a very easy decision,'' Rodriguez said. ''To me, this came down to winning. Over the last three years, I've come to understand that winning is something I respect a lot. It was an easy decision. Hopefully, after today, it will be a dead issue. Derek Jeter is the captain of this team, and I'm going to follow his leadership.''
Rodriguez, who was captain of the Rangers for three weeks before the trade, said repeatedly that he just wanted to blend in. That will be next to impossible for a player with a $252 million contract, but Rodriguez said he understood Jeter's stature. It is Jeter's team, he said, not his.
''When you have four world championships and you're the captain of the New York Yankees, that should never be an issue,'' Rodriguez said. ''I'm here to assist him and be one of the guys.''
Jeter said that having Rodriguez beside him could help his defense at short. Jeter does not have excellent range, but he has seemed even worse the last two seasons because Robin Ventura covered little ground at third. Jeter compared Rodriguez to Scott Brosius, the former Yankees third baseman whose range allowed Jeter to play closer to the middle.
Rodriguez and Jeter flew together from Tampa, Fla., to New York on Monday, and Rodriguez assured him that he would be comfortable switching to third. For Rodriguez, the move was a show of professional courtesy that Jeter said he would have returned.
''If he was with Texas and I went over to Texas, I wouldn't try to push him out of shortstop,'' Jeter said.
Manager Joe Torre, who also flew from Tampa for the news conference and had breakfast with Rodriguez yesterday, was not told of the trade talks until it had been decided that Rodriguez would play third. Torre said he agreed with it, even though he all but acknowledged that Rodriguez is a better shortstop than Jeter.
''I'm loyal to players, but I'm more loyal to the team,'' Torre said. ''Because someone may have more ability and can do certain things doesn't mean you're a better team that way. I think that's my job, to decide how we're a better team.''
What Torre did not say is that Rodriguez would probably be a better third baseman than Jeter. One official of another team said yesterday that Rodriguez has the most important asset of a great third baseman: the first-step quickness that comes with anticipating the direction of the ball off the bat.
But the same official said he did not envision Rodriguez staying at third for long, and that issue could shadow the Yankees.
''I understand if I make an error, people will start saying, 'You should move over there,' '' Jeter said. ''But I've made errors before. I'm going to make errors this year. It's part of the game; you can write it down. But I understand my role on the team.''
Jeter anticipated another question yesterday, about his relationship with Rodriguez. The two have been friendly for more than 10 years, but the relationship became strained in 2001 when Rodriguez questioned Jeter's leadership and talent in an Esquire article. Jeter played down the spat.
''When you have a brother, I'm sure you have arguments with your brother,'' Jeter said. ''But the bottom line is, we're still close. I think everyone wants us to disagree; everyone wants us to not get along. But that's not the case. Our relationship is fine.''
Rodriguez said he and Jeter used to joke about playing on the same team late in their careers, with one or the other moving to third base. He never expected such a sudden career move, but after Texas finished in last place in all three of his seasons there, Rodriguez was eager for a change.
His agent, Scott Boras, told Rodriguez only two teams could trade for him, and one, the Boston Red Sox, had missed its chance in December. Boras knew the Yankees did not want Rodriguez to play shortstop, so he presented Rodriguez with an enticing plan of what could happen in New York.
''When you've done what he's done individually, being a Gold Glove third baseman and being a two-time most valuable player and being a world champion is a lot better than being in the position he was in a year ago,'' Boras said.
Rodriguez is getting that chance in the city where he was born (in Washington Heights in 1975) and lived until he was 4. The family later settled in Miami, where Rodriguez followed the Atlanta Braves and the Mets on cable. He wore No. 3 because the former Braves star Dale Murphy wore it, and chose No. 13 for the Yankees because Dan Marino wore it for the Miami Dolphins.
Rodriguez wanted to play in New York after the 2000 season, but the Mets broke off free-agent negotiations, with Steve Phillips, their general manager at the time, saying infamously that Rodriguez would have created a ''24-and-1'' environment because of the perks Phillips said he had demanded. Rodriguez, who contended he did not remember that comment, said he still pined for New York after the snub.
''Deep down in my heart, I always thought New York was a possibility,'' he said. ''I was thinking at 38, not 28. So that part of it is exciting.''
It is also a relief for Rodriguez, who finally knows where he will play after months in limbo. After the deal was finished, Rodriguez said, his wife, Cynthia, told Jeter, ''I'm glad that this whole thing is over.''
Jeter corrected her. ''The party has just begun,'' he said.
INSIDE PITCH
Callers to Yankee Stadium who were put on hold yesterday heard a tape loop of ALEX RODRIGUEZ's home runs against the Yankees. The phone lines have been busy: the Yankees said they had sold about 2.3 million tickets for 2004 and had exceeded last year's season-ticket sales. They sold 24,200 full-season packages last year and have sold 24,300 for 2004. . . . The left-hander GABE WHITE agreed to a contract that guarantees him $2,125,000, avoiding a salary arbitration hearing. . . . The right-hander STEVE KARSAY, recovering from a torn rotator cuff, said he felt fine after throwing a few breaking balls during a bullpen session Tuesday in Tampa.
BASEBALL
