A group of 28 foundations said Tuesday that it would work to promote economic development in nine counties of northeastern Ohio, a region hit hard by the loss of manufacturing jobs to foreign countries.
The foundations, which include the Community Foundation of Greater Lorain County and the George Gund Foundation, have pledged $22 million to the Fund for Our Economic Future, which the 28 charities will control. Their goal is to accumulate $30 million.
The Fund for Our Economic Future will support projects and organizations intended to help the regional economy, which has lost jobs at a higher rate than the national average as its manufacturing and heavy industry sectors have declined.
''Historically, our economy has been focused around metalworking, polymers and autos, all industries that have experienced slow to declining growth rates,'' said Brad Whitehead, senior fellow for economic development at the Cleveland Foundation, which is putting $10.3 million into the fund. ''We're losing ground even when the economic cycle is on the upswing.''
Among 200 American cities ranked in terms of economic vitality by the Milken Institute, an economic research organization based in Santa Monica, Calif., Akron was 180th, Cleveland 194th and Youngstown 199th. Canton ranked highest in the region at 149th.
Government has traditionally played the largest role in economic development, but public resources are strained. In addition, local governments in northeastern Ohio are not used to working together to promote the area, foundation heads there say. ''We've been individual cities, competitive with each other, very parochial, and that doesn't sell in the 21st century,'' said Robert W. Briggs, executive director and a trustee of the $170 million G.A.R. Foundation, which will put in $1.5 million over the next three years.
Foundations are typically wary of taking on responsibilities that have historically fallen to governments. About 4 percent, or $666.2 million, of the grants made in 2002 by 1,005 foundations went to community improvement and economic development, according to a survey by the Foundation Center, a research organization based in New York City.
''Because a lot of government involvement in economic development has political aspects to it, programs come and go,'' said Brian Frederick, president and chief executive of the Community Foundation of Greater Lorain County, which is putting in $300,000 over three years. ''We can be patient for the 12, 15 or 20 years it make take to see real changes.''
The fund plans to make its first grants in April. Its money will go to nonprofit institutions, including local colleges and organizations that offer counseling about changing jobs and starting and maintaining businesses.
David Abbott, executive director of the George Gund Foundation, which is contributing $3 million, said, ''We're hoping we can exercise a more muscular form of philanthropy that demands that other sectors work with us to advance the agenda more aggressively.''
