The recent news that the American auto parts maker Tower Automotive would shut a plant in Milwaukee and move production, and 600 jobs, to a joint venture partner in northern Mexico was greeted here as a sign that after three years in the doldrums, Mexico was finally feeling the effects of the recovery in the United States.
Last year, as American growth picked up, Mexico languished. Analysts puzzled over why the economy, which is tightly tied to the United States through exports and investment, failed to follow in tandem.
Gross domestic product rose 1.3 percent in 2003 and 2 percent in the fourth quarter compared with the period a year earlier, the finance ministry reported on Tuesday. The government is forecasting growth of 3.1 percent this year, though many private analysts expect it could be higher.
Seeking an explanation for the economy's disappointing performance, many business leaders blamed China. They argued that its low wages, lax regulation and government incentives were siphoning off Mexico's much-needed manufacturing jobs. Mexico's role as the chief low-wage producer for the American market appeared to be in jeopardy.
But a series of investment announcements in recent weeks suggested that some version of that role was still secure.
''Someone has forgotten to share with foreign manufacturers the conventional wisdom that Mexico has lost its competitive edge,'' wrote Gray Newman, Latin America economist for Morgan Stanley in New York, in a recent report. He found that last year, foreign investment in manufacturing increased in Mexico, even though overall foreign direct investment declined.
''The link is still strong enough between Mexico and the United States that Mexico moves with the United States,'' he said in an interview.
The reason Mexico's recovery has lagged for so long is that Mexico's economy follows American manufacturing, which did not begin to recover until the fall, analysts say. While the United States has had a relentless decline in manufacturing jobs  -- a loss of 2.8 million jobs since August 2000 -- it is not clear how Mexico's employment picture will fare in this recovery.
Analysts say that even with the new manufacturing momentum, it will still be several months before Mexico can begin to see a rebound in employment.
One gauge is the number of jobs in the maquiladora sector, which assembles duty-free products for export. Maquiladoras have lost more than 250,000 jobs since the peak in October 2000.
''The key to the manufacturing rebound beginning to signal a broader recovery in the Mexican economy will be when we begin to see a rebound in manufacturing employment,'' a Merrill Lynch report said Tuesday. ''Given that we are just in the beginning stages of the manufacturing cycle, we believe we are still months away from that point.''
Despite the uncertain job outlook, other indicators of manufacturing health have emerged in the last week. In December, industrial production rose 2.4 percent and manufacturing exports rose 10.2 percent over the period a year earlier. Some 90 percent of Mexico's exports go to the United States. Optimism over the economy lifted the stock market index above 10,100 on Tuesday, a record.
The newest round of investments suggests that Mexico's edge is still strong in areas like autos and bulky electronics.
Tower Automotive announced last week that it would move production of the frame assembly for the Dodge Ram light truck to Metalsa, a Monterrey company in which Tower holds a 40 percent stake.
''The Milwaukee plant wasn't competitive,'' said Leopoldo Cedillo, commercial vice president for Metalsa. So when DaimlerChrysler redesigned the light-duty truck, it saw a way to save costs, Mr. Cedillo said. ''It generates savings in labor costs.''
Metalsa expects to hire 600 workers to add to the 2,500 already at its plant.
The Tower announcement follows several other investments in the auto industry that show that Mexico will benefit as the North American industry strengthens. The most significant came in October when the Ford Motor Company said that it would spend $1 billion to expand its Hermosillo plant in the northern state of Sonora to make its Futura sedan.
More modest investments have continued. Last month, Grupo Industrial Saltillo, an auto parts supplier, said that it would invest $20 million with a Norwegian partner, Norsk Hydro, to build a plant to make aluminum motor heads.
Analysts say the investment in the auto industry reflects the fact that Mexico can still benefit from being next door to the United States.
''As Mexico recognizes that they cannot just compete on unit labor rates, they are focusing on those areas where there is not only a labor advantage, but also a transportation advantage,'' said Carlos Lukac, managing director for Bain &amp; Company Mexico, a consultant group. Mexico, he said, would continue to make bulky items like car seats and big-screen televisions that need to arrive at a precise time at an American factory or retailer.
Not all the new investments are in the auto industry. The copper producer, Phelps Dodge, is moving production of magnet wire -- a component used in products like power tools, appliances and cars -- from a plant it is closing in El Paso, to its Monterrey plant.
''Our customers are companies who manufacture items like electric motors,'' said Ken Vaughn, a spokesman for Phelps Dodge in Phoenix. ''Those customers have been moving to places like Mexico and China.''
Electrolux, a Swedish company, announced last month that it would shut its refrigerator plant in Greenville, Mich., and move to Mexico.
LG Electronics, which is based in South Korea, makes televisions, refrigerators and monitors at three plants in northern Mexico and spent $160 million to expand those plants last year. It expects to spend an additional $30 million this year.
Medtronics, a medical equipment maker, is moving jobs from its vascular division in Santa Rosa, Calif., to a plant it owns in Tijuana. ''The proximity alone is good for us,'' a spokesman, Rob Clark, said. ''Cost is a factor as well. The cost of operating and manufacturing there is less than manufacturing here in California.''
Despite the positive news, investors warn that Mexico needs to do more to attract business.
''Other countries are advancing on their structural reforms much more so than Mexico is,'' said James Callahan, president of the American Chamber of Commerce of Mexico and managing director of BankBoston Mexico. ''Mexico could be much more competitive and attracting more foreign direct investment with more competitive energy policies, improvements in the legal system, judicial transparency, and tax reform.
''We have a certain level of frustration. Most of our member companies operate on a global basis. We've seen what works in other countries. We believe that Mexico's potential is to grow on average 6 percent per annum with the proper structural reforms.''
