On a rainswept afternoon in this neighborhood of cinderblock hovels, Hussam Shahin's Melody Internet cafe is nearly full and thick with the smell of cigarette smoke.
Mr. Shahin opened Melody in late 2002 on a bet that Palestinians would pay about 68 cents an hour for an Internet connection, even in one of the most impoverished areas of Gaza, where the average daily wage is $11 for those who can find work. Within a year, he had a competitor nearby.
Now, Mr. Shahin said, a friend is planning to open a third cafe up the block, evidence that providing Internet access has become one of the few growth industries in the Palestinian economy.
The Melody's bare walls are darkened with grime from customers squeezing their way around a double row of 10 PC stations that take up almost the whole floor. ''They look at how good the quality of the Internet connection is; we have a very fast one,'' said Mr. Shahin, who has dropped his rate to 45 cents an hour to stay competitive. ''This is a good project because it is needed here.''
Palestinians are increasingly logging on to the Internet as a way to bypass Israeli army closings and curfews used to clamp down on the movement of militants. Internet use among the 3.2 million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza has quadrupled to at least 8 percent in three years, according to the Palestinian chapter of the Internet Society, an international group that promotes online technologies.
The figure puts the territories ahead of some Arab nations. In Egypt, only 2.8 people of every 100 use the Internet, according to the International Telecommunication Union. The group estimates use at 5.8 percent in Jordan and 6.2 percent in Saudi Arabia. The rate is higher in Lebanon, at 11.7 percent, and in the United Arab Emirates, 36.7 percent.
For many who risk being turned back at military checkpoints, online chat sessions are the most affordable way of staying in contact with friends in the next town or relatives in the Palestinian diaspora. Teenagers play video games to pass time, and workers for nonprofit organizations come in to log on.
When closings and curfews in Ramallah made it impossible for Bir Zeit University to hold classes in mid-2002, the university created a portal called Ritaj, Arabic for ''great gateway,'' which let professors post lecture notes and communicate with students via bulletin boards.
''It became a priority for students to start using computers,'' said Marwan Tarazi, information technology director at the university. ''Those who didn't have access at home would get together at a friend's house or go to an Internet cafe.''
Despite the violence, software and Internet start-ups have continued to proliferate, according to the Palestine Information Technology Association of Companies.
''People might look at the intifada negatively in terms of political achievements, but I would look at it positively in terms of information communications technology,'' said Sabri Saidam, director of the Palestinian Internet Society chapter. ''Had it not been for the intifada, Palestinians wouldn't have thought of e-learning, e-commerce or e-health. Palestinians would have taken a lot longer in introducing such techniques.''
Increasing reliance on the Internet has created demand for products from Palestinian entrepreneurs, and has provided a critical push to open the first technology incubator in the territories. The project has received $1.2 million from the United States Agency for International Development and is to open this spring.
Palestinian software houses have an edge over competitors elsewhere in the Arab world because wages are lower than in Amman or Dubai, said Maria-Gabriella Khoury, an analyst at the Atlas Investment Group, a Jordanian investment bank that covers the Palestinian economy. Programmers in the West Bank and Gaza Strip are considered more sophisticated than their peers elsewhere in the region because of their exposure to Israel's technology. Gulf countries, hungry for software in Arabic, would be the primary export market.
''A company could set up a marketing office in Amman, and R.&amp;D. in Palestine,'' Ms. Khoury said. ''It would derive a return, despite everything that's going on, because you're talking about a product that isn't bound by where the work is done physically.''
As Internet use wins acceptance among Palestinians, the question of who will provide the service has become a battle in itself, pitting the Palestine Telecommunications Company, the telephone monopoly, against 17 service providers.
The phone company is promoting a plan that would let subscribers pay one bill, instead of a phone bill and an Internet access bill, and the phone company would pass on to the Internet service provider its part of the revenue. PalTel, as the company is known, says it will set aside 1 percent of that revenue to subsidize PC purchases by Palestinian families, in an effort to expand access in an area where 60 percent of the population lives below the poverty line. The Palestinian Communications Ministry is expected to decide by March.
Internet providers, however, fear the plan will enable PalTel to expand its monopoly at their expense. Ahmed Abumarzouq, the 32-year-old founder of Gaza's largest Internet service provider, Palestine Internet Services, said that the plan would force many I.S.P.'s out of business.
''A decision like that would affect the Internet in Palestine for years to come,'' he said. ''We want free choices, I want to be able to connect when I want and at the price that I want.
''I don't want to be like other Arab countries where you have one provider to choose from.''
