The United Auto Workers union and the Sierra Club, long at odds over federal fuel economy regulations, are joining to oppose a Bush administration plan to overhaul those rules.
In an article today on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, leaders of the two groups say the administration's proposals would worsen the nation's fuel economy and increase pollution and dependence on foreign oil. They also say the jobs of thousands of automobile workers at plants that make small cars could be threatened.
''United States manufacturing is already in deep crisis,'' said the article, signed by Ron Gettelfinger, the U.A.W. president, and Carl Pope, the executive director of the Sierra Club. ''The Bush administration should not aggravate the problem.''
Federal rules divide each automaker's annual fleet of new vehicles into two categories: passenger cars and light trucks, which includes sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and minivans. Car fleets are required to average 27.5 miles per gallon and light trucks 20.7.
In the 2002 model year, booming sales in the light truck class sank the average fuel economy for new vehicles to the lowest level in more than two decades, government figures show.
The administration's proposed changes would break the light truck fleet into weight or size classes, instead of having a single average. The administration might also regulate light trucks that weigh more than about 5,000 pounds more stringently and change category definitions so carlike vehicles cannot be configured to fit into the light truck class.
Administration officials have said their plan is driven more by safety concerns than saving gasoline. The plan could alleviate pressures on automakers to increase fuel economy by making vehicles lighter, which can make them less safe for the people inside.
The union worries that a weight-based system for light trucks would be a troublesome precedent for cars. If automakers did not have to balance domestic production of large and small cars to meet fuel economy standards, the union argues, then manufacturers might make fewer small cars domestically.
Union officials say more than 10,000 jobs at six small car plants in Michigan, Ohio, Delaware, Illinois and Tennessee could be threatened by the administration's proposals.
And rule changes could mean the average new vehicle would be heavier and less fuel-efficient than it is today, the authors of the opinion article wrote. ''America's dependence on foreign oil would increase, and our environment would suffer,'' they wrote.
The opinion article did not propose an alternative to the Bush plan. While the Sierra Club has pushed for substantial increases in fuel economy standards, the union has opposed such plans.
The industry said it was waiting to see more details before taking a position. ''We have to see the fine print,'' said Eron Shosteck, a spokesman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the industry's leading lobbying group.
Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a column on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times by the United Auto Workers and the Sierra Club, opposing a plan by the Bush administration to overhaul fuel economy rules, omitted comment from the government. Rae Tyson, a spokesman for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, said that the proposals were at an early stage and that suggestions are being sought from all parties, including the union and environmental groups.
