Penny Hardaway sprang into the air to take a shot, and in one suspended moment, it seemed as if he and Stephon Marbury were alone on the court.
Keith Van Horn was traded to Milwaukee, his replacements were on the bench and Allan Houston was still on the injured list. The Detroit Pistons trailed by a point with 41 seconds left when Hardaway rose and Marbury planted his feet on the right wing.
Instead of taking a shot, Hardaway passed to Marbury, who drained a 3-pointer.
The duo worked in dynamic harmony in the final two minutes last night to execute a 92-88 comeback victory over the Detroit Pistons at Madison Square Garden.
''That's the sign of a good team,'' Hardaway said. ''That's the sign of the new-look Knicks.''
They showed that Isiah Thomas's first blockbuster trade might very well be remembered as his most significant.
''So many times in Phoenix, he knew what I was going to do, I knew he was going to knock it down,'' Hardaway said of Marbury. ''We've been working off each other well for three years, so it was great to be traded with him.''
The newest Knicks made no impact in the wake of Van Horn's departure on Sunday. Tim Thomas played nine minutes and Nazr Mohammed did not play at all. Although they did not make up the difference for Van Horn, who averaged 16.4 points, Hardaway and Marbury did.
Marbury scored a game-high 28 points and Hardaway added 17, providing stability in an uncertain time of transition for the Knicks and allowing them to knock off one of the Eastern Conference's best teams.
''I came in here rejuvenated,'' Hardaway said. ''Stephon, we know what he can do. With me coming in, there were question marks, but I knew all along.''
Now, Hardaway added, ''With Keith leaving, it tends to upgrade everyone.''
For most of the game, the play was ragged and sloppy, players from both teams auditioning to keep their jobs before tomorrow's trading deadline.
Thomas is not finished dealing and the Knicks' players know it. The Knicks' trade candidates performed well: Kurt Thomas scored 14 points in his first game back from a one-game suspension, Othella Harrington finished with 14 points and 9 rebounds, and Dikembe Mutombo had 10 rebounds. The Knicks won their sixth game in the last eight to improve to 26-29.
The Knicks were trailing by 5 points with 2 minutes 43 seconds to play when Marbury and Hardaway scored the Knicks' next 8 points. It was Hardaway who hit a 3-pointer off a pass from Marbury to tie the score at 82-82.
''I know all of his movements, he knows all of mine, we've been playing together for three years,'' Marbury said. He then induced Chauncey Billups to foul him beyond the arc and he made all three free throws, with 1:08 to play.
After Billups made two free throws to cut the lead to 85-84, Marbury drained his 3-pointer.
Hardaway and Harrington made all of their free throws in the final 10.5 seconds of the game to seal the victory.
Tim Thomas learned just before the game that Van Horn had passed his physical in Milwaukee and he was cleared to play. He entered the game with 1:48 to play in the first quarter. His debut was less than auspicious. He tipped in a Harrington miss for his only points. He then committed a turnover by dribbling out the shot clock. He missed two more shots on drives to the basket and an open 14-footer.
Thomas, who did not play in the second half, also had four rebounds. He characterized his nine minutes as mixed.
''It was great, other than myself having to learn the system,'' he said. ''Stephon and I grew up playing with and against each other. I've always wanted to be alongside Stephon. I just can't wait for us to gel together.''
The Knicks gain athleticism with Thomas, a 6-10 forward. ''It's going to help us tremendously because now we can run and play halfcourt,'' Marbury said.
As a graduate of Paterson Catholic High School in New Jersey, Thomas used to play with Marbury in local summer camps and tournaments. ''I always wanted to be a Knick,'' he said.
He found out about his opportunity in the most New York way. ''I was actually in Miami with my wife and Spike was out there,'' Thomas said, referring to Spike Lee. ''The first thing he asked me was, 'Are you ready to come home?' I looked at him like he was crazy. The very next day I got the call.''
PRO BASKETBALL
