Russian prosecutors expanded charges on Tuesday against a major shareholder in the Yukos oil company, one day after a group of shareholders made an offer they hoped would free him and two other imprisoned Yukos figures.
On Monday, a major shareholder in Yukos, Leonid Nevzlin, offered to swap his stake and those of other large shareholders, worth about 44 percent of the company, for the release of the three men: Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the former chief executive and Russia's richest man; Platon Lebedev, an important shareholder; and Aleksei Pichugin, head of Yukos's security service.
All three are in jail awaiting trial on various charges, including fraud and embezzlement.
''What I'm saying is, 'Let my people go,' '' Mr. Nevzlin said on Monday in an interview from Israel, where he is living. ''Then we will stop being shareholders.'' The 44 percent of Yukos he offered is worth about $14 billion.
Russia has asked Interpol to issue a warrant for Mr. Nevzlin as part of an investigation into corruption.
There has been no official response from the Kremlin, which is widely seen as having backed the prosecution of Mr. Khodorkovsky as part of a broader campaign to curtail the oil baron's political ambitions.
Instead, the General Prosecutor's Office expanded its case against Mr. Lebedev, who was jailed last July, adding a new charge of having stolen $30 million.
''On the one hand, we need to familiarize ourselves with case records, and on the other, we are being presented with new charges,'' one of Mr. Lebedev's lawyers, Vladimir Krasnov, told Interfax news agency.
The original charges against Mr. Khodorkovsky and Mr. Lebedev were linked not to Yukos, but to a fertilizer company, Apatit, in the billionaire's financial empire. Mr. Khodorkovsky's wealth and that of several other Yukos shareholders is in a holding company called Group Menatep.
The Kremlin is not expected to accept such a public offer from the oil tycoon's camp, and has instead turned up the heat on the embattled Group Menatep.
''There is a great desire out there for some kind of solution to be achieved,'' said Adam Landes, an oil and gas analyst at Renaissance Capital in London. However, with Russia's oligarchs now toeing the Kremlin line, and with little political or economic fallout from the men's arrests, there is little incentive to release Mr. Khodorkovsky, he said.
Separately, the endgame between the Kremlin and Menatep shareholders could pave the way for a deal for the contested stake in Yukos. Some now expect the government to force Mr. Khodorkovsky and his Group Menatep associates to cede control of Yukos either to the state or to an approved buyer.
According to one analyst, ExxonMobil's chairman and chief executive, Lee R. Raymond, privately told investors and analysts in the United States that he was ''very optimistic'' about a possible acquisition in Russia, without naming any oil company.
An ExxonMobil spokesman, Tom Sirigliano, said Tuesday that the company ''does not comment on rumors'' regarding potential acquisitions.
''Lee Raymond has never responded to any of the rumors, about Yukos or other companies,'' Mr. Sirigliano said. ''The only comment Lee has made publicly about Russia is, 'Everybody needs to be patient and take a deep breath.' ''
Other supporters of Mr. Khodorkovsky said he was more interested in a trial open to the public than a prison swap.
''Khodorkovsky believes that the friends who are speaking on his behalf nevertheless fail to represent his position,'' Irina Yasina, who works at his Open Russia charitable foundation, said on the radio station Echo Moskvy.
Mr. Khodorkovsky, she said, ''is perfectly aware of their anxiety regarding his future and the future of their colleagues who are in prison now.''
''But money is not the main thing for Khodorkovsky,'' she added. ''The main thing is his honest name. And he will only defend this honest name in an open trial.''
