Sotheby's Holdings, the owner of the auction house, has agreed to sell its 15-office real estate brokerage firm in the United States and the brand's licensing rights to the Cendant Corporation, owner of the Century 21 and Coldwell Banker real estate names.
Cendant, which is based in Manhattan and both owns and franchises real estate agencies, announced yesterday that it was paying $100 million to buy the 15 Sotheby's International Realty offices, in locations that include Manhattan; Beverly Hills; Southampton, N.Y.; and San Francisco. The purchase includes the right to franchise the Sotheby's name to other real estate firms throughout the country.
Bill Ruprecht, the president and chief executive of Sotheby's, said the firm wanted to expand beyond its existing markets. But ''to grow the way we would like to see it grown would require resources and skills that were not our core strength,'' he said.
For Cendant, the purchase of Sotheby's International Realty furthers an aggressive expansion of its interests in the New York market, where it bought the Corcoran Group, one of the city's largest brokerage firms, in 2001. It followed that up in 2002 with the purchase of the Sunshine Group, a marketer of new luxury real estate. Over all, Cendant, through its NRT unit, has bought about 270 companies in more than 30 cities.
Richard A. Smith, chairman and chief executive of Cendant's real estate division, said the company was not finished with its ambitions in New York. ''We absolutely intend to continue to build our presence in key marketplaces,'' he said. ''And New York is one of the most powerful real estate markets in the world, so we will be very prominent here.''
Cendant has agreed to license the Sotheby's International Realty brand for 50 years, with an option to renew the agreement for another 50 years. Under the agreement, Sotheby's will continue to receive royalties from Cendant as the brand name is franchised to other real estate agencies in new markets. Mr. Smith said the company would probably start by negotiating new arrangements with some of Sotheby's 175 independent affiliates, which include agencies in markets like Westchester County; Alpine, N.J.; and Lake Tahoe, Nev.
Stuart Siegel, president of Sotheby's International Realty, will become a senior vice president at NRT, where he will be responsible for the 15 company-owned agencies that Cendant has just acquired. Michael R. Good, chief operating officer of NRT, has been appointed president and chief executive of Sotheby's International Realty Corporation, as the division will be known, and will be responsible for managing franchise relationships.
Cendant is not the only acquisitive company in New York's powerhouse real estate market. Last month, Terra Holdings, the owner of the white-shoe real estate firm Brown Harris Stevens and another Manhattan firm, Halstead Realty, bought Dunemere Associates Real Estate, a brokerage firm on the East End of Long Island. Last March, Prudential Long Island Realty bought Douglas Elliman, one of Manhattan's largest real estate firms.
The remaining independent brokerage firms see the consolidation as an opportunity to distinguish themselves. ''We are able to be more completely responsive to buyer and seller requirements than the larger, more corporately directed firms are able to be,'' said Frederick W. Peters, president of Warburg Realty in Manhattan, who added that Cendant had approached many other firms about a possible purchase.
Dottie Herman, president of Prudential Douglas Elliman Real Estate, said New York was just playing catch-up with the rest of the country. New York, she said, is ''probably one of the last holdouts in the United States in terms of holding onto individual owners rather than big corporations.''
''I think you're going to see in the next couple of years there will probably be just a couple of big companies and maybe some very small boutiques,'' she added.
Some rivals said they wondered if Cendant was the right match for Sotheby's high-end name. Cendant, which also owns hotel brands like Days Inn and Howard Johnson and the Avis car rental company, does not have much experience with luxury brands. ''Culturally and marketing-wise, you are taking a mass-market firm now marketing a superluxury brand,'' said William Lie Zeckendorf, co-chairman of Terra Holdings. ''It's not a natural marriage in my book.''
Mr. Smith of Cendant said: ''No one has yet built a franchise brand in this luxury segment. Given our past successes, we are highly confident that we can be the first to do so.''
