He did not say, ''I told you so,'' but he might as well have.
Over and over, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina had urged Democrats not to count him out. He cautioned pundits that he surged late and could sense it happening here, though he was not confident he could overtake Senator John Kerry. There was Mr. Kerry's momentum and the assumption by many Democrats that the race was all but over.
But with the results showing him just a few percentage points behind Mr. Kerry on Tuesday night, after some recent polls had placed him more than 20 points behind, Mr. Edwards hopped onto a stage at a community hall, beaming and pumping his fists, barely containing his glee.
''Today the voters of Wisconsin sent a clear message,'' Mr. Edwards said, ''and the message was this: Objects in your mirror may be closer than they appear.''
But he quickly moved to the theme he had promoted all week, the need to recover from the loss of thousands of manufacturing jobs, a theme his advisers say he will emphasize before the Super Tuesday round of primaries on March 2. He recalled meeting earlier in the week with steelworkers facing the prospect of losing their jobs when their factory moves operations to Mexico.
''They lost their jobs; their jobs are going to Mexico,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''What are they supposed to do?''
The election result left Mr. Edwards's advisers pondering what might have been if he had had another week to campaign.
Though Mr. Edwards held events every day in Wisconsin, ran three different television commercials statewide and won the endorsement of the state's two largest newspapers, he left the state twice for fund-raisers in Los Angeles.
Surveys of voters leaving the polls bore out Mr. Edwards's predictions that he tended to close strongly and attracted votes from beyond the party. He drew the support of almost half the voters who made their decision in the last three days, and his focus on jobs seems to have paid off. Of voters who said the economy was their top concern, 45 percent voted for him. Just as in earlier open primaries, he drew strong support from Republicans as well.
He also captured the majority of votes from those who said they considered a positive message most important and those who said they were concerned about the candidate having the right temperament.
Mr. Edwards said he now expected the run-up to Super Tuesday, when 10 states have primaries or caucuses, to be the two-man race he has sought.
Long before the polls closed, Mr. Edwards, in an interview with an Ohio television station, said that as a ''practical matter,'' Howard Dean was out of the race.
''It's already narrowed down to Senator Kerry and myself,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''We clearly have the ability to go long-term in this nomination process.''
Mr. Edwards has won just one primary, in South Carolina, his birthplace. He came in second in Iowa, Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee and Virginia and finished fourth or worse in the other contests, some of which he skipped.
Experts said they believed the closer-than-expected showing on Tuesday would solidify Mr. Edwards as the alternative to Mr. Kerry and would position him well for a Kerry collapse, or for the vice presidential sweepstakes, though Mr. Edwards has insisted he is not campaigning for that job.
''It will galvanize his resolve that he is the credible alternative to Kerry and the media needs to treat me as a bona fide second candidate in the race,'' Doug Schoen, a veteran Democratic pollster, said.
Mr. Edwards's supporters predict he will continue to draw disaffected working-class voters once known as Reagan Democrats.
Going into Wisconsin, his strategists saw an opportunity. There would be a full week to campaign in just one state with a history of favoring populists, as Mr. Edwards promoted himself, and an electorate stacked with independents who, polls in other states showed, Mr. Edwards was attracting.
Bill de Blasio, a New York City councilman and veteran Democratic operative who is running Mr. Edwards's campaign in the state, said Mr. Edwards would do well in Rust Belt upstate communities and working-class sections of the outer boroughs and suburbs.
''New York is a place that defies prediction,'' Mr. de Blasio said, adding that ''the decision tonight may be closer than expected and that will have an impact.''
Mr. Edwards does not plan to compete in the Feb. 24 contests in Hawaii, Utah and Idaho and will instead jump ahead to the March 2 states, his campaign aides said.
Nick Baldick, his campaign manager, said he believed the two-week gap before March 2 would allow Mr. Edwards to become better known, and voters to reconsider Mr. Kerry's front-runner status.
Mr. Edwards plans to focus on New York, Georgia and Ohio -- he is planning three trips to New York alone over three days this week -- where he plans to combine his standard upbeat message with more talk on the loss of manufacturing jobs to trade agreements.
''We plan to spend a lot of time in the Albanys in New York and Georgia, the Rochester, New Yorks, the Cincinnatis and Daytons,'' Mr. Baldick said.
Campaign officials said Mr. Edwards's travel plans were still under discussion. Although Mr. Edwards has said he will ''compete everywhere,'' it is possible that he will bypass Vermont, Connecticut and Rhode Island, which are in Mr. Kerry's home turf.
At this point Mr. Edwards does not plan to focus on California, either.
The two biggest states that vote on March 2, California and New York, also include the most expensive television advertising markets, New York City and Los Angeles. Mr. Edwards does not yet have the money to advertise in those cities and for now will focus on smaller markets in New York, Ohio and Georgia.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
