Downtown landlords here are in an uproar over a measure that would allow a public subsidy for a proposed new 60-story headquarters building for Comcast, the giant cable company that wants to take over the Walt Disney Company.
The developer, Liberty Property Trust, is seeking to qualify the building site -- in the heart of downtown, three blocks from Comcast's current offices -- for a generous 1998 state tax abatement program that was originally intended to improve blighted neighborhoods.
More than two dozen landlords in Center City, as downtown is known, have banded together to try to prevent designation of the site at 17th Street and John F. Kennedy Boulevard as a Keystone Opportunity Improvement Zone. Extending the designation to the core of the central business district, a move supported by Gov. Edward G. Rendell, would mean that tenants of the building would be exempt from all state and local taxes, except for the city's wage tax, for 15 years.
Comcast, which has 450,000 square feet of space at Center Square, a 36-story building at 15th and Market Streets, has a few years remaining on its lease so it is under no pressure to make a real estate decision, said Tim Fitzpatrick, a company spokesman. But Comcast officials do not deny that they began talking to Liberty last year.
As a result of those discussions, the proposed building, designed by the architect Robert A.M. Stern, has grown by eight stories, said John S. Gattuso, a senior vice president at Liberty Property. The 1.3-million-square-foot tower of limestone and aluminum would be Philadelphia's tallest and the first new skyscraper in Center City since 1991.
The bill to extend the designation is subject to the approval of the State Legislature, the mayor and the City Council.
The Liberty site, 1 Pennsylvania Plaza, is not the only project to prompt a citywide discussion of the Keystone program. Two Center City law firms, Dechert and Woodcock Washburn, recently signed leases to occupy about half of the 727,000 square feet of space at Cira Center, a 28-story building being developed by Brandywine Realty Trust of Plymouth Meeting, Pa. It sits across the Schuylkill River from Center City and next to the 30th Street train station on land leased from Amtrak that was designated a Keystone site last year.
In this case, the focus is not on the building's location, since the area has not previously attracted development, but rather on the fact that the law firm partners will receive a windfall by moving. Their shares of the firm's profits -- amounting to hundreds of thousands of dollars a year -- will be exempt from state and local taxes.
Even with the designation, the Cira Center has been a tough sell, according to Gerard H. Sweeney, Brandywine's chief executive. Brandywine has talked to 3,300 companies and found deep resistance to relocating to a neighborhood that lacks shops and upscale restaurants. In Mr. Sweeney's view, Brandywine is making a long-term investment and helping to create a link between the business district and the western suburbs. Giving a Center City site without the same risk the same tax advantage ''runs counter to the legislative intent'' of the Keystone program, he said.
The intense debate over the Keystone incentives has also led to renewed clamor across the city for reform of the local tax laws -- particularly the vastly unpopular wage tax -- which many say have prompted an exodus to the suburbs or other states. A recent survey by The Philadelphia Business Journal found that businesses here pay significantly more in state and local taxes than they would in other major cities. If any more businesses are lost, the city will be in severe trouble, said Les J. Crammer, a senior managing director of Julien J. Studley, a real estate company that represents tenants. ''The city doesn't have a choice,'' he said. ''They have to stop the bleeding.''
The downtown landlords' group, led by David J. Campoli, the regional manager of Comcast's landlord, HRPT Properties Trust of Newton, Mass., says that awarding the Keystone designation to 1 Pennsylvania Plaza would put other property owners at a competitive disadvantage. Liberty could charge above-market rents knowing that the additional cost would be offset by tenants' tax savings, they say. The state, Mr. Campoli said, would be creating more vacancies in ''a downtown market that doesn't need any more distress than it already has.''
And the timing, opponents of the designation say, could not be worse. The current Center City vacancy rate of 12.8 percent for top-grade buildings is expected to climb significantly because most of the sleek skyscrapers that line the major east-west streets were built from the late 1980's to the early 90's, and many of the 15-year leases that were signed then will be coming up for renewal soon. Some buildings are facing vacancies of 50 percent or more, Mr. Campoli said.
William S. Elder, a senior vice president of the Shorenstein Company of San Francisco, which bought the 58-story 2 Liberty Place at 16th and Market Streets in June 2002, said the building would be 50 to 60 percent empty by 2006 because of corporate downsizing. ''You have to look at the playing field,'' Mr. Elder said. ''When we made this investment, there was no such thing as a Keystone zone in the middle of Center City. We had no idea we would be competing with that.''
Mr. Gattuso, however, said that these investors had gambled on the absence of new Center City development so they could raise rents when their leases expired. ''There is a role for that kind of investment strategy,'' Mr. Gattuso said, ''but don't try to pass that off as public policy.'' He said the Keystone designation was justified because Comcast has said it will add at least 700 people to its current Philadelphia work force of 1,100, resulting in a gain for the city, even with the tax abatements.
Comcast has expressed interest in occupying about 45 percent of the building, Mr. Gattuso said. Liberty has also promised to spend $30 million on rebuilding the nearby commuter railway station's entrance and concourses, he said.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Governor Rendell defended the prospective tax break, saying that a new Comcast headquarters ''could do for Philadelphia what Coca-Cola did for Atlanta'' decades ago by serving as a magnet for other corporate headquarters. He said that tax cuts alone would not be enough to lure them. ''The only way we'll grow is with incentives,'' he said. Asked about the opposition, he said: ''I've never known progress that doesn't step on somebody's toes.''
Mr. Campoli and other critics of 1 Pennsylvania Plaza suggest that the proposed designation is rooted in what they say are close ties among the Rendell administration and Liberty and Comcast. David L. Cohen, a Comcast executive vice president, was Mr. Rendell's chief of staff when he was mayor, and William P. Hankowsky, Liberty's chief executive, was director of Philadelphia's development agency.
''We're dealing with some strong political allies and forces,'' Mr. Campoli said. ''For us as outside investors, that's been problematic for years.'' But Mr. Rendell said those relationships were not a factor. ''Every building owner in town was a contributor to me,'' he said.
In a report issued last month, the Center City District, a business improvement district whose members consist of downtown property owners, said that if both Cira Center and 1 Pennsylvania Plaza were occupied by companies that relocate from other Center City buildings, the city could lose as much as $153 million by 2018. The city would benefit only in the ''unlikely scenario'' that the projects fill their remaining space with corporations that are not currently here, the report said.
A report by the Econsult Corporation, a consulting company hired by Liberty, said, by contrast, that awarding a Keystone designation to 1 Pennsylvania Plaza could generate as much as $27 million for the city, including indirect tax revenues. The report also argues that there is a demand for new buildings with up-to-date amenities that the older buildings cannot match.
But other real estate specialists take issue with the notion that the existing inventory is reaching the end of its life cycle.
Georgette Chapman Poindexter, a professor of real estate at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, said that if there was a demand for newly built office space, ''then why do you need this humongous subsidy?''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
