In a setback for opponents of gay marriage, city officials here said Tuesday that they would continue issuing marriage licenses to same-sex couples after two judges stopped short of halting them.
Despite two separate hearings before different judges, the legal questions surrounding the marriages remained largely unresolved. When City Hall closed Tuesday afternoon, more than 2,600 licenses had been issued to same-sex couples over five days, and city officials had invited couples waiting in line to return on Wednesday.
''I am confident we will be able to run our operation,'' the assessor-recorder, Mabel S. Teng, told the couples who were sent home without licenses. ''I don't want you to worry about this indecision. I am confident San Francisco will win.''
One judge said on Tuesday that he had been inclined to order Mayor Gavin Newsom and other city officials to stop issuing the marriage licenses but agreed to give them a chance first to argue their case at a hearing late next month. The judge, James L. Warren of San Francisco County Superior Court, issued a cease and desist order against the city but said it was not binding if the city chose to attend the hearing on March 29 instead. The city said it would.
''Every day that passes, that couples get married, is an enormous victory,'' said Kate Kendell, executive director of the National Center for Lesbian Rights.
In a statement released to reporters, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, urged San Francisco officials to obey a state law that defines marriage as between a man and a woman. But Mayor Newsom, speaking at a news conference on Tuesday night, said the same-sex marriage policy would remain unchanged, asserting that guarantees of equality in the state's Constitution took precedence.
''I am not standing here breaking open the Champagne bottles; quite the contrary,'' Mayor Newsom, a Democrat, said. ''But I do recognize the path we are on is inevitable.''
He added, ''This is a long road, and I am resolved, more resolved today than ever.''
The San Francisco city attorney, Dennis Herrera, said city officials were pleased that the judge did not order a halt to the weddings, as had been requested by the Alliance Defense Fund, a group representing supporters of Proposition 22, the successful 2000 ballot measure that opposed same-sex marriage.
''We are extremely happy and gratified that a stay was not issued,'' Mr. Herrera said.
A lawyer for Alliance Defense Fund, Robert Tyler, said opponents of gay marriage were confident that the judge would ultimately rule in their favor.
''We have moved the ball from the end zone to the 25-yard line,'' Mr. Tyler said. ''And on the 29th we expect to have a touchdown.''
A second judge in the same courthouse, Judge Ronald Evans Quidachay, refused to hear arguments against the licenses until Friday because opponents in that case missed a deadline in filing some court papers.
Lawyers for Campaign for California Families, a group opposed to gay marriage that brought a lawsuit in that case, said they would appeal to the California Appeals Court to intervene and ''restore the rule of law quickly.''
''The mayor and his staff have created a circus-like atmosphere,'' one of the lawyers, Mathew D. Staver, said in a statement announcing the appeal. ''The court must act now, not later.''
While disappointed, Randy Thomasson, executive director of Campaign for California Families, predicted the delay was only putting off the inevitable.
''If he is disobeying the laws, and he is and he knows it, he is not fit for office,'' Mr. Thomasson said of Mayor Newsom.
Though the lines of gay couples outside City Hall were shorter on Tuesday, the intensity of conviction remained strong even as the legal situation remained unclear.
The San Francisco Gay Men's Chorus serenaded crowds on the sidewalk outside City Hall with songs like ''Chapel of Love.'' At a cafe inside, women with eyeliner, rouge and compact mirrors sat at tables, primping before saying their vows. In the men's room, there was a line at the mirror, as combs streaked through hair and collars were straightened.
''It's a very exciting time in history, and what better place for this to happen than in San Francisco?'' asked Jeff Adachi, the San Francisco public defender, who volunteered to stamp marriage licenses in the county assessor-recorder's office.
Ms. Teng, the assessor-recorder, said there was a sharp drop on Tuesday in the number of licenses issued to same-sex couples, in large part because her office had cut back on the staff dedicated to the task.
Still, 172 licenses had been issued by closing time at 4 p.m., bringing the total since last week to 2,636. Late in the day, Ms. Teng's office issued waiting-list numbers to several dozen couples in line, advising all others to come back Wednesday at 8 a.m.
Andy Birnbaum, 34, a lawyer from Los Angeles, was directing traffic in the dimly lighted corridors at City Hall, ushering couples with licenses toward the center rotunda, where they were cheered, married and photographed.
Mr. Birnbaum married his partner, Ron Elecciri-Hernandez, also from Los Angeles, on Monday, but decided to stay in San Francisco for a few more days to help get as many other couples married as possible.
''This is our honeymoon, and there is no way we would rather spend it,'' Mr. Birnbaum said. ''We will win in the long run. Any setbacks are temporary. No civil rights movement in this county has ever failed.''
