Rumors abound. The weave of fact is sometimes stitched over with fiction. A dollop of fancy may be thought to have spiced the narrative. One such example is that the Nets' improbable, implausible, imperturbable head coach, Lawrence Frank, was never a head coach before Jan. 26, when the Nets astonished the basketball world by announcing that he would be taking over.
It is true that he is the youngest and shortest head coach in the N.B.A. And he is alone among the league's 29 head coaches in having never played for a high school, college or professional team. But he had in fact run a team from the sideline before.
As a teenager in Teaneck, N.J., he was the player-coach of a C.Y.O. team. ''This way, I wasn't about to cut myself from the team,'' Frank said.
So Frank did not just drop from the sky to amaze the basketball world. He finds himself on the verge of setting an N.B.A. record for consecutive victories at the start of a coaching career. The Nets go for a record 10th straight victory under Frank's leadership Wednesday night against the Atlanta Hawks at Continental Arena.
Frank, 33, is ''approaching,'' as he said, ''5-8, depending on the shoes I'm wearing.'' His face is so youthful that, even though he was Byron Scott's assistant coach for the three and a half years that Scott was the Nets' head coach, he still would be questioned by skeptical arena security officials on the road.
While sitting in the coaches' work room on Monday at the Nets' practice facility, he told the story of his first coaching experience with the rush of enthusiasm, intensity and candor that seems to have captured the imagination and hearts of his players.
''I was, I think, 15 years old and had been cut from the high school team but loved basketball, was crazy for basketball, and I was competitive, but I also knew even back then that I wanted to be a coach one day,'' he said.
''I knew I didn't have quite enough to be a player -- not like my two older brothers, who started at point guard for Teaneck High School. So I played in gyms and parks and in our driveway, anywhere I could, and I was nondenominational. I played for the J.C.C. and I played for the C.Y.O.''
Frank, who is Jewish, played on a Jewish Community Center team, but he said he had insisted on being a player-coach with his Catholic Youth Organization team.
As a coach of 15- and 16-year-olds, he was astute enough to allow player Frank limited action, presaging an acumen that has impressed basketball people for years.
''I picked my spots,'' he said with a smile. ''And not when the game was on the line.''
Now, everyone seems to have a story about how hard Frank works, how driven he is to learn and absorb as much as he can about basketball.
''There was this Italian restaurant in Knoxville that was a favorite, but Lawrence never wanted to go, because he couldn't tear himself away from watching tapes of games,'' said Billy Schmidt, the associate athletic director of the University of Dayton, a longtime friend of Frank's, who was an assistant coach with him at Marquette and Tennessee.
''But Lawrence agreed to go only when we arranged to call ahead to the restaurant and order, and when we got there the meal was on the table. We ate in 10 minutes and shot back to the office. We didn't even turn the tape machine off. We just put it on pause.''
An official with the Nets said that Frank is so focused on basketball that a lot of what goes on in the world eludes him. ''Like one day a few months ago I mentioned Howard Dean to him,'' the official said. ''He looked at me and said, 'Who's Howard Dean?' ''
It not uncommon for Frank's wife, Susan, to get out of bed at 3 a.m. and find her husband watching game films or noodling over plays. She laughs about how immersed he can be in his work. Once, she recalled, they were on an airplane and ''Seinfeld'' was on the monitor. Frank said to her: ''Who is that guy? He's funny.''
Lawrence, Susan and their two daughters spent last weekend on vacation in Puerto Rico during the All-Star Game break. She put her foot down. ''No watching tape while we're on vacation,'' she said. He agreed, with one stipulation, that he could take his basketball books.
And he read them, but with a sense of guilt. ''It was like when you're a kid and you had to sneak a comic book to read inside your text book,'' he said.
When Susan began straightening up the hotel room, she cleared away scraps of paper. ''Oh no, give them back,'' he told her. ''Those are new plays.''
Frank served as a team manager at Indiana under Coach Bob Knight. After graduation, he worked as an assistant coach with Kevin O'Neill at Marquette. When O'Neill moved on to Tennessee, Frank went along.
From there, Frank worked as an assistant for three years with the Vancouver Grizzlies. His reputation for an extraordinary work ethic and a remarkably nimble mind convinced the Nets and Scott to bring him to New Jersey, just a few miles from where he had grown up in Teaneck.
''I felt that Byron Scott was losing the team,'' said Rod Thorn, the Nets' president. ''Most of the players felt he didn't make adequate adjustments in games, was lax in practice and had given over too much authority to Eddie Jordan, his top assistant.''
When Jordan left to coach the Washington Wizards, Frank replaced him as the team's top assistant coach.
''We had to make a change,'' Thorn said of Scott, even though, Thorn added, ''He was well liked personally.''
Thorn said he had been impressed with the way the players had come to trust and respect Frank as an assistant coach.
''What you don't know is how a guy will be accepted as a leader when he moves one seat over, from assistant to head coach,'' Thorn said. ''He makes the adjustments not just at halftime, but in the heat of battle, in the throes of the game. And he's not afraid to get into the players' faces if something is wrong.''
Frank has been playing down the significance of the record for consecutive victories at the beginning of an N.B.A. coaching career. ''Every guy could go after individual records, but that's not what this team is about,'' he said.
If he is to succeed in the long run, Frank believes, it will be because of something he recalled Muhammad Ali saying: ''It's not just what you do when the lights are turned on, it's what you do when no one is watching.''
Whether Frank likes it or not, the focus Wednesday night will be on the guy who did not make his high school team, but found another basketball way.
PRO BASKETBALL
