The owners of a Murray Hill apartment building where two people died and two others were seriously injured on Sunday from carbon monoxide poisoning came under growing scrutiny yesterday, as District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau and the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development pursued investigations.
Residents of the six-story rental building, at 535 Third Avenue between 35th and 36th Streets, were evacuated about 8 p.m. on Sunday -- some by firefighters who smashed through their doors -- after deadly levels of carbon monoxide were found to have leaked from the building's heating system.
Two men who shared a sixth-floor apartment were pronounced dead at the scene, and two women who lived on the fifth floor remained in critical condition yesterday at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx. Other residents, still unable to move back into their apartments yesterday, said there had been at least one carbon monoxide leak and a fire in the last two years.
''We are going to take a look to determine whether there was negligence,'' said Barbara Thompson, a spokeswoman for Mr. Morgenthau. ''And if there was negligence, did it rise to the level of criminality?''
Fire marshals and investigators for the city's Department of Buildings began looking into the cause of Sunday's leak immediately after it occurred, and said yesterday that their investigations were continuing.
And late yesterday, William Nieves, a housing code enforcement inspector, who was interviewed briefly as he visited the Third Avenue building, said his department wanted to know if the superintendent of 535 Third Avenue was a resident or lived within 200 feet of the building, as city law requires.
Two residents who returned to gather up belongings from the building said yesterday that they believed inadequate maintenance was at least partly to blame.
''This whole thing is just wrong, and it's a little bit spooky,'' said Charles Wojciechowski, 43, who has lived in the building for 20 years. He said he did not believe the superintendent was a fellow resident.
Michael Cohen, 23, who has lived in the building for less than a year, said he was moving out. ''This is the third time something like this has happened,'' he said.
Residents said the building is managed by Pan Am Equities. A phone call to that company's Manhattan executive office yesterday was not answered.
City records indicate the building is owned by United Enterprises, a company controlled by Fraydun Manocherian, a member of a large family real estate enterprise and the founder of the New York Health and Racquet Club. Calls left for him at the health club's executive office yesterday were not returned.
