POT-AU-FEU has been a fixture for years at George Lang's Café des Artistes, the ideal cold-weather, late-night supper after a concert or an opera at Lincoln Center. The cafe's new chef, Bill Peet, simmers a veal knuckle bone and a calf's foot overnight to make an unusually rich, golden stock; in that, he cooks leeks, carrots, cabbage, turnips, fennel and potatoes.
Talking about Figaro or ''La Traviata'' beneath Howard Chandler Christie's lusty murals, draining a few glasses of country red, nibbling brisket, short ribs and veal shank, sprinkled with coarse salt and daubed with horseradish or Dijon -- what could be more agreeable? Digging out the marrow and devouring it, that's what. (At 1 West 67th Street, near Central Park West; 212-877-3500.)
There is pot-au-feu in the heartland, too. Tribute, near Detroit, serves a splendid example, with foie gras among the meats, and the Washington Hotel, on a remote island in Lake Michigan, uses chuck, oxtail and short ribs from shorthorn steers that graze in nearby pastures to fashion a rustic version. (Tribute is at 31425 West 12 Mile Road, Farmington Hills, Mich., 248-848-9393. The Washington Hotel is on Rangeline Road, Washington Island, Wis.; 920-847-2169.)
Reservations at Babbo in Manhattan, tough anytime, are almost impossible on Sunday nights, because that is bollito misto night. Mario Batali goes all out, offering a cascade of boiled meats -- cotechino, tongue, brisket, veal shank and breast of capon -- and invigorating wines to complement them, like gutturnio from the hills near Piacenza, and barbera and nebbiolo from Piedmont.
The night we were there Babbo's broth was exceptional, its meats were skillfully timed and its vegetables less impressive. The condiments -- red pepper salsa, cranberry mostarda, chianti mustard and horseradish-laced salsa verde among the best -- were very, very Mario and very, very good. (At 110 Waverly Place, near Sixth Avenue, 212-777-0303.)
A continent away, at Alice Waters's Chez Panisse in Berkeley, Calif., Kelsie Kerr, the chef, demonstrated that you don't have to be Italian-American to make a fine bollito. Hers was full of Panisse panache. The salsa verde was sharpened with Meyer lemon. The cotechino, homemade, was studded with pistachios. The vegetables were magnificent, including cardoons and fleshy white Phipps Ranch beans, which Ms. Waters called ''not quite cannellini.'' The staff had tasted carrots that afternoon before choosing which to use. A niggle: I had to ask for the indispensable coarse salt. (At 1517 Shattuck Avenue, 510-548-5525.)
Viennese boiled beef? American raw materials can't match Austria's, so the succulence that marks the genuine article is hard to achieve. But Kurt Gutenbrunner, the talented chef who makes Wallsé, in the West Village, one of New York's most satisfying bistros, comes close with his kavalierspitz. (At 344 West 11th Street, at Washington Street, 212-352-2300.)
