WHILE Alex Rodriguez and Derek Jeter now play for the same team, the coming of Mr. Rodriguez to the New York Yankees could set up an off-field rivalry for endorsement dollars.
The trade that brought Mr. Rodriguez to New York is likely to transform an athlete who has been of only mild interest to advertisers into an endorsement superstar, sports marketing experts say. His status would finally befit his performance statistics -- assuming he helps his new team win additional pennants and world championships.
The experts also predicted yesterday, as the Yankees formally showed off Mr. Rodriguez in pinstripes, that his arrival from the Texas Rangers may serve to set up a competition for commercials between him and Mr. Jeter, the longtime Yankee standout pitchman.
''Advertising is a pretty fickle business, where 'new and improved' is always a choice over 'tried and true,''' said Nova Lanktree, executive vice president for player marketing at Lanktree Sports in Skokie, Ill., a consulting company owned by CSMG Sports.
''Derek Jeter is so great that I don't want to diminish his value,'' she added, ''but Alex Rodriguez is a new face, a new personality, and this could be very catalytic for his endorsement career.''
The likely spike in Madison Avenue's interest in Mr. Rodriguez is emblematic of recent changes in how marketers view endorsers who are athletes. There has been much more of a focus on proven players like Mr. Rodriguez rather than the flavor of the month who hits a home run to win a pennant -- anyone remember Aaron Boone? -- or scores the winning touchdown in a Super Bowl.
That trend is particularly evident in baseball because national marketers, responding to the rise in fan ardor for football, basketball and stock-car racing, have been paring their baseball signings to concentrate on the bigger, more prominent stars with staying power like Mr. Jeter, Roger Clemens, Cal Ripken Jr. and Sammy Sosa.
''There are only so many baseball-related endorsements to go around,'' said Bob Williams, president of Burns Sports and Celebrities in Evanston, Ill., which helps match advertisers and athletes, ''and it really comes down to proving yourself on the field.''
That said, Mr. Williams added, there is an additional element that has impeded Mr. Rodriguez's endorsement career: ''He may be the greatest shortstop who ever lived. But when you're buried in last place in Texas, advertisers tend to look elsewhere.''
Of course, not only is Mr. Rodriguez joining a successful team, he is joining a long-successful team, in the biggest media market in America, which just also happens to be, as Mr. Williams put it, ''the epicenter of advertising.''
That should significantly improve the lineup of marketers looking at Mr. Rodriguez.
''Certainly he hasn't been anonymous, but he has just not been making it into the postseason, where there are more viewers for baseball on TV, and more casual viewers, which is how you make a household name for yourself,'' said Bob Dorfman, a sports analyst who assesses the endorsement potential of athletes as the executive vice president and creative director at Pickett Advertising in San Francisco.
While playing for the Rangers, and the Seattle Mariners before that, Mr. Rodriguez appeared in campaigns for brands like AllSport sports drink; Amtrak; Mennen skin-care products, sold by Colgate-Palmolive; and Radio Shack. Some of the ads played up his Hispanic roots by appealing to Spanish-speaking consumers.
An indication of how Mr. Rodriguez, nicknamed A-Rod, has not been quite A-list in advertising: A newspaper coupon ad in 2001 in which he appeared for the Mennen Speed Stick Ultimate antiperspirant misspelled his surname as ''Rodriquez.''
By contrast, Mr. Jeter's campaigns have been for more visible marketers like Gatorade, the leader in sports drinks; Skippy peanut butter; and Visa, which had him in two popular commercials last year by BBDO Worldwide in New York. And while both players are Nike endorsers, Mr. Jeter is a member of Team Jordan, a cadre of athletes Nike considers such powerful endorsers they hawk the Michael Jordan brand of apparel and footwear.
Mr. Jeter is ''a great-looking guy with class and humility and substance, but what sets him apart is one word: winner,'' said Matthew Lalin, executive vice president at Steiner Sports Marketing in New Rochelle, N.Y. ''When you win in New York, you're idolized; that's what it's about.''
''A-Rod is going to need to win to go to that level,'' he added.
That caution was echoed by Mr. Dorfman, who warned that ''there is a lot of pressure'' on Mr. Rodriguez -- not only to continue playing as superbly as he has in Seattle and Texas but also to help the Yankees win the World Series.
''If they fall short of that,'' Mr. Dorfman said, ''it would be seen as a major disappointment.''
Of course, there may not be an either-or war between Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Jeter for endorsements.
''They might be great in tandem,'' Ms. Lanktree said.
In fact, Major League Baseball has already paired the two new teammates, before they were teammates, using them both in a commercial to promote opening day of the 2004 season that ran right after Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1. The spot by McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising in New York, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, also featured Mr. Rodriguez's wife, Cynthia, and the Florida Marlins pitcher Josh Beckett.
Might Visa twin Mr. Rodriguez and Mr. Jeter in new commercials, perhaps with the principal owner of the Yankees, George Steinbrenner, with whom Mr. Jeter appeared in his humorous Visa spots last year?
''Visa is always looking for advertising creative that would be both relevant to consumers and newsworthy,'' said Will Valentine, a spokesman for Visa. ''In terms of specifics, obviously there's nothing in the hopper right now.''
Mr. Dorfman of Pickett Advertising had some tongue-in-cheek suggestions for how Mr. Rodriguez could be put to work immediately: ''With the pressure to perform, he could advertise Viagra or Cialis; with the amount of money he'll make playing in New York, Merrill Lynch or the New York Stock Exchange; and with him leaving Texas for New York, Southwest Airlines or American Airlines.''
Actually, the Yankees are wasting no time in using Mr. Rodriguez as a marketing tool. The sign board outside Yankee Stadium in the Bronx already proclaims, ''A Rod, Welcome to NY.''
And as the Sports Business Daily Web site reported yesterday, Mike Francesca, a host on the WFAN-AM radio station, called the Yankee ticket line during his show so listeners could hear a taped message with the voice of Mr. Rodriguez asking callers to wait for an operator.
Those Yankees sure are fast operators.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
