Following are excerpts from comments by Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, Senator John Edwards of Massachusetts and Howard Dean yesterday after the Wisconsin primary, as recorded by The New York Times:
Mr. Kerry
What motivates us and drives us in this race and in this cause all across the country, what brings all of you here together tonight and in the past days in states across the nation -- in Tennessee and Virginia, to the north the Dakotas, to the west Washington and now here in Wisconsin -- is that we have a vision. We see an America where every child can go to a good school. We see an America where every teacher is respected for doing one of the most important jobs in our country and respected not just in words but respected in the resources we give the schools to be able to do the job. Because we see a country where the doors of higher education are open to all. And when I am president we will have a $4,000 per pupil tuition tax credit. And we will help young people take part in national service out of high school, two years of service, and we'll pay for their full in-state four-year-college public education.
And what drives us also is our vision where we see an America where we cut the poverty of millions instead of cutting the taxes of millionaires. We need fairness in America. We see an America where each of us has something to give and each of us is challenged to give something back to our country. We see an America of civil rights and civil liberties.
Mr. Edwards
I've been looking forward to the time when this is a two-person race and people will focus on Senator Kerry and myself. It now appears that we're very close to that place and maybe already there. And so this is the moment I've been looking for. I believe if that happens the choice that I give voters, which is different than Senator Kerry, as somebody who comes from them, who understands the problems that they have in their lives, who understands what the loss of a job means, who has both trade policy and tax policy that will work for all Americans and not just the privileged few. And I think there are real differences between us. And that's the moment I've been looking for.
Dr. Dean
I know that some of you are disappointed because we didn't do as well as we'd hoped we would do in Wisconsin. But I also want you to think for a moment about how far we have come. There are a lot of people in this room that are young. And when you're young, you never think things go as fast as you'd like them to go. But the truth is, change is tough. And there's enormous institutional pressure in this country against change. There's enormous institutional pressure in Washington against change, in the Democratic Party against change. And you have already started to change the Democratic Party. And we will not stop.
You have already written the platform of the Democratic Party for this election. A year ago, the Democrats were falling all over each other to vote for the war in Iraq. They sure don't talk like that now. A year ago, the Democrats were accepting reckless budget deficits and huge tax cuts that mortgage our children's futures. They don't talk like that anymore. A year ago, they were adopting the president's education policies, which leave every child behind. They all voted for it, but they don't support it anymore.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
