In this unsettled Democratic primary season, time has been John Edwards's friend, and tough competition has always inspired John Kerry, and on Tuesday the searching, independent-minded voters of Wisconsin gave both men a bit more of each.
Senator Kerry racked up another victory, but Senator Edwards's second-place showing made it easier for him to argue that the 29 days since the Iowa caucuses have not been enough time to pick his party's best-tested nominee. Mr. Kerry now faces at least a couple of more weeks of the kind of contest that has helped sharpen his skills on the stump.
Democratic Party leaders designed this year's front-loaded primary process to produce a consensus candidate quickly, without bloodletting and with the broad backing needed to take on President Bush. Mr. Kerry had hoped Wisconsin would make him the near-nominee with just such support -- and with an array of pragmatic policy positions on topics from tax cuts, to trade to gay marriage that he contends can make him competitive in November -- and he came ever closer.
Still, Mr. Kerry could not quite close the deal, and this famously iconoclastic state gave Mr. Edwards hard evidence for his own lawyer's case that a mere month of voting should not produce a verdict. He won the support of about half the primary voters who made up their minds within the last three days, according to a survey of those leaving the polls. And with Wisconsin allowing independents and Republicans to vote in its open primary, the senator from North Carolina also won the support of roughly 4 in 10 non-Democrats, compared with about a quarter for Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards's campaign skills have improved with each election, and he declared Tuesday that Wisconsin voters had decided, ''Objects in your mirror may be closer than they appear.'' Perhaps, but it is also fair to ask how much a second-place finish, even a fairly close one, in a single state might ultimately matter. The next batch of primaries will not all have Wisconsin's multiparty participation. Mr. Edwards has already signaled he may skip the biggest one, California, and Mr. Kerry now has roughly three times as many delegates.
Howard Dean has seen his own candidacy come full circle from asterisk to afterthought, with a few heady months as a fiery, front-running asteroid in between. He had staked out Wisconsin as his last stand, but came in a distant third. ''We are not done,'' he vowed, but he may be. Depending on how and whether he decides to retool his efforts -- as a quest for personal vindication or as a journey to keep molding the party he briefly electrified -- he has already largely framed the terms of the debate. Both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards now covet his support, and his supporters. And Mr. Kerry now calls his own campaign a cause.
If Dr. Dean spent months allowing restive Democrats to feel that it was good to be angry, Mr. Kerry began persuading voters last month that it would be better to get even -- for the election of 2000. In his final rallies here, Dr. Dean was still urging voters to send a message to Washington, while Mr. Kerry long ago asked them to send a president. Now, Mr. Edwards is arguing that he deserves yet another look, and though he has lost 16 states, just enough voters have kept agreeing with him to keep him in the race.
''This is a great place for the Democrats to be,'' said Mandy Grunwald, a media consultant who advised Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut until he dropped out of the race earlier this month. ''The president's on the defensive,'' she said. ''I think if this goes on some more, it actually isn't so bad for the Democrats, or for Kerry, to keep going out there. The American people are learning more and more about John Kerry and the Democrats, all of which is good, and I'm not that eager to shift to the Republicans training their full fire on one person.''
Members of any party were allowed to participate in Wisconsin's primary, and about twice as many people who called themselves Republicans voted here on Tuesday as in any other state so far, offering at least a tentative hint of Mr. Edwards's potential appeal in a general election.
Mr. Edwards again did significantly better than Mr. Kerry among voters who said that the economy was the issue that mattered most in making their decision, the survey found. That issue was cited by more voters here than any other -- roughly 40 percent -- and Mr. Edwards won nearly half of their votes, compared with about a third for Mr. Kerry. Among the 20 percent of voters who said that the impression that the candidate cared about them was most important, Mr. Edwards drew close to half, compared with about a third for Mr. Kerry.
The survey of voters leaving polling places throughout the state was conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the television networks and The Associated Press.
Mr. Kerry's and Mr. Edwards's contrasts with each other are mostly textbook questions of style and tone. On Tuesday night, when Mr. Kerry took to television to claim victory and bumped Mr. Edwards's own ebullient speech off the air, it was as if a pep rally had morphed into math class.
Still, as Representative Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, a Kerry supporter, put it, ''President Bush said that he was a uniter and not a divider, and he has united the Democratic Party in a way it has not been united in a generation.'' He added: ''Every candidate is now 95 percent on the same sheet. Each has a different articulation of it, but they all oppose Bush in the same way.''
If Mr. Edwards, who has run an upbeat campaign, is to continue as an alternative to Mr. Kerry, he will face pressure to begin drawing some sharper differences with his opponent. He suggested one possible approach in their debate Sunday night by gently mocking Mr. Kerry for a long-winded answer about his vote to authorize Mr. Bush to use force in Iraq, a position Mr. Edwards shared.
Mr. Kerry did not wear especially well in the period in early 2003 when he was seen by many party leaders as the presumptive front-runner. Only after he slipped far behind Dr. Dean in the polls and joined him and Mr. Bush in opting out of public financing and the spending and contribution limits that come with it did Mr. Kerry begin to rebound.
Joe Trippi, who built a half-million strong Internet-based following as Dr. Dean's campaign manager until he was replaced after Dr. Dean lost the New Hampshire primary said, ''Even the opt-out happened because of Dean. We moved the entire debate.''
Mr. Edwards is now betting that he can move it some more.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEWS ANALYSIS
