The top market makers at the New York Stock Exchange have tentatively agreed with regulators to pay about $240 million in penalties and fines because of trading abuses, capping a yearlong investigation at the Big Board, people involved in the settlement said yesterday.
The figure is a significant increase over the $150 million that the Securities and Exchange Commission first proposed that specialists pay late last year, suggesting that both the exchange and its specialists were eager to cut a deal at a time when the Big Board has been under increased regulatory scrutiny.
The investigation conducted by the S.E.C. and the exchange's regulatory staff has exposed some frailties of the stock exchange's 211-year-old open outcry trading model, which relies on a swarm of specialist traders on the floor of the exchange to serve as middlemen, helping investors to arrive at the best possible price for a stock.
Of the $240 million, at least $150 million is expected to go to investors harmed by the trading infractions, with the rest to be paid as fines, officials involved in the discussions said.
''I think the specialists had extraordinary incentive to settle,'' John C. Coffee Jr., a professor of securities law at Columbia University, said. ''They were fighting not only the N.Y.S.E., but Congress and the S.E.C. too.''
Four of the top five specialist firms on the exchange are expected to pay more than $50 million in disgorgement and fines, bankers involved in the talks said.
They include, LaBranche &amp; Company, the largest specialist firm; Fleet Specialist, a unit of the FleetBoston Financial Corporation; Spear, Leeds &amp; Kellogg, owned by Goldman, Sachs; and Van der Moolen Specialists, a unit of Van der Moolen Holdings. The fifth firm, Bear Wagner, a unit of Bear Stearns, is expected to pay $15 million to $30 million.
The S.E.C., the stock exchange and representatives from the specialist firms declined to comment yesterday.
The settlement comes at a sensitive time for the Big Board. On Friday, John A. Thain, the exchange's new chief executive, will testify before a Congressional panel on the future of specialists in today's markets. He is expected to promote the role of the Big Board's specialist traders in securing the best prices for customers trading on the exchange.
The disclosures that some specialists were suspected of trading ahead of customers for their own benefit, thus harming investors, has been rich fodder for an array of stock exchange critics, ranging from the rival Nasdaq to pension funds and large mutual fund investors like Fidelity Investments, which have argued that electronic trading would prevent such abuses.
Many of these critics have said that the trading scandal, and the involvement of the S.E.C., proves that the exchange is not capable of regulating itself, as it does now.
While the stock exchange controls 80 percent of the market for its listed stocks, it has been under attack for years by a new breed of electronic exchanges that match buy and sell orders instantly by computer, without allowing market makers the time to improve on the price.
This method was closely associated with Richard A. Grasso, its most passionate defender, who resigned last year as the exchange's chairman because of the public outcry over his $139.5 million pay package. The stock exchange has said that its model delivers the best possible price 94 percent of the time.
Big board critics contend that the process, relying as it does on humans, is susceptible to fraud, in addition to being too slow for many of today's investors who place more of a premium on speed of execution.
While regulators at the Big Board discovered the trading abuses early last year, the investigation did not pick up speed until the fall, when the S.E.C. began to assume a greater role in determining how serious the infractions were.
According to an internal report by the S.E.C., specialists traded ahead of their customer orders in order to benefit from advantageous prices. They also violated exchange rules by stepping between existing buyers and sellers and purchasing stock, only to sell it moments later, a practice called interpositioning.
As prescribed by exchange rules, specialists can intervene in a trade only when there is no ready buyer and seller and they do so using their own capital.
When they intervene, they can capture the difference between buy and sell orders that should go to their customers instead of them.
In calculating the extent of customer losses, the S.E.C. required that the time frame used to examine the trades be reduced to 14 seconds from 60. This shorter period showed a higher amount of backed-up orders and higher losses, leading to the $240 million in penalties and fines.
Such a move met with sharp protest from the specialists, who contended that such a shortened time frame was draconian and did not paint a true picture of the disputed customer losses. In the last few months, specialists and federal and exchange regulators have engaged in drawn out negotiations over the appropriate sum to pay.
Earlier this month, the S.E.C. set a deadline of yesterday for the specialist firms. They could either agree to the penalties imposed or face a civil lawsuit from the S.E.C. and the possibility of an even steeper financial punishment.
While Mr. Thain has no authority over regulatory matters at the exchange, a cease-fire between the specialists and federal regulators was essential to his ambitious plans to bring more electronic trading to the exchange.
Earlier this month, Mr. Thain laid out a plan to make it easier for investors to trade electronically on the exchange by scratching limits on the time and size of their trades. While the system is not yet in effect, it is expected to increase electronic trading on the exchange.
Despite some reservations with regard to the possible negative effect on their business, specialists have supported the plan, seeing it as an efficient way to increase customer satisfaction while responding to the exchange's critics.
Several of these critics are scheduled to testify at the hearing by the House subcommittee on capital markets this week.
They include Gerald D. Putnam, the chief executive of Archipelago, the largest of the electronic exchanges, and Robert Greifeld, the chief executive of Nasdaq.
The meeting will be in New York and will be led by Representative Richard H. Baker of Louisiana, who earlier this month wrote a letter to William H. Donaldson, the chairman of the S.E.C., asking that the ''trade-through rule,'' which ensures that traders obtain the best possible price for their customers regardless of which market they trade on, be abolished. Stock exchange critics say the rule is outdated and favors the specialists by directing most trades to the Big Board.
The stock exchange has been furiously lobbying lawmakers and regulators to keep the rule intact.
