A game between two teams that swear by yawn-inducing, defense-first systems unexpectedly dissolved into a thriller. The Devils took the lead three times Tuesday, and the Minnesota Wild tied the score three times.
And all that happened in the first two periods. The Wild scored one more time, then the Devils scored again. Given even more room in overtime to skate, neither team scored, and an entertaining game ended in an unlikely 4-4 tie at Continental Arena.
''I thought it would be a chess match,'' Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer said.
Minnesota took the lead for the first time with 7 minutes 48 seconds remaining in regulation on right wing Marian Gaborik's third goal of the game. His power-play shot sneaked past Devils defenseman Colin White and goaltender Martin Brodeur.
''He just whacked at it,'' White said.
But the Devils tied the score 81 seconds later when right wing Brian Gionta stood his ground in front of Minnesota goaltender Manny Fernandez and deflected a pass from Niedermayer for his second goal of the game.
''It was a nerve-racking game,'' Gionta said.
The Devils (30-16-11-1) gained a point on the Philadelphia Flyers, the Atlantic Division leaders, who lost on Tuesday to Tampa Bay. The Flyers (31-14-11-5) have a 6-point lead on the Devils, who have played three fewer games.
''I think we should make a run at it,'' said Devils defenseman David Hale, who returned to the lineup after missing five games with a knee injury.
The Devils opened the scoring when Erik Rasmussen beat Fernandez at 15:53. They are 24-4-7-0 when they score first and are 6-12-4-1 when they do not.
But five goals were scored in a second period, something that both teams were at a loss to explain. ''People will probably have to look twice when they see the score sheet tomorrow,'' Devils center Scott Gomez said.
Minnesota tied the score early in the second period. Wild right wing Alexandre Daigle stole the puck from Devils defenseman Sean Brown behind the Devils' goal. Daigle fed Gaborik with a pass that Gaborik smacked in at 2:02.
The Devils regained the lead at 5:28 with a power-play goal. Minnesota right wing Richard Park was one second from completing an obstruction-tripping penalty when Devils defenseman Paul Martin scored on a one-timer.
The goal, Martin's fourth of the season and second in two games, was the first of three goals in a chaotic span of 4:38. The Wild tied the score again at 6:38 after Brodeur misplayed the puck for the second time in three games.
Brodeur went to his left to play a loose puck and shoved it toward the Devils' blue line. But Minnesota center Sergei Zholtok intercepted the puck and flipped in his 13th goal as Brodeur scrambled back to the crease.
''They were more confident to see that Brodeur is human -- that he makes mistakes like other goaltenders,'' Minnesota Coach Jacques Lemaire, a former Devils coach, said of his players.
Brodeur, who was critical last week of a proposal by N.H.L. general managers to limit puck-handling by goalies, slammed his stick after the goal. He gave up a goal under almost identical circumstances in the Devils' 4-1 victory over Carolina on Saturday.
''I mean well when I go out there,'' Brodeur said, ''and I try to help everybody out, but sometimes I make mistakes.''
The Devils had the lead again less than four minutes later. Left wing Jeff Friesen, blazing down the right wing, flung a pass that hit Gionta's shin pad and went in at 10:06. Gionta got his 13th goal of the season.
The Devils' third lead lasted less than eight minutes. Zholtok won a face-off with John Madden in the circle to Brodeur's right, and Gaborik snapped a shot past Brodeur at 18:01. The third period was not much tighter.
''Close game, but extremely tough,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''We knew it was going to be tight, but I thought it was pretty entertaining.
HOCKEY
