Shoulders hunched forward and hands clasped on knees, Bishop Howard J. Hubbard of Albany looked toward a row of television cameras, his shadow cast starkly against the white wall behind him. He proclaimed that he had lived a lifetime of chastity, but acknowledged, ''I think the taint will always be there.''
A man once lauded as a ''street priest'' who fought for social justice, Bishop Hubbard is fighting for something else these days: his reputation in the face of accusations last week that he had a homosexual affair with a man who later killed himself, and that he had sexual encounters with a teenage street hustler.
The nation's bishops have struggled for two years with defending themselves over their handling of priests who sexually abused minors. Several have resigned after allegations of abuse, while others have quietly weathered false charges against them. But few bishops have ever waged so public a battle over such sordid accusations.
A dose of intrigue was added Sunday when the body of an Albany priest was found in the priest's home. Although the police have not disclosed a cause of death, the Albany diocese said that it apparently was suicide. The priest, the Rev. John Minkler, 57, had met with Bishop Hubbard two days earlier over a nine-year-old letter that denounced the bishop, accusing him of homosexual affairs, tolerating gay activity in the priesthood and departing from church teachings. Bishop Hubbard said that Father Minkler sought the meeting to deny having written the letter after it surfaced in a local television report.
No lawsuit or charges have been filed against Bishop Hubbard, 65, regarding the accusations, and the Albany County district attorney has revealed evidence casting doubt on the truthfulness of one of his accusers. Nevertheless, to fight back, Bishop Hubbard -- a fixture in Albany for 40 years and one of the nation's most liberal bishops -- has begun a campaign to win over public opinion.
He quickly called for an independent investigator to establish his innocence. Yesterday, the diocese announced that Mary Jo White, a former United States attorney in Manhattan, had been hired ''to investigate and issue a public report on allegations of sexual misconduct'' against the bishop. Ms. White, now chief of the litigation department at the New York City law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, said in a statement that she took the job only after a promise of total independence, plentiful resources and the diocese's full cooperation.
Bishop Hubbard has promised to take a lie detector test. His aides have organized a media blitz, which included inviting five local television stations to hear his story Thursday, and meeting with the editorial boards of the local newspapers. A recent issue of the diocesan paper, The Evangelist, devoted eight pages to the case under the rubric ''Bishop Fights Back.''
''I feel that I've been stripped of my dignity,'' a weary-seeming Bishop Hubbard said last week in an interview after the group TV appearance. ''I feel very embarrassed and very humiliated.'' Add to that fear, anger, pain and disappointment, he said. ''But with it all, I really am at peace because I know that I am innocent.''
The bishop has compared himself to another prelate, Cardinal Joseph Bernardin of Chicago, who in 1993 was accused of sexual abuse by a man who later recanted. Bishop Hubbard said that the day after the accusation against the cardinal surfaced, he spent long hours with him working on a document for the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops.
''I've never seen a man who was so at peace with himself,'' Bishop Hubbard said. ''He never lost his dignity. He never lost his grace.''
The very fact that he would pour out his heart so much, the bishop and his aides say, makes his case. Who else but an innocent man would put himself, his friends and his family through such an ordeal?
''I'm not sure what else is to be done,'' said Bishop Matthew H. Clarke of Rochester, one of Bishop Hubbard's closest friends. ''Anyone in his position who has been subjected to what he has been subjected to is pretty defenseless.''
One critic, however, said that the bishop's record in handling sexually abusive priests in his diocese was really responsible for his predicament.
''If these allegations came out without this bad history, he would weather the storm without a problem,'' said Mark Furnish, a victim of clerical sexual abuse and leader of the local chapter of Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests.
The bishop acknowledges allowing at least four priests to continue in ministry despite abuse allegations, saying he was following the advice of mental health professionals. The diocese also acknowledged paying out $2.3 million rather than what it had previously said was ''hundreds of thousands'' of dollars toward settlements with abuse victims.
He has apologized repeatedly. ''My greatest failing is that I did not handle allegations of sexual abuse with the transparency and accountability that should have been present,'' Bishop Hubbard said in the interview. Nor, the bishop went on, did he appreciate the long-term effects of abuse on victims.
Bishop Hubbard was a seminarian in Rome during the early years of the Second Vatican Council, and he brought the council's modernizing spirit back to Albany as a young priest in the 1960's. The council infused him, he said, with a sense of the church's universality and the importance of the laity. He spent his early priesthood running programs for the poor, homeless and addicted, often taking them to treatment programs himself.
''He just took care of the people,'' said Elizabeth Servitello, a public health nurse in Albany in those years who often referred cases to Father Hubbard. ''He worked the streets.''
When he was named bishop in 1977 -- at 38, the youngest ever appointed until then -- one black activist proclaimed, ''They picked one of ours!'' according to the Rev. Robert C. Lamar, a retired Presbyterian minister who worked with Father Hubbard on social programs.
Because he was appointed so young, Bishop Hubbard remains one of the few serving bishops appointed by Pope Paul VI. He was recommended by Archbishop Jean Jadot, the papal nuncio in the 1970's who was responsible for a cadre of liberal-minded bishops.
Bishop Hubbard has shown a tendency to take unpopular stands. In 1966, three years after his ordination, he said white Catholics had to confront their racism and apologize to blacks. Twenty years later, Bishop Hubbard was an early voice calling on Catholics to accept the church's complicity in the origins of anti-Semitism. In 2002, when the American bishops met in Dallas to address the raging abuse scandal, Bishop Hubbard took a quixotic position against a zero-tolerance policy for abuser priests, which passed overwhelmingly in the face of widespread public outrage.
As bishop, he has been outspoken in favor of labor unions and prison reform, and in opposition to the Rockefeller-era drug laws and the death penalty.
Bishop Hubbard's current chapter of distress began on Feb. 11, when a California man, Andrew Zalay, held a news conference in Albany arranged by John Aretakis, a lawyer who has repeatedly sued the diocese over clerical sex abuse cases. Mr. Zalay said he had recently discovered a suicide note by his brother, Thomas Zalay, from 1978. It was unsigned, undated, typewritten and mentions a sexual affair with a bishop named Howard. The diocese has questioned its authenticity.
Bishop Hubbard rushed back from vacation in Florida and held a news conference the next day denying the allegation. Then, Mr. Aretakis brought forth another man who said that as a teenage street hustler he had two sexual encounters with the bishop in the late 1970's.
The bishop asked the Albany County district attorney, Paul A. Clyne, to investigate the Zalay matter. Mr. Clyne said there was no crime for him to investigate. He released the original police report about Mr. Zalay's death, which said he was mentally disturbed and had a history of suicide attempts.
Bishop Hubbard said he had no recollection of either man. He promised to remain as bishop as long as he had the support of the priests of the diocese, his flock and brother bishops. Cardinal Edward M. Egan of New York, himself the subject of an unfounded accusation, backs him, the bishop said. Some parishioners wear purple ribbons as a sign of support.
The latest controversy may be a defining moment for the bishop, but he has weathered criticism for years from conservatives in the church.
He says the debate over the ordination of women should continue, and has promoted many women to important positions in the diocese. Celibacy, he said, was a question ''that could carefully be restudied.''
Although he once backed lawsuits (ultimately unsuccessfully) to block licenses for two abortion clinics, he said opposition to abortion is no more important than a range of ''pro-life'' issues, including concern for the poor, homeless and mentally ill. He supported New York's gay rights bill. During the interview last week, he declined to say whether he supports laws defining marriage as a union between a man and a woman.For years Bishop Hubbard has been the subject of a whispered campaign that his diocese was friendly to gay priests, and that he was gay. His critics include a traditionalist group called Roman Catholic Faithful in Petersburg, Ill., and The Wanderer, an ultraconservative newspaper.
One of his fiercest critics is Mr. Aretakis, who says he represents scores of people with abuse allegations and who has been engaged in an increasingly nasty fight with the diocese. One of its officials lodged an ethics violation against him for his conduct in a lawsuit. He, in turn, has passed on to reporters allegations that the diocese is rife with homosexually active clergy, including the letter linked to Father Minkler.
''Why do you think a bishop protects the sickest of the sick?'' Mr. Aretakis asked. ''He is hiding so much of his own personal life.''
Many of Bishop Hubbard's supporters and critics agree that scandal has come to dominate his agenda.
''I just hope, in the end,'' said Bishop Clark of Rochester, ''people will be at peace and rest in the truth.''
Correction:  February 20, 2004, Friday  An article on Wednesday about the fight by Bishop Howard J. Hubbard of Albany against claims that he had sexual encounters with two men misstated the date of a news conference by a man who said his brother had a sexual affair with the bishop. The conference took place Feb. 4, not Feb. 11.
