At Howard Dean's primary-election-night party in a hotel ballroom here, flag-waving supporters on Tuesday ignored the television in the corner, which bore no good news. And when Dr. Dean took the stage, he avoided any mention of the election that had taken place.
He did not try to explain his third-place showing in what he had insisted was a must-win state. Nor did he say what he would do next.
Instead, Dr. Dean claimed a victory of sorts for affecting the debate among Democrats, and he vowed to keep fighting: for change, if not for his own candidacy.
''We are not done yet,'' he declared, drawing sustained applause from a relatively small crowd.
''You have already started to change the Democratic Party, and we will not stop,'' he said, noting that presidential candidates who once voted to authorize the use of force in Iraq now denounce the war. ''You have already written the platform of the Democratic Party for this election.''
Within a half-hour of his final ovation, Dr. Dean flew home to Burlington, Vt., where he planned to meet with advisers to decide his next moves.
He has no campaign events scheduled, and many of his aides say they expect an announcement by Thursday that he will abandon his White House bid and instead create a political action group working to oust President Bush and fill Congress and state legislatures with Democrats.
But on Tuesday night, Dr. Dean left his options open in his speech, which he and his aides worked on for several hours Tuesday.
''We have a long way to go,'' he said, leaving a silence where his trademark list of upcoming primary battlegrounds might have been. ''In order to change America, we have to fundamentally change Washington, both the Democrats and the Republicans.''
But even some of his heartiest backers think Dr. Dean should withdraw.
''I've been a supporter since May; I love the guy,'' said Daniel Sosnay, 20, a University of Wisconsin junior who wore his blue Dean T-shirt to Tuesday night's party. ''The money's not there. There's no more momentum. There's nothing left. It's time to go home.''
After his defeats in Iowa and New Hampshire, Dr. Dean decided to make a last stand here in Wisconsin, friendly turf where he had drawn 5,000 in October for a rally in this left-leaning college town. He said he believed the state was his best hope for challenging the front-runner, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. He abandoned operations in most other states voting beforehand, and on Feb. 5 he upended his schedule to fly to Milwaukee after sending an e-mail fund-raising plea to supporters saying he would be ''out of the race'' if he lost here.
Money poured in -- more than $1 million in two days -- but Dr. Dean meandered through a moribund schedule for several days, having staked his claim but seeming to be without a strategy. He spent only $227,000 on television advertisements -- less than his two main rivals -- and kept as his state director a 24-year-old yet to complete the University of Wisconsin, while Mr. Kerry sent experienced operatives who had already scored significant victories on his behalf.
Eight days before the election, Dr. Dean rolled out a new slogan, ''Real Choice, Real Change,'' and a new speech that argued that he alone had stood up against President Bush on critical issues, that he fit into Wisconsin's progressive, independent tradition and that voters here should disrupt Mr. Kerry's apparent lightning bolt toward the nomination.
But Dr. Dean upstaged the new message, telling a television reporter in Green Bay that he would continue campaigning regardless of the results in Wisconsin. Despite dwindling crowds and defecting endorsers, Dr. Dean claimed he had been overwhelmed by supporters begging him not to quit.
For the next week, Dr. Dean spent much of his time answering questions about what he would do on Wednesday. His staff made post-Wisconsin plans in warmer climes than Vermont, many of those who had once endorsed him reached out to rivals and his campaign chairman said he would leave the campaign should Dr. Dean lose Tuesday night.
For days he lurched back and forth over how he would respond to a loss. He acknowledged the campaign was likely to change shape, perhaps becoming more of a movement than a candidacy. But he also insisted he could still win, ignoring the polls, the pundits and the people -- or lack of them -- at his events.
Tuesday night, it looked like Dr. Dean's Stop Kerry theme had only helped Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. But he told his supporters here, ''We, together, have only begun our work.
''People have said that we have begun to transform the Democratic Party,'' he said. ''But the transformation that we have wrought is a transformation of convenience, not of conviction, and we have to fight and fight and fight.''
''We will change the Democratic Party, we will change America and we will change the White House,'' he continued. ''Let's fight on. On Wisconsin. Keep up the fight for a better America. Never give up, never give up, never give up.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
