Surprise and anger coursed through the Brooklyn neighborhood of a teenager shot on a housing project rooftop by a police officer last month after word spread that a grand jury had decided yesterday not to indict the officer.
The decision baffled many residents of Bedford-Stuyvesant, where Timothy Stansbury Jr., an unarmed 19-year-old, was shot on Jan. 24 by the officer, Richard S. Neri Jr. Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly had said the shooting appeared unjustified.
Mr. Stansbury's relatives were angered by a decision they saw as an application of the law that was sloppy at best and biased at worst.
Mr. Stansbury's sister, Timetress Stansbury, said the family planned to take further legal action. Councilman Charles Barron, a candidate for mayor who has become something of a spokesman for the dead man's family, met with Mr. Stansbury's parents yesterday and said they would request that a federal grand jury open a civil rights investigation into the shooting. However, the family's lawyer said the parents had not decided whether they would take action.
''I didn't expect this,'' said Mr. Stansbury's uncle, Wayne Clayburne. ''I expected something to happen. Not just let my nephew lay dead like that.
''We're back to where we started from,'' Mr. Clayburne added. ''And it hurts so bad.''
In the apartment of Mr. Stansbury's grandmother, Irene Clayburne, where friends gathered to comfort the family, angry questions and statements were plentiful.
''I want that dog to go to jail,'' Ms. Clayburne said, her hands clasping her face at times. ''He killed my child. That's where I want him. That's where he should be. I want justice.''
Although the authorities said that Officer Neri could still face departmental charges of violating police policy, Mr. Stansbury's relatives and residents of the Louis Armstrong Houses, where the shooting occurred, seemed convinced that the officer would escape punishment.
''What angers me most is this officer may get off scot-free,'' Ms. Stansbury said. ''I'll do whatever it takes, even if it means committing the rest of my life to get justice. We are going to the federal level next.''
Ms. Stansbury's boyfriend, who identified himself only as Dwayne, said, ''We understand they are here to serve and protect, but if I shot a cop, they'd put me under the prison, not in it.''
Councilman Barron, speaking to residents in the neighborhood last night, said he saw racial bias in the jury's ruling, and he cited previous acquittals in police shootings of unarmed civilians, like the killing five years ago of Amadou Diallo in the Bronx.
''This system stinks when it comes to getting justice for black and Latino people,'' Mr. Barron said. ''They are sending a dangerous signal to white cops that they can shoot us with impunity.
''What do we tell our people now? What do we do now?''
Some residents said the Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, whose office had sought a grand jury indictment, had not pursued the case aggressively enough.
''No one's talking about the D.A., but that's really where it's at,'' said Wahkim Allah, 35. ''They call this the American way.''
He added that ''this is a culture issue -- the police think that all projects are the same.''
Still, some residents praised Commissioner Kelly for his outspokenness. ''He called it as he saw it,'' said Joseph Lockler, 23, who has lived in the neighborhood all his life. ''It's the first time our neighborhood has a police commissioner like him.''
Ms. Clayburne, crying softly in the apartment she had shared with her grandson, expressed disbelief. ''I never thought that man would get away with it,'' she said. ''I've never seen such prejudice before in my life. I cannot understand it.''
Outside Javarez Grocery Deli on the corner of Lexington and Marcy Avenues, in Bedford-Stuyvesant, a group of young people were gathered. They had bitter words for yesterday's decision.
One of the young men, who refused to give his name, told a reporter, ''Where you need to be is at the police station congratulating them on a job well done.''
Jewel Austin, the mother of Terrence Fisher, one of the two young men who were eyewitnesses to the shooting, said her son, who had testified before the jury, was very upset.
''Terrence is still in a state of shock,'' Ms. Austin said, referring to yesterday's decision. ''He said, 'Mommy, I can't believe it happened.' He was very mad.''
She added: ''It's not right. Something has to be done about it.''
In the quiet cold of the neighborhood last night, police patrol cars cruised by periodically. No protests or public displays of displeasure over the decision could be seen.
Mr. Clayburne said d the family planned to keep fighting for justice.
''We can't stop right now,'' he said. ''If we stop right now, we let that man win.''
He added, ''My family is destroyed right now, and we don't know how long it's going to go on.''
