Last fall, President Bush declared that Washington had learned the folly of accommodating Middle East dictatorships in the name of stability and that America would start putting its power in the service of democratic values throughout the region. Today, one of the area's most unbudging autocrats, President Zine el-Abidine ben Ali of Tunisia, will visit the White House. If Mr. Bush meant what he said last fall, he will offer some constructive public criticism on the value of free elections, a free press and an independent judiciary. Secretary of State Colin Powell prepared the ground yesterday by offering Mr. ben Ali just such criticism.
Mr. ben Ali's record on human rights and democracy is poor even by the standards of the Middle East. No serious political opposition is allowed, no critical coverage appears in the mass media, and hundreds of Tunisians remain jailed after unfair trials. Such arbitrary practices warrant condemnation anywhere, but are doubly deplorable in Tunisia, a relatively developed country that enacted pioneering protections of women's rights decades ago.
Tunisia's political progress has all but ground to a halt since Mr. ben Ali seized power in 1987. Since then, he has had himself re-elected three times, on each occasion claiming more than 99 percent of the vote.
He plans to run for yet another term this October, and he recently pushed through constitutional changes that would allow him to remain in power through 2014.
Mr. ben Ali has earned his White House visit through relatively enlightened foreign policies, including support for peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians and efforts that could lead to a Tunisian-American trade agreement. Washington also credits him with encouraging Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, to abandon his unconventional weapons programs.
Mr. ben Ali also poses as an effective ally against Islamic extremism, a danger he has invoked to justify his wider repression. Mr. Bush provided the best answer to that last fall, noting that in the long term, neither America's safety nor stability in Middle Eastern countries -- like Tunisia -- could ''be purchased at the expense of liberty.'' That sound advice bears repeating today.
