THE WORKING POOR  Invisible in America  By David K. Shipler  319 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.
In the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, the issue of poverty in America rarely arises. Only Senator John Edwards of North Carolina regularly mentions the 35 million Americans (or 42 million by some counts) who have been marooned amid this country's rising prosperity. Yet even he rarely gets specific about what should be done to help them.
David K. Shipler has spent the last six years speaking to these other Americans. His book ''The Working Poor: Invisible in America'' is in the tradition of Michael Harrington, Edward R. Murrow and more recently Barbara Ehrenreich as it seeks to alert a complacent nation about the misery and deprivation in its midst.
Mr. Shipler is a former correspondent for The New York Times and author of three previous books, one about race in America, another on the Soviet Union in the late 1970's, and the third an exploration of Arab and Jewish relations in the Middle East (for which he won a Pulitzer Prize). For his latest book he visited New Hampshire towns and North Carolina fields, Los Angeles sweatshops and Washington housing projects, talking with low-wage workers on the edge of poverty. By watching them try to escape, he writes, ''we see vividly the obstacles they have to cross.''
To succeed in such a project a writer needs to be both a witness and a wonk, the former to dramatize the plight of the poor and the latter to devise policies to help them. At the outset Mr. Shipler states that his intention is to see the predicament of the poor ''with clear eyes, not through an ideological lens,'' so as to ''challenge and undermine longstanding assumptions at both ends of the spectrum.''
As a witness Mr. Shipler is indefatigable. Interviewing cashiers and seamstresses, burger flippers and migrant workers a dozen or more times, he has gotten them to open up and share the grim realities of their lives.
Among his compelling subjects is Caroline Payne, a hard-working 50-year-old who earns $6.80 an hour stocking shelves and working the cash register at a Wal-Mart superstore in New Hampshire. This is just 80 cents an hour more than she earned more than 20 years earlier. She must cope with four children, including a teenage daughter who has epilepsy and a low I.Q.; bosses who will not let her juggle her schedule to accommodate her daughter's needs; $12,000 in credit-card debt; nagging ailments that go untreated because she cannot afford health insurance; and, not least, the loss of her teeth, which makes her look 10 years older than she is and which causes male managers to pass her over at promotion time.
As Mr. Shipler notes, Ms. Payne's face captures the insidious, self-reinforcing nature of poverty. ''If she had not been poor,'' he writes, ''she would not have lost her teeth, and if she had not lost her teeth, perhaps she would not have remained poor.''
Debra Hall, a ''welfare mother'' in Cleveland forced to seek a job after welfare reform, makes $7 an hour working from 3:30 to 11:30 a.m. in a bakery, ''flipping bread on the dreaded garlic line.'' After a few months her wage jumps all the way to $7.90. After paying the bills and taking care of her two children, one of whom has Down syndrome, she rarely has more than $8 in her bank account. Her fellow workers -- some have been at the bakery for years -- all seem ''trapped in gloom,'' Mr. Shipler writes, and Ms. Hall seems ''doomed to repeat her family's inability to emerge from low wages.''
As such bleak tales unfold, the reader can only feel outrage at the multiple injustices these people must endure: the low wages and high interest rates, the tax preparers eager to bilk them, the government workers who brush them off, the malnutrition, the shabby housing, the rats. In his most chilling chapter Mr. Shipler describes the epidemic of sexual abuse afflicting poor women.
''Even though I never posed the question,'' he writes, ''sooner or later most of the impoverished women I interviewed mentioned that they had been sexually abused as children.'' Many have trouble trusting men and maintaining families, which makes them more likely to be poor.
It is here, in exploring the roots of poverty, that ''The Working Poor'' falters. The issue of marriage is a good example. As Mr. Shipler notes, half of all poor families are headed by single women. Time and again in his case studies, their single status emerges as a major factor in their troubles. ''Married, Ann was in the middle class,'' he writes of one woman. ''Divorced, she sank rapidly.'' One does not have to endorse President Bush's venture to promote marriage to recognize that single parenthood is a significant variable in the poverty equation. Yet Mr. Shipler spends little time analyzing this.
The same is true of race and ethnicity. The poverty rate among African-Americans and Latinos is about three times that of non-Latino whites. ''The Working Poor'' is full of people like Leary Brock, an African-American living in Washington. Her parents had solid blue-collar jobs, her father as an electrician, her mother at the United States Agriculture Department. Yet Ms. Brock dropped out of high school, had four children by four fathers and became a crack addict. The Brock family tree was like ''the wildest of Alexander Calder's mobiles,'' Mr. Shipler writes, ''a chaotic whirl of offspring from multiple liaisons by Leary and, a generation later, by some of her children.''
Understanding how so many African-American households have experienced such downward mobility seems critical to figuring out ways to help them. Alas, Mr. Shipler sidesteps the issue. His preface states that having written about black-white divides in his last book, ''A Country of Strangers,'' he has decided here to avoid race and instead concentrate on ''the dynamics of poverty that are broadly shared across racial lines.'' But how can one write a book about poverty in America and not deal with race?
In his conclusion Mr. Shipler asserts that in the fight against poverty ''holistic remedies are vital,'' and he proposes a smorgasbord: adopting ''living wage'' laws, providing more vocational training, broadening access to health care, expanding early intervention programs. These all seem worthy, yet familiar. Here as throughout, Mr. Shipler avoids saying anything too controversial and as a result his book seems unlikely to change minds on either the left or the right.
Nonetheless, by exposing the wretched condition of these invisible Americans, he has performed a noble and badly needed service.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES Michael Massing is the author of ''The Fix,'' a critical study of the United States' efforts to fight drug abuse.
