PEOPLE don't get much more French than Jean-Claude Iacovelli. His first restaurant, Jean Claude, an insouciant slice of the Left Bank that opened in SoHo in 1992, set the standard for dozens of inexpensive bistros that followed in its wake, and outlasted many of them. Another of his restaurants, SoHo Steak, cuts an equally Gallic stance on Thompson Street. Even his Italian place, Velli, which closed a few years ago on Houston Street, was French underneath it all.
So when Mr. Iacovelli, with a partner, Dan Houle, opened Cubana Cafe a couple of months ago in SoHo, it was no surprise to find a sly wink of a place that would be far more at home in the Quartier Latin than on Calle Ocho. Nonetheless, for a quick inexpensive bite and a glass of wine, or better yet, an excellent mojito, Cubana Cafe is a good bet.
Cubana, an awkward few steps down from the sidewalk, has a warm, casual look to it. The walls are done up in tropical pastels and festooned with almost every conceivable symbol of Cuba -- the good Cuba, that is -- photos and models of classic American cars of the 1950's, guayabera shirts, even cigars.
Here and there slogans are painted on the wall, like ''No cervezas, no trabajo,'' no beer, no work. Lining the shelves around a pillar in the center of the small room are colorful bottles of Jarritos, the Mexican soda.
Mexican soda?
As it turns out, Cubana Cafe has a sense of manifest destiny, annexing quite a few Mexican dishes to its quasi-Cuban menu. They are pretty good, in fact. The shrimp quesadilla ($7.50) is fresh and lively, layered with avocado and a smoky chipotle salsa. A tangled mop of julienned jicama, with slivers of green apple and crumbled cotija cheese ($6) makes a superb salad, simultaneously refreshing and savory, while a tangy ceviche of shrimp and calamari ($8) is, at the least, serviceable.
But Cuban-style food is the central theme and the heart of the menu -- Cuban-style, because Mr. Houle, who oversees the kitchen, is not after authenticity so much as he is simply trying to make food that tastes good. Perhaps the best dish I tasted was a special, a whole roasted red snapper ($14) that was filleted before it arrived at the table. It was moist and full of delicate flavor, served with a chunky mango salsa, a decidedly Nuevo touch.
Nonetheless, the closer Mr. Houle sticks to the traditional the better he succeeds. Black bean soup ($4), rich, smooth and full of cumin, is a cold-weather treat, and I happily devoured the hunk of garlic bread set in the middle of the bowl. Picadillo ($8), the ground beef dish, is a satisfying, traditional blend, with pungency from olives and sweetness from raisins, while pulled pork with red wine gravy ($9) is moist and delicious, superior to the dry roasted pork ($9).
Like the picadillo, ropa vieja ($12), a traditional dish of tender, shredded beef, gets much of its flavor from olives, as well as sautéed onions and peppers. That seems as it should be. But a palomilla ($12), or steak, which is pounded thin and marinated in lime and garlic, is instead dominated by the flavor of rosemary, an unwelcome culinary voyage that does not work in this context. A thin hanger steak ($12), sautéed with onions and peppers, tastes as if it was stir-fried at an old Cuban-Chinese place. A Cubano sandwich ($7.50) is pleasing enough, though the chipotle mayonnaise will drive purists insane. And anyone seeking yuca frita will be disappointed -- the Cubana Cafe is not permitted under its lease to fry.
For dessert, flan ($3.50) is classically rich, and drenched in caramel syrup, but a brownie ($4), ''Mom's brownie,'' yet, is so sweet it is possible to eat only a few bites.
Aside from the superb mojitos ($5) -- full of mint and not too sweet -- Cubana offers a few inexpensive wines, including a good, fruity crianza Rioja from Lan ($24), and of course those Jarritos. But the batidos ($2.50), sweet fruit drinks, are awfully wan.
It almost goes without saying that you can find more genuine Cuban restaurants. But Mr. Iacovelli can always be counted on for fun. One night he stopped by our table as our main courses were being cleared. We were about to order dessert, but he insisted on intervening. ''You must have some cheese,'' he said, and he brought over a plate.
Cheese had been the farthest thing from our minds. But Mr. Iacovelli, the Frenchman, was making a gesture in the right direction. It was Manchego, and it went very well with the Rioja.
Cubana Cafe  110 Thompson Street (Prince Street), SoHo; (212) 966-5366.
BEST DISHES -- Shrimp quesadilla; jicama salad with apple and cotija; roasted red snapper; black bean soup; pulled pork with red wine gravy; ropa vieja; flan.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, quesadillas and sandwiches, $2 to $8; main courses, $7.50 to $14.  CREDIT CARDS -- Cash only.  HOURS -- Monday through Thursday, 11:30 a.m. to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 11:30 a.m. to midnight.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Several steps at entrance; restroom is narrow.
$25 AND UNDER
