If you ask him to describe his native Sudan, which has been in a state of civil war for 20 years, Santino Chuor has a hard time finding the words.
''My country is really very beautiful,'' he said recently by telephone from Houston, where he moved three years ago in a refugee resettlement program. ''Some days when I am driving my car in America I think, 'Why can't I be driving this car on a highway in my own country?' That gives me a lot of heartbreak. I'd like the same good things to be in my country. My country is so beautiful I cannot even describe it.''
Sudan's civil war has left two million dead and four million displaced. Mr. Chuor, who estimates his age to be 25, is one of approximately 17,000 young men, known as the lost boys of Sudan, who were left homeless and parentless when the war forced them to flee their homes in the 1980's. He is one of the two lead characters -- the other is Peter Dut -- in the documentary ''Lost Boys of Sudan.''
Mr. Dut, who is about 20 and lives in Olathe, Kan., said that militias backed by Sudan's government ''went from village to village killing people, kidnapping people, taking women and children, taking properties.'' He estimated that he was 5 when he fled his village in southern Sudan, and he said he had not seen his mother and siblings since. Shortly after he fled, his father became sick and died.
''I got help from other people,'' he said. ''This journey to Ethiopia was three months. There was no food, no water, dangers along the way. For water you had to use your own urine. You had to walk with the group, or the lions would get you.''
By summer 2001, when the San Francisco filmmakers Megan Mylan and Jon Shenk traveled to a refugee camp in Kakuma, in northern Kenya, Mr. Dut and Mr. Chuor had lived there for close to 10 years. (They fled Ethiopia after war broke out there, too.)
''Kakuma was like a small city,'' Mr. Shenk said. ''Imagine 80,000 people camping out for 10 years. There's a lack of electricity, no running water. People are living in mud huts. You look around, and you think, with 14 or 15 million refugees in the world, this is how millions of people are living.''
Ms. Mylan and Mr. Shenk spent a week in the camp and chose Mr. Dut and Mr. Chuor as their main subjects after talking with 80 young men who were on their way to places like Houston; Omaha; Jacksonville, Fla.; Nashville; and Richmond, Va. (Around 4,000 have been resettled in the United States as part of the refugee program.)
''Peter looked us straight in the eye and asked us a million questions about America,'' Mr. Shenk said. ''He was an extrovert. Santino is one of these people you meet and almost feel like he's part of your family already. He was shyer. He showed us paintings he had done and talked about the books he had read. I'll never forget this great thing he said to me. He asked me where I was from, and said, 'I want to come to California and learn the ways of your tribe.' ''
In America -- most of the film is set in Houston and Kansas -- Mr. Dut and Mr. Chuor tackle life in a world very different from the one they left behind. They learn to use an electric stove, pay rent, find jobs, buy cars and furnish an apartment; they take drivers' tests and negotiate the mysteries of the phone company. But they also question a life in which they work long days and sometimes into the night to pay rent; and when they call friends back in Africa, the friends wonder why they are not sending more money.
Mr. Dut finds that life in Houston is not working out -- he is dead set on getting an education sooner rather than later -- and he heads out to Kansas without telling Mr. Chuor. There he joins another young man from Sudan and enrolls in high school.
Today Mr. Dut has two jobs. During the day he works at a Wal-Mart store, where he has been promoted from retrieving carts in the parking lot to working in the garden center. At night he parks cars at a casino in Kansas City, Mo. He graduated from high school with honors and said he was thinking about attending college in Seattle, where he has a friend from Kakuma. Mr. Chuor, who works nights at a factory in Houston, said he planned to begin community college.
''We grappled with the whole title of 'Lost Boys,' '' Ms. Mylan said. ''We didn't want it to be condescending. But they see it as a badge of honor: 'We've endured, we've been through the horrors.' ''
