A grand jury declined to indict a police officer yesterday in the fatal shooting of an unarmed 19-year-old man on the roof of a Brooklyn housing project last month, officials said.
Officials have said that prosecutors in the office of the Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, asked the jury to consider charging the officer with criminally negligent homicide and manslaughter in the shooting, which Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said appeared to be unjustified.
Indictments of police officers in such cases are rare, but some legal experts had suggested that there might be an indictment in this politically charged case, in part because the victim, Timothy Stansbury Jr., who was black, was not carrying a weapon or committing a crime. Also, the experts noted, no words were exchanged before the shot was fired between the officer, Richard S. Neri Jr., who is white, and Mr. Stansbury.
Officer Neri, who took the unusual step of testifying in his own behalf, told the grand jury that he fired unintentionally when he was startled as Mr. Stansbury pushed open the rooftop door, his lawyer said.
The grand jury apparently believed crucial elements of his account, essentially determining that the shooting was more accident than crime -- that Officer Neri's conduct was not a ''gross deviation'' from what would be expected from a normal person in that situation.
A strong current of emotions surrounded the shooting, which produced sharply divided reactions to the commissioner's quick assessment -- from a vote of no-confidence in Mr. Kelly by the police union, to praise for the commissioner from Brooklyn residents demonstrating in front of City Hall.
Mr. Stansbury's family reiterated their view that his death was a crime. ''I'm very, very angry, and I'm upset,'' said Irene Clayburne, the victim's grandmother, after hearing of the grand jury's decision last night. ''I want this cop to go to jail.''
Officer Neri's lawyer, Stuart London, said: ''There are clearly no winners in this case. There is a loss of life and that's a very serious matter. Having said that, my client is thrilled that the grand jury had the courage to analyze the evidence and return a vote that they felt was just under the circumstances.''
The grand jury's action clears the way for possible departmental charges against Officer Neri. The department had no comment, except to say that the shooting would be reviewed by the borough and the departmental Firearms Discharge Review Boards, and that Officer Neri would remain on modified duty, without his gun or badge.
The grand jury's decision does not preclude a finding of civil liability on the part of the Police Department, the city or Officer Neri. The Stansbury family has not yet decided whether to push for federal civil rights charges or file a wrongful-death lawsuit against the city, said their lawyer, Mark Fuller. The grand jurors, described as predominantly black and Latino, deliberated for 35 minutes before deciding against an indictment -- much longer than is customary for grand juries considering routine cases, a person familiar with the panel's actions said. After the vote, some of the jurors appeared very emotional, the person said.
Officer Neri, a housing officer with nearly 12 years on the force who had never before fired his weapon while on duty, was patrolling the roof of the Louis Armstrong Houses with his partner about 1 a.m. on Jan. 24 when they approached a rooftop door to check the stairway inside. At almost the same moment, Mr. Stansbury and two friends were approaching the door from the inside, intending to use the roof as a shortcut to a party in an adjoining building.
When the door opened, Officer Neri fired once. He told the grand jury that Mr. Stansbury had pushed the door open, but law enforcement officials have said that Mr. Stansbury's two friends maintained that he had not yet touched the door.
Officer Neri told the panel that he had been startled and had not intended to fire, Mr. London said. He said his client testified that he had his gun pointed down and his finger on the side of the barrel, in accordance with police training, and could not remember raising his arm and moving his finger to the trigger. After Officer Neri fired, Mr. London said, Mr. Stansbury fled back into the building, and Officer Neri did not know ''if he shot his partner or any other individual'' until he saw Mr. Stansbury in a pool of blood in the lobby.
Officer Neri had not seen Mr. Stansbury's face, but only his silhouette before he fired, Mr. London said.
The officer was later criticized by some, including the president of 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care, for having his gun drawn while patrolling even though no specific danger had been reported. But there are no police guidelines telling officers when to draw their guns; it is a decision that rests largely on the officer's own assessment of danger, and housing project rooftops are often havens for drug dealers and other criminals. After the shooting, Commissioner Kelly convened a panel to review procedures and training issues, but he has said unequivocally that the decision to draw a gun must be the officer's call.
One person familiar with the evidence said a training officer testified yesterday about when officers should draw their guns. The panel also heard from the two friends who were with Mr. Stansbury, forensic experts, and Officer Neri's partner, Jason Hallik. One law enforcement official called the grand jury presentation ''exhaustive'' and ''very aggressive,'' but would not describe the evidence or how it was presented. The precedings of the grand jury, by law, are conducted in secret.
To indict Officer Neri on a charge of criminally negligent homicide, the jury would have had to find that his actions were a ''gross deviation from the standard of care that a reasonable person would observe,'' according to New York State penal law.
Unlike manslaughter, in which the perpetrator must display a reckless disregard of the risk of his actions, a person can be guilty of criminally negligent homicide even if he ''fails to perceive a substantial and unjustifiable risk'' of a tragic result.
''The grand jury, in interpreting this rather general language, is bringing to bear the conscience of the community on the police officer's conduct,'' said Stephen Gillers, a professor of legal ethics at New York University School of Law. ''We don't know if the grand jury thought the officer was negligent, because that was not the question,'' he said. ''We're not just talking about negligence, we're talking about something so unreasonable as to be a gross deviation. A mistake, or a simple act of negligence, is not enough to be criminal.''
The panel's decision seemed to underscore the unwillingness of grand juries, like juries in criminal trials, to find fault in cases where officers make mistakes -- even egregious ones -- in settings where they said they had reasons to be fearful and their actions were in good faith. In the case of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed West African immigrant slain in 1999, four officers were acquitted after they testified that they initially fired on him, unleashing 41 shots, because they believed he was reaching for a gun, when in fact it was his wallet.
At the Armstrong Houses, residents reacted with surprise, expressing confusion that after Commissioner Kelly had made statements that they perceived as supportive, another official body would, to their minds, disagree.
Officer Neri learned of the jury's decision while visiting the doctor with his pregnant wife, Mr. London said. Patrick J. Lynch, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, said, ''This was a tragedy from the start, involving a loss of life that a family must live with for the rest of their lives and that this police officer must deal with as well.''
Some people regarded it as travesty rather than tragedy. City Councilman Charles Barron of Brooklyn, who is running for mayor, said, ''I actually thought that they might give us this one because it was so blatant. I'm not shocked, I'm disappointed.'' He expressed a lack of confidence in the department's internal investigation. ''The community of New York has to be really disgusted with the system,'' he said.
But the city's response to the shooting has been notable in its contrast to that of previous administrations in similar circumstances. Mr. Kelly gave an account of the shooting on the day it happened, and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg offered condolences to the family and spoke at Mr. Stansbury's funeral.
Yesterday, Mr. Bloomberg issued a statement, saying: ''Although the death of Timothy Stansbury was a heartbreaking tragedy, a grand jury today decided that Officer Neri's actions were not criminal. The Police Department will conduct a review of the case to determine the appropriate course of action."
