A jaunty George Steinbrenner emerged from the Yankees' minor league facility early Tuesday afternoon and flashed the thumbs-up sign. He stepped into his midnight-blue BMW sedan and appeared ready to drive away, only to change his mind. For with Alex Rodriguez now in pinstripes, the Boss was ready to bask.
Reaching out of the driver's window, he signed autographs for fans. Speaking out of the passenger's window, he talked of another possible trade to counter any weaknesses, real or imagined, arising in the wake of Rodriguez's arrival and the departure of Alfonso Soriano.
Whether it might be for a crafty left-handed starting pitcher -- all the Yankees starters are right-handed -- or for an established second baseman, Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner, would not say. Still, the not-so-subtle message was that Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman was not finished retooling the Yankees' lineup.
''We may make one more deal, but it won't be a huge blockbuster, of course,'' Steinbrenner said. ''It's up to Cashman. He's constantly tinkering where he thinks we need help here, need help there,'' adding that the Yankees ''didn't raise our payroll at all'' in acquiring Rodriguez.
Having first watched on television as Rodriguez donned a Yankees uniform at a news conference at Yankee Stadium, Steinbrenner talked of various team issues as fans and reporters surrounded his car. He gave his front office high praise, particularly Cashman and the team's president, Randy Levine, for outmaneuvering conventional wisdom, and opponents, in trading for Rodriguez and in making other off-season moves.
''I would say A-plus,'' Steinbrenner said. ''You don't like to lose Andy Pettitte, but instead of sitting there moping, they went out and did some other things.''
Steinbrenner bristled at the suggestion that he has again disrupted baseball's competitive balance and was simply trying to spend his way to another World Series title. And he maintained that the Boston Red Sox remained the team to beat in the American League East.
But he also tweaked the Red Sox and every other major league team for not being as clever as the Yankees in finding a way to acquire Rodriguez and insisted that the Yankees did not ''buy'' Rodriguez.
''They don't know their math,'' Steinbrenner said. ''They don't know what the costs were or were not. We didn't go out and buy him. Texas got a very good deal. I hated to lose Soriano -- he'll do great in Texas. Given the time, he'll be a very great player out there. But look at the finances before you make that statement.''
The handful of Yankees players and coaches who arrived at Legends Field for workouts strongly endorsed the Rodriguez trade and could not help but smile as they pondered the capabilities of the Yankees' 2004 offense. Don Mattingly, the team's new hitting coach, said he had only one concern.
''We can't sit back and wait for the next guy,'' Mattingly said. ''There's a tendency when you've got a club that's so good offensively, and I've played on a few of those myself, where you kind of lay back and say, 'Oh, if I don't get him in, the next guy will.' Individually, each guy has to put pressure on himself to do the job.''
Catcher Jorge Posada half-jokingly anticipated he would drop from the middle of the Yankees' batting order to the bottom. ''How can you not be excited about this?'' he said. ''We've got a very strong lineup, and I'm going to be hitting ninth.''
Steinbrenner also said he was not concerned about possible friction between Rodriguez and Derek Jeter, the Yankees' captain.
''He's the guy I look for to lead the team,'' Steinbrenner said of Jeter.
And Steinbrenner said he was not worried about distractions stemming from the status of Manager Joe Torre, who is in the last year of his contract, and he dismissed rumors that he was interested in acquiring the free-agent pitcher Greg Maddux. The Associated Press, citing an anonymous source close to the negotiations, reported Tuesday night that Maddux would sign with the Cubs.
Asked who would be the Yankees' center fielder on opening day, Steinbrenner said that it was Bernie Williams's job to lose -- to newly acquired Kenny Lofton.
''It's Bernie, but we've got some flexibility there,'' Steinbrenner said. ''We've got Lofton, and he's a great one. That's going to be up to the manager. I think that's the way Joe feels, that's the way I feel. Bernie has been an important part of this team for so long.''
''It's a good day for the Yankees, a very good day,'' Steinbrenner concluded. ''But we haven't won anything yet.''
BASEBALL
