IT'S hard to blame anyone for not liking anchovies. Their salient qualities are concealed by fillets that are bony and withered, more like fragments of prehistoric fish. They are packed row by row in flimsy tins. They come from a factory, somewhere in a Dickens novel.
But it's harder to imagine living without them. There would be no Caesar salad, no pan bagnat, no pissaladière, no Provençal lamb stew, and no pasta puttanesca.
Well, there might be, but none of these dishes would be nearly as vivid. They would lack that essential whiff of the ocean, that burst of sweet pungency and nutty aroma that, when used properly, is hard to identify and impossible to substitute.
For a while, it seemed that anchovies' opponents had won out. Between the 1960's, when anchovies were as essential a part of the French food boom as capers, and the turn of the 21st century, they were largely discredited. Almost everyone has tasted a Caesar salad without anchovies, because so few are made with the real things. This new version is pungent all right, and its pungency comes from entirely too much garlic, to make up for the loss.
But attitudes seem to be shifting. Spanish cuisine, which celebrates the anchovy, has gained an audience, and chefs, who have been rewarded in recent years by taking risks on esoteric foods, like beef cheeks and pigs' trotters, have begun putting forth anchovies with similar nerve.
The sandwich is always a bellwether of tastes, and at 'Wichcraft in Manhattan, which specializes in them, they've had great success selling a sandwich layered with marinated anchovies, soft-cooked eggs, roasted onion and frisée between slices of country bread. In restaurants, anchovies are now nearly as common as crudo, or raw fish. Grilled shrimp with anchovy butter has lasted on Prune's small menu for years. At Esca, David Pasternack, the chef, tempers bitter dandelion greens with an anchovy vinaigrette, then for emphasis, lays white anchovy fillets, marinated in vinegar, atop the salad. Somewhat famously, Wylie Dufresne at WD-50 layered anchovies and foie gras, a pair about as harmonious as bacon and peanut butter, and diners came flocking.
If you use anchovies enough or if you've had the chance to taste anchovies in Spain or Italy, you begin to see that the vile anchovies that are strewn on pizzas all over America really are vile. Good imported anchovies can be delicious, potent, sweet and saline all at once.
''It's the absolute essence of the sea,'' Steven Jenkins, a partner in Fairway Markets, said of a good anchovy. ''It's the most true representative of seafood. It's fish essential. It's like eating the sea.''
In recent years, imported anchovies have taken on larger identities in stores like Fairway, Dean &amp; DeLuca and Eli's Manhattan. Fairway has cheap tins in the canned-fish aisle, but there are also shelves full of imported anchovies from Spain in a specialties' section.
In older European cookbooks anchovies show up in spreads, in braises, in salads and in gratins. But a salty fish essence is hardly unique to European cooking. Asian cooks use fish sauce -- a refined version of the ancient Roman sauce garum -- to intensify and season dishes.
Still, fish sauce and garum are much different from anchovies. They are fermented essences whereas anchovies have both essence and flesh. And that is what makes them so engaging in the kitchen.
Physically, anchovies may be treated much like garlic. They can be chopped and stirred into a marinade or whisked into a vinaigrette. The fillets can be pounded to a paste in a mortar and pestle and dissolved into a sauce or a mayonnaise. Anchovies are often sautéed whole with other aromatics, and when a liquid is added, they melt away, their fragile meat loosened apart.
In flavor, the anchovy has an equivalent range. It can be used to season fiercely, as it is in bagna cauda, a ''hot bath'' made of garlic, anchovies, olive oil and butter that is served as a dipping sauce for vegetables like fennel, radishes and carrots. And it can be made to whisper, as it is in a risotto recipe from ''Second Helpings From Union Square Cafe'' (HarperCollins) by Michael Romano and Danny Meyer. Roasted eggplant, chopped mint and anchovies dissolve into the rice. The eggplant thickens, the mint freshens and the anchovies keep it savory and succinct without making themselves known.
Not all anchovies can do this. There is wild variation in the quality of anchovies, because there are a handful of varieties and because anchovy makers range from small artisan operations to huge factories. Most anchovies come from the Atlantic, north of Cantabria in Spain; the Mediterranean; and the Pacific and Atlantic near South America. According to Globefish, which tracks marketing trends for the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, in 2000 Morocco was the largest producer of canned anchovies, followed by Spain. The best anchovies are considered by many to be those from off the coast of Spain, where the water is cold and the plankton is rich.
Artisanal producers like Conservas Pedro Alegría, in Ondárroa, Spain, buy anchovies caught by fine net from November through March. When they arrive at Alegría, their heads are removed and they are put into steel tanks filled with seawater. The anchovies are weighted down as they cure and ferment at room temperature in dark rooms for three to five months. This sets their flavor and softens their bones. Next the anchovies are rinsed, skinned and filleted, and then layered in tins and covered with olive oil. The only machine used in the process is one that seals the tins.
In Spain, the best anchovies are cured in salt water and then packed, usually whole, in vinegar and sometimes a little oil and garlic. These are called boquerón, and are often eaten in Spain as is, or fried.
There is a misperception that salt-packed anchovies are better than oil-packed anchovies. I found almost the opposite. Salt-packed anchovies tended to be plumper because they were not pressed, but they had to be boned. They were sometimes slimy, sometimes dry, and I never found their flavor to be superior.
The better oil-packed anchovies come in olive oil. Among those I tried, the best, like Alegría, Ortiz and Agostino Recca, were intensely flavored but didn't have as many high notes of salt.
Anchovies that come in jars have an advantage over those in tins. Once you open the jar, you can reseal it and keep it in the refrigerator. If each time you want to use anchovies you have to open a tin, it is only natural that you might avoid using them.
Salt-packed anchovies must be soaked in either water or milk before being used. About 20 minutes does it. Anchovies packed in oil may be simply drained.
The only product to avoid completely is anchovy paste. It is made with the lowest grade of anchovies and really saves no time. It is almost as easy to take a few anchovies and pound them to a paste with a mortar and pestle.
If you've never cooked with anchovies, the place to begin is with butter. Anchovy butter is a recipe that makes a good companion for life. It takes about five minutes to assemble, once you soften a stick of unsalted butter (salted would make it too salty). When it gets just past the waxy point, where you can easily press the tines of a fork into it, mash in the anchovies alone, or with a little minced shallot, chopped mint or basil; lemon zest; and a touch of Worcestershire sauce. It's pretty forgiving, but one thing should be clear: it should be either a full-on anchovy-with-a-capital-A butter, or a compound butter merely scented with anchovy.
Spread it on toast, and top it with a slice of radish. Grill steaks and let a knob of the anchovy butter melt over them as you carry them to the table. Blanch green beans and while the beans are hot, roll them in the butter. Do the same with carrots. Dab it on monkfish, then roast it in a hot oven.
Anchovy is like sea salt, a well-honed tool, best used judiciously. I like anchovies in vinaigrettes made for tough winter greens like frisée. I pound garlic and anchovies to a paste, then add a little red wine vinegar, and let it sit for a few minutes before whisking in the oil. It makes a dressing that's pungent but not irascible. Or add pounded anchovies to a base of Dijon mustard and vinegar, then whisk in the oil. The anchovy isn't apparent, but the added depth is.
Deviled eggs may be reconceived by folding a little chopped anchovy, radish and chives into the egg yolks, mayonnaise and mustard. Linguine may be coated with a paste of anchovy, parsley and walnuts. Anchovies may be infused in milk used for a celery root or cardoon gratin. And do not forget one of the great sauces of the world: anchovy mayonnaise.
Soon enough, you may become emboldened, laying whole fillets over salads, over vitello tonnato, maybe even on top of pizza. And this time, it will actually taste good.
As Mr. Jenkins of Fairway said, ''You never forget a perfect anchovy. It lingers. It stays. It's all encompassing.''
It's the ugly little fish that could.
LAMB SHOULDER CHOPS WITH ANCHOVY AND MINT BUTTER  Time: 20 minutes, plus 20 minutes' chilling
4 tablespoons unsalted butter at room temperature  2 tablespoons minced shallots  1 tablespoon chopped fresh mint leaves  4 anchovy fillets  4 lamb shoulder chops,  1/2-inch thick  Sea salt and freshly ground black pepper  4 lemon wedges.
1. In a small bowl, combine butter, shallots, mint and anchovies. Using a fork, mash to a paste. Spoon paste onto a square of plastic wrap and roll into a 3-inch-long log. Twist ends to seal, and refrigerate for at least 20 minutes.
2. Meanwhile, heat a broiler with a rack positioned 4 to 6 inches from flame. Season lamb generously on both sides with salt and pepper. Place lamb on a broiling pan and broil for about 2 minutes a side for rare, 3 minutes for medium rare. To serve, place a chop on each of four serving plates, and top each with a  1/2-inch slice of anchovy butter and a wedge of lemon.
Yield: 4 servings.
SHRIMP WITH LEMON ANCHOVY MAYONNAISE  Time: 35 minutes
1 pound medium shrimp, peeled and deveined
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  Sea salt  4 anchovy fillets  1 clove garlic, peeled  1 large egg yolk  1 tablespoon lemon juice
1/3 cup plus 2 tablespoons vegetable or peanut oil  Grated zest of 1 lemon.
1. Preheat oven to 225 degrees. Place the shrimp in a sauté pan or a casserole just large enough to hold the shrimp in one layer. Toss with  1/2 cup of the olive oil, and season with salt to taste. Put the pan in the oven and poach the shrimp in the oil, turning and basting occasionally, until just cooked through, about 25 minutes.
2. Using a mortar and pestle, pound the anchovies and garlic to a paste. Scrape into a medium bowl, and add the egg yolk and lemon juice. Whisk to a slurry. While whisking rapidly, add the vegetable oil and remaining 2 tablespoons of olive oil a few drops at a time, until the mixture is emulsified and thickened. Fold in the lemon zest. Spoon into 4 small serving bowls.
3. To serve, remove the shrimp from the oil and divide among four plates. Serve each plate of shrimp with a bowl of the mayonnaise for dipping.
Yield: 4 appetizer servings.
ENDIVE, WATERCRESS AND RADISH SALAD WITH ANCHOVY DRESSING  Time: 10 minutes
3 heads Belgian endive, trimmed and leaves separated  4 cups watercress tops  1 small black radish, peeled and sliced into fine matchsticks (about  1/2 cup), or  1/2 cup daikon radish matchsticks  1 clove garlic, peeled and chopped  4 anchovy fillets, finely chopped  1 tablespoon red wine vinegar  1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
1/4 cup extra virgin olive oil or walnut oil  Salt to taste.
1. In a salad bowl, mix together the endive, watercress and radish. In a small bowl, whisk together the garlic, anchovies, vinegar and mustard. Gradually whisk in the olive oil until well blended.
2. Pour half the dressing on the greens, and toss to coat. Taste a leaf or two, and if desired, add more dressing and salt to taste.
Yield: 4 servings.
