The Yankees' deal for Alex Rodriguez has already resulted in a rush for No. 13 shirts and jerseys, and an increase in Yankees ticket sales.
At 4 p.m. yesterday, a white truck pulled up outside the Modell's Sporting Goods store at 234 West 42nd Street in Manhattan with the first shipment of Alex Rodriguez Yankees merchandise: blue T-shirts with Rodriguez's name and No. 13 emblazoned on the back.
The T-shirts were selling for $12.99, and fans were snatching them off the rack, two at a time.
Cindy Poletsky and her son, Joey, 14, and daughter, Lauren, 11, were visiting Madame Tussaud's wax museum nearby when they heard a saleswoman outside Modell's shout: ''We got A-Rod T-shirts!''
The Poletskys, who say they are Derek Jeter fans, said they could not pass up the chance to be the first in their neighborhood with Rodriguez shirts.
Bill Barrett, Modell's vice president for store operations, said he expected there would be a big demand for Rodriguez's Yankees jersey.
So big, in fact, that Modell's gambled that the Rodriguez trade was a done deal on Saturday and ordered hundreds of the jerseys.
Modell's officials would not say how many T-shirts and jerseys had been ordered, but Barrett said Rodriguez's T-shirts would most likely outsell the Yankees-Mets Subway Series T-shirts, the biggest-selling item for the chain, followed by Jeter's No. 2 jersey.
Across 42nd Street, the Yankees Clubhouse Shop had four boxes of Rodriguez jerseys to sell by noon yesterday. Steve Cozzolino of SoHo was there to buy three Rodriguez jerseys -- one for himself, for his father and for a friend -- and tickets to a Boston home series and the Mets home series. The Yankees-Mets home series was sold out, and only single seats in the bleachers were left for the three Boston homestands.
When the Rodriguez trade was announced on Monday, the Yankees sold 22,000 tickets, 8,000 more than the average on a comparable day, said Howard Rubenstein, a spokesman for the Yankees. So far, ticket sales for the 2004 season are just under 2.3 million, 75,000 ahead of last year's pace.
Season tickets already total 24,300, surpassing last year's full-year total of 24,200. Rubenstein added that traffic on the Yankees' Web site, Yankees.com, quintupled on Monday to 2.5 million hits from last year.
If Rodriguez helps the Yankees' local television ratings, it will benefit the YES Network, which will carry 130 Yankees games. An increase in the local Nielsen rating from last season's 3.4 would increase advertising rates for the 2005 season.
But of greater impact to YES will be the result of the current arbitration between the network and Cablevision. A three-member panel is holding hearings to decide whether Cablevision should carry YES as an expanded basic network, available to the greatest number of subscribers and generating the most revenue, or as a network that requires an extra fee or the purchase of a premium package, which is the current arrangement and has expired.
Fox had already scheduled the Yankees for eight games, and expects to add a ninth, the maximum under the contract, by showing the game against the Red Sox on the final Saturday of the season.
ESPN expects to show the maximum four Yankees games on Sunday nights this season and has scheduled the first two, against the Dodgers on June 20 and the Mets on June 27. Numerous other Yankees games will be shown by ESPN and ESPN2. ESPN2 will carry the March 30 game against Tampa Bay from Japan.
BASEBALL
