The Japanese economy grew at a robust 7 percent annual pace in the fourth quarter of 2003, the Cabinet Office reported. After weakness early in the year, the strong showing last quarter by Japan, the world's second-largest economy, brought growth for all of 2003 to 2.7 percent.
True to form, exports were the engine behind the growth, pulling Japan well out of recession. But this time, the crucial demand for Japanese goods came not from the United States, but from China.
''We reckon that 80 percent of the growth in exports in the last 12 months is due to Chinese demand,'' said Jesper Koll, chief Japan economist for Merrill Lynch. ''There is absolutely no question that here in Japan, all eyes are on China. If China slows down, Japan will crash.''
Unlike past recoveries, which tended to be narrowly dependent on increased exports of cars to North America, current growth is more widely based as Chinese demand puts idle capacity in Japanese steel mills and semiconductor plants back to work.
Sales of construction and mining equipment to China by Komatsu jumped 47 percent last quarter, to $150 million. In 2005, the company said, it expects to sell $1 billion to China, more than double the 2002 level. And Chinese demand has increased steel prices, turning losses into profit at Nippon Steel. Last year, China was the ultimate destination for about 40 percent of the company's foreign sales.
''The Japanese economy has always been led by plant-and-equipment investments of export-oriented manufactures,'' said Eisuke Sakakibara, professor of international economics at Keio University. Noting exports last year of $518 billion, he said, ''We are back on that path.''
In December, unemployment fell to 4.9 percent, the lowest level in two and a half years. Last month, corporate bankruptcies continued a yearlong decline, running 16 percent below the period a year earlier. Bankruptcy debt was down 63 percent.
Japan's current account surplus, a broad measure of trade, increased 11.6 percent last year, to a record $150 billion -- aided by a 33 percent rise in exports to China and a 20 percent fall in Japanese travel overseas.
Some growth can be traced to a rebound in consumer electronics. In spite of reports that Japan has lost its competitive edge to lower-wage Asian countries, audiovisual equipment exports rose 68 percent in December from those a year earlier. ''A lot of people everywhere are saying this is a genuine upturn,'' said Richard Dyck, president of TSC Japan, an electronic components company. ''There is a lot of optimism in the electronics industry.''
To keep exports affordable to Americans and Europeans, Japan's government has intervened on a large scale in the currency markets, buying $172 billion of foreign currency last year to keep the strong yen from strengthening even further. Last month, it bought $67 billion more.
According to the United States Treasury Department, Japanese investors accounted for about half the purchases of Treasury bonds in 2003, with net purchases about four times that the previous year.
The currency interventions have limited the dollar's drop against the yen to 12 percent in the last year. Even so, the yen is trading here at a rate around 105 to the dollar, a three-and-a-half-year high.
Beyond the yen, other threats loom for Japan's economy. While many big companies have restructured to regain profitability, the government has done little to cut spending or to close the budget deficit, now around 8 percent of the gross domestic product. By comparison, the American deficit was recently projected at $521 billion in an economy of more than $11 trillion, or 4.7 percent.
With a population-age profile similar to that of Florida, the Japanese government is paying more for social security than it obtains in contributions and taxes. At the other end of the age range, unemployment among young men is 10 percent. To meet obligations, the government has allowed the ratio of debt to the gross domestic product to soar to 163 percent, the highest among advanced economies.
