Treasury Secretary John W. Snow distanced himself on Tuesday from the Bush administration's official prediction that the nation would add 2.6 million jobs by the end of this year.
That prediction, which is far more optimistic than that of many private sector forecasters, was part of the annual economic report released last week by the White House Council of Economic Advisers and was immediately echoed by Mr. Bush himself.
But on a tour through Washington and Oregon to promote the president's economic agenda, Mr. Snow and Commerce Secretary Donald L. Evans both declined to endorse the White House prediction and cautioned that it was based on economic assumptions that have an inherent margin of error.
''I think we are going to create a lot of jobs; how many I don't know,'' Mr. Snow said, adding that ''macroeconomic models are based on a lot of assumptions'' and are ''not without a range of error.''
Unemployment and the nation's surprisingly sluggish pace of job creation has become a significant political weakness for Mr. Bush, who is on track to be the first president since Herbert Hoover to end his first term with fewer jobs than when he started.
The nation has lost about 2.5 million jobs in the last three years, and job loss has been acute in the Pacific Northwest. Unemployment is 6.8 percent in Washington and 7.2 percent in Oregon, compared with 5.6 percent nationwide. The aerospace industry has laid off tens of thousands of workers, as have technology companies tied to the collapse of the stock market bubble and older manufacturers.
Mr. Snow and other top administration officials are on a two-day tour through both states this week, traveling in a luxurious bus to promote the beneficial effects of Mr. Bush's tax-cutting plans and spread the word that the economy is humming once again.
But while economic growth has been very strong for the last six months, the pace of job creation has been much slower than in previous economic recoveries. After losing about 2.8 million jobs since late 2001, the nation started to add jobs only last fall and has been adding them at the rate of about 100,000 a month.
Most economists say the nation needs to add about 125,000 jobs a month just to keep up with increases in the number of workers, and that it needs to add more than 200,000 a month over a sustained period to significantly reduce the unemployment rate below its current 5.6 percent.
To create 2.6 million jobs by the end of this year, the nation would have to add more than 230,000 positions each month from now until January. But many if not most economic forecasters expect a more modest upswing, largely because the nation's productivity has been climbing so rapidly that companies have been meeting higher demand without adding workers.
Mr. Snow and Mr. Evans are traveling around the Northwest in a bus that has been used by touring performers like Bon Jovi and Styx. Secretary of Labor Elaine L. Chao and Hector V. Barreto, head of the Small Business Administration, are on the tour as well to promote the administration's job-training programs and assistance for new companies.
The group announced new grants at a center in Spokane that acts as an incubator for high-technology start-ups, then held a roundtable meeting with women business owners in Richland.
Mr. Snow and Mr. Evans said the economy was still recovering from the combined blows of a recession, the collapse of the stock market bubble, the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
But they said the fundamentals of the economy all pointed to strong growth for the foreseeable future and faster job creation. Brushing aside complaints about the federal government's large budget deficit, which the White House predicts will surpass $500 billion this year, Mr. Snow renewed the administration's call for making President Bush's tax cuts permanent, a move that would cost about $1.5 trillion over the next 10 years.
Still stinging from criticism by Democrats about comments by a top White House aide in support of ''outsourcing,'' or shifting jobs to low-wage countries, Mr. Snow said those remarks had been ''misinterpreted'' and were not meant to condone the loss of American jobs.
