SO the burning question of the day is, will Mike Lamb go down in Yankees history alongside Wally Pipp? Pipp was the first baseman who woke up with a headache one day in 1925, missed a game and never saw first base again as Lou Gehrig played 2,130 consecutive games there.
Mike Lamb doesn't qualify in the same way as Pipp; he hasn't had a headache. But then, he hasn't played an inning at third base for the Yankees either.
Lamb, however, was acquired two weeks ago with the idea that he might play third base for the Yankees. Seeking a replacement for the injured Aaron Boone, the Yankees sent Jose Garcia, a minor league pitcher, to the Rangers on Feb. 3 for Lamb, whom Texas had designated for assignment.
The Yankees didn't instantly anoint the 28-year-old Lamb as the third baseman, but he was being brought in to compete with Enrique Wilson, Tyler Houston and Miguel Cairo for the job. Given that he was the most natural third baseman of the group, he just might have won the job, at least a major portion of it.
But in the last few days, Lamb's status changed. Oh did it ever.
Before he had a chance to travel to Tampa, try on his new uniform and take a few ground balls at Legends Field, Lamb lost his job. While Lamb was roaming around Southern California alone and anonymous yesterday, his former Texas teammate Alex Rodriguez was appearing at Yankee Stadium before the largest news media throng to show up in the Bronx for a news conference.
It was a standing room only crowd for Rodriguez, a stand alone day for Lamb.
Speaking on his cellphone, Lamb was asked what he thought his future would be with the Yankees.
''I have no idea,'' he said. ''I don't know if the Yankees have a plan in mind for me. I haven't had a chance to talk to them. They were kind of busy today.''
Lamb, born 13 days after Rodriguez in 1975, was not cursing his luck. He has been in baseball long enough to know that nothing is certain, that a trade to the Yankees doesn't necessarily turn one's career around.
Lamb spent the majority of the past four seasons with the Rangers but did not establish himself as the everyday third baseman. As a rookie in 2000, he started 129 games at third and was named the third baseman on all-rookie teams. But his .278 batting average guaranteed him nothing for the next season, most of the first half of which he spent in the minor leagues. In 2002 he was with the Rangers all but the first 10 days of the season but divided his playing time among five positions. Last season was a lost season for Lamb, who batted .132 in 28 games with the Rangers and spent the second half in the minors.
''It's been hectic just wanting another opportunity outside of Texas,'' Lamb said. ''I finally got it, and I was moving to New York with a chance to play on one of the best teams in baseball, one of the best organizations in all sports.
''To go from that to New York trading for Alex; he's obviously going to play. It's exciting. He's one of the best players in the game. I can't fault New York for making that move or Alex for saying he'd play third base. Who wouldn't want him on their team? What a great deal for everybody, really.''
Not for Lamb, though.
''I'll go to spring training, see what they want,'' he said. ''I'd love to stay in New York. Who wouldn't? Sure, I'd like a chance to play, but there you have a chance to go to the playoffs and the World Series. Who wouldn't want to do that? I can't sit here and tell you I'd rather do something else.''
Though his move to the Yankees may turn out to be fruitless, Lamb was instrumental in his new team's acquisition of Rodriguez. During General Manager Brian Cashman's talks with the Rangers for Lamb, Cashman asked John Hart, the Texas general manager, about the possibility of Rodriguez playing third base.
''No, we just made him captain,'' Cashman quoted Hart as responding. ''That's not something we're looking to get into.''
The Yankees proceeded with the trade for Lamb but persisted with the idea of adding a shortstop to play third.
When Rodriguez was a free agent three winters ago, the Mets disdained him, saying his demands would upset the chemistry of their club. Rodriguez, they said, wanted to be treated differently from his teammates and would create a 24-and-1 environment. In his three seasons with Rodriguez, Lamb said he never saw that side of him.
''I don't know if there were times when he'd stay in different hotels on the road, though I wouldn't blame him if he did,'' Lamb said. ''People always want a piece of him. He was on team flights all the time. He didn't single himself out. He honestly cares about his teammates. He cares about winning, cares about younger players and helping people out, giving them an idea what to expect. He helps players however he can. He's always talking to the younger guys. You see it on ESPN, but he did it when the camera wasn't on, too. If he doesn't care, he should be in Hollywood making movies.''
Lamb meant that Rodriguez would be that good an actor. ''He'd make a lot more money making movies,'' he said.
For now, Rodriguez will remain a baseball player, a baseball player playing third base, a position that two weeks ago might have belonged to Mike Lamb.
On Baseball
