If This Be a Dream, Pray, Let Us Slumber
What a whirl, a soufflé, a kaleidoscope, a samba with the guy who didn't know you existed in high school, a gay roundelay (not that that's a bad thing) Fashion Week was for us. The glamour never seemed to end.
At one event, if you may believe it, ADAM SANDLER and DAN AYKROYD were seated in a basement, in a roped-off area with security guards, and we were able, by peering through a small screened window, to catch a glimpse of them. They were sitting in a room of wall-to-wall pillows, clinking their stemmed glasses. One day, and we hope soon, the Bronx Zoo may mount an exhibition of Early 21st Century Comedians Who Got Really, Really Lucky, and everyone may get a chance to study these creatures. But until that day -- well, you can imagine our thrill. We even got to tell Mr. Sandler an amusing little anecdote as he left with the bodyguards. He chuckled but did not stop to chat, which we quite understand. But that was the Victoria's Secret party on Wednesday night, and we are getting ahead of ourselves. So to that beloved Boldface feature:
Stuff We Didn't Have Room for Last Week
There's a video, at the coat-check area, of two people having sex while handling a live chicken. It must be a JOHN WATERS event. In this case, the opening of Mr. Waters's show, ''Change of Life,'' at the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo, on the cusp of Fashion Week. The exhibition, which consisted mostly of photographs that Mr. Waters took from his TV screen and assembled into post-modern commentaries, included a series called ''DOROTHY MALONE's Collar'' (she liked it up) ; another called ''CHARLES MANSON Copies Dorothy Malone.'' Also attending were the actor STEVE BUSCEMI, the designer TODD OLDHAM, the comedian AMY SEDARIS, the Waters muse PATRICIA HEARST and Mr. Waters's parents, PATRICIA and JOHN WATERS.
We also met LIZ RENAY, who starred as a murderous housewife in Mr. Waters's 1977 movie ''Desperate Living.'' Ms. Renay, who wore a sequined pantsuit and a DOLLY PARTON wig, gave her age as ''70-something.''
''Her famous thing is she was MICKEY COHEN's girlfriend,'' Mr. Waters said. ''The mobster. BOBBY KENNEDY hated her, and she wouldn't snitch on the mob. And she went to jail, where she wrote a great book called 'My Face for the World to See.' She streaked Hollywood Boulevard at the height of the streaking fad; when she was in her 50's, she ran totally nude up Hollywood Boulevard. She's the happiest person I know.''
With a See-Through Cami She'd Be a Fox
The 150th anniversary for LOUIS VUITTON last week was a two-part affair: first, the new three-floor shop at 57th Street and Fifth, then the party at Lincoln Center. Our favorite item: a thong sandal selling for $440. KENNETH JAY LANE was checking out the line with LADY BURY, who was wearing a conservative silk dress and pumps so often validated on Masterpiece Theater. Not that she needs validation.
Mr. Lane told us his favorite item were platform sandals with 3 1/2-inch tortoiseshell heels and gold ankle straps.
''I offered to buy them for my friend RUFUS ALBEMARLE's mother -- he's actually the 14th Earl of Albemarle but lives in New York, and he's an industrial designer'' Mr. Lane said. ''Lady Bury. But she didn't think they were quite her style.''
Elsewhere in the party: RUDOLPH GIULIANI and JUDITH NATHAN holding hands, ANTONIO BANDERAS and MELANIE GRIFFITH, ARMAND ASSANTE, NAOMI CAMPBELL , and PATTI HANSEN, the model and wife of KEITH RICHARDS.
''There is no gray area when it comes to fashion and Keith,'' Ms. Hansen told us. ''He knows exactly what he likes and he knows exactly what he likes on me.''
Yes, rock star marriage must be lovely.
We must write a sonnet to it some time.
Most fascinating fashion statement of the evening: PHARRELL WILLIAMS of the Neptunes, who, in addition to his camouflage baseball cap, red baseball jacket, denim jeans and silver and gold sneakers, wore a flower-patterned handkerchief over his mouth.
What's with the mask, we asked, after a little chitchat about the merch, which, having produced songs for everyone from JUSTIN TIMBERLAKE to JAY-Z, he can afford.
''It's for preservation. I've got an album coming out. It's preserving my face. The new album is out March 23. But I can't tell you about it.''
Will there be surprise guests?
''I can't tell you.''
There, on the Runway, Isn't That Lady Bury?
Off to the party for Victoria's Secret at Spice Market we go.
TYRA BANKS, in a leather bustier minidress and spike heels, tells us her CD will be out soon.
''I've been singing for six years,'' she said, ''but I never wanted to talk to the press about it. I felt that coming from the modeling world, people don't tend to take us seriously. And I totally understand that. So I wanted to make sure that my stuff was tight, that my voice was tight, that my dancing was tight.''
In a roped-off area, HARVEY WEINSTEIN huddled with GISELE BÜNDCHEN. In another area, behind velvet ropes and bodyguards, CHRISTINA AGUILERA sat on a sofa, chatting on a cellphone.
We're out of here.
with Joe Brescia, Melena Z. Ryzik and C.J. Satterwhite
Boldface Names  Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  A report in the Boldface Names column yesterday misidentified a Fashion Week party that Christina Aguilera attended on Feb. 11. It was the MAC cosmetics party at the Ace Gallery, not the Victoria's Secret party at Spice Market.
