Once locked in a fierce battle over the future of music, the fans of Brahms and the fans of Wagner seemed to get along quite amicably on Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall. Truth be told, there appeared to be a lot of overlap among them.
Joking aside, the bitter rivalry that defined German cultural politics 150 years ago has now become just another programming conceit, a framing device through which Lorin Maazel and the New York Philharmonic presented an evening of well-loved music by both composers.
The antagonism between the ''conservative'' Brahms and the ''radical'' Wagner was overstated even in their own time, and the reductive labels have only grown more implausible as their terms were reversed and their legacies taken up -- or violently appropriated -- by 20th-century champions ranging from Schoenberg to Hitler. As the Philharmonic program demonstrated, both composers can be seen as progressive innovators, and their music commingles in concerts without conceptual dissonance.
The only sparks on Thursday night were happily confined to the stage -- mostly to the keyboard -- as the German pianist Lars Vogt made an exciting Philharmonic debut with Brahms's First Piano Concerto. The piece's compositional history suggests it as the unlikely offspring of a sonata and a symphony, and the work's quotients of intimacy and grandeur suggest it received essential qualities from each.
Mr. Vogt was receptive to both strains in this music, and he often impressively discovered them coexisting side by side. His playing was broad and muscular in the outer movements but he tempered their monumentality with a lithe sensitivity and refinement of tone. These latter qualities also informed his delicately inflected reading of the slow movement.
After the intermission Mr. Maazel led three Wagner selections: the Prelude to Act I of ''Lohengrin,'' the Prelude and Liebestod from ''Tristan und Isolde'' and the Overture and Bacchanale of ''Tannhäuser.'' By and large he had the orchestra sounding in top form: the brass in particular played as a sleek and unified phalanx and the strings spun smooth and seamless webs out of Wagner's inextinguishable melody.
Mr. Maazel's interpretations were most convincing in ''Tannhäuser'' as well as in two encores -- the preludes to Act I of ''Meistersinger'' and Act III of ''Lohengrin'' -- music that lends itself to his exacting vision, his gift for textural clarity and his virtuoso baton technique. '
'Tristan'' by contrast left this listener wishing for more mystical sweep. In just one telling detail, the rests in the opening lines felt like empty silences rather than pauses pregnant with anticipation, with a small fraction of the deep yearning that later intoxicates the two lovers and the musical world they share.
PHILHARMONIC REVIEW
