''AFTER endless luncheons in smart restaurants, endless tastings, endless talk about food,'' James Beard wrote as he approached the end of a long life, ''one inevitably develops a certain antipathy toward elegant cuisine. How I have longed, after a week of rich and complicated foods, for the exquisite pleasure of a simple piece of boiled meat!''
I'm with him, like a lot of people all over the world, epicureans and mere chowhounds alike. Escoffier, who ate more fancy food than Beard, described the French boil-up pot-au-feu as ''the symbol of family life, a comfortable, thoroughly bourgeois dish that nothing may dethrone.''
Ronald Reagan, a Midwesterner of plain tastes, was totally devoted to a Hollywood variety of boiled meat called Beef Belmont. Featuring short ribs, vegetables and matzo balls, it was a Tuesday-only special at Dave Chasen's restaurant. The Wednesday night after he was elected president, the rules were bent a little, and the dish was served to him and his wife, Nancy.
There is no night so forlorn, no mood so bleak, that it cannot be infused with pleasure by tender meat, simmered languidly in rich broth until it is ready to collapse into enticing shreds with the slightest touch of a fork. Cheap cuts are slowly transformed by the magic of bouillon into dishes so reassuring and restorative that I run to any kitchen or restaurant serving them.
Yes, I know, boiled meat sounds boringly bland (and in case I hadn't known it, at least a dozen friends turned up their noses when I told them I was making a study of the subject). But such skepticism melts in the face of a well-made pot-au-feu in Paris, a grand bollito misto near Modena, a classic tafelspitz in Vienna or a hearty New England boiled dinner in Boston -- all of which my wife, Betsey, and I have sampled on the spot in some depth this winter.
A bottle of something not too obstreperous is essential -- Beaujolais, maybe, or nebbiolo -- as is coarse salt. Herby salsa verde and mostarda di Cremona, composed of fruit chunks preserved in mustard-flavored sugar syrup, are eaten with bollito in Italy, and Austrians serve a sweet-sharp blend of horseradish and applesauce with tafelspitz.
Old-fashioned it may be, but boiling is creeping back into fashion. The überchef Daniel Boulud recently rhapsodized about pot-au-feu in a column in Elle Decor, although naturally he throws in a couple of filets mignons for greater luxe.
Upmarket restaurants across the country are finding places on their menus for boiled meat (a listing appears on Page 4). In food-frenzied London, where boiled silverside (corned beef) was a standby at the Savoy and Connaught hotels before the dubious updating of their dining rooms, boiled beef and carrots is a big draw at Wolseley, the hot new brasserie.
This is comfort food people reminisce about. My friend Charlotte Williams, a retired New Zealand diplomat, told me of the thrilling boiled mutton, served with caper sauce, of her North Island childhood. My colleague Linda Greenhouse recalls a one-pot meal of boiled beef, yuccas, plantains and other starchy things she ate one chilly day in the mid-1970's at a truck stop on the Pan-American Highway in Guatemala.
POT-AU-FEU is of ancient origin. Campaigning in France in 1792 as a member of the general staff of the Duke of Weimar, Goethe came across a kettle hanging over a fire. What was bubbling away inside, he was told, was ''the national dish, called pot-au-feu,'' composed of beef, carrots, turnips, leeks and cabbage. The recipe has changed little in the more than two centuries since.
Making pot-au-feu is no simple matter. The bouillon is best if made by plunging meat into cold water. Brought to a boil, simmered, then skimmed and strained, the resulting liquid serves as the cooking medium for the pot-au-feu. A generous assortment of vegetables and meats, including at least one gelatinous cut for richness, is needed for optimum flavor complexity.
You have to look a little to find a Paris bistro that serves good pot-au-feu. The best that we ate on a recent stay was at Chez la Vieille, a slightly faded cubbyhole near the Samaritaine department store, which is run by Marie-José Cervoni, a chic, animated Sardinian woman who is always turned out in gold jewelry and black high heels.
Mme. Cervoni's pot-au-feu comes in a well-used Le Creuset casserole with a ladle for self-service, and Betsey splashed around in the perfectly limpid broth as happily as a kid at the beach. Lurking in there were delectable pieces of shin and shoulder of beef, oxtail, short ribs and marrow bones, along with leeks, carrots, bittersweet little turnips and -- subbing for cabbage -- celery root. Every flavor and texture stood out, clear and distinctive.
We spread marrow on toast, sprinkled it with salt and glowed. We hit the oxtails and carrots and glowed more, saving the ribs and turnips for last. There was just enough Corsican ordinaire to see us through.
Chez la Vielle is a lunch spot, but we couldn't resist sampling the array of starters Mme. Cervoni put on the table: peppery tête de veau, duck terrine, stuffed tomatoes. And she wouldn't let us leave without a taste of savarin doused with Martinique rum.
At today's punitive rates, it cost $153.25, service included. But we didn't need dinner.
Another day, we met our friends Jonathan Randal and his wife, Geneviève, for a trip down memory lane at Le Pot au Feu, a street-corner local in a leafy area on the Left Bank near the Tour Montparnasse. After oeufs mayonnaise and before chocolate mousse, we ate an unorthodox but delicious, greaseless pot-au-feu. Rather than several cuts of beef, it included pork spareribs and a duck leg in addition to beef cheeks and marrow bones, as well as some of the dandiest cabbage I've tasted in years -- sweet, green and slightly crunchy.
It all came to the table in a vintage copper vessel from E. Dehillerin, the grand old restaurant-supply house. Pots of Dijon mustard and unrefined gray Guerande salt from Brittany, which made both meat and vegetable flavors sparkle, arrived as well.C LINICA GASTRONOMICA at the Hotel Arnaldo in Rubiera, a few miles west of Modena in north-central Italy, is not, as Nicholas Lander of The Financial Times once suggested, a rest home for overindulgent food writers. It is a shrine to bollito misto, where waiter captains in suits carve, and waitresses in black dresses with white pinafores dispense, luscious boiled meats.
In the comfortable, tile-floored dining room just off the old Via Emilia, dinner begins with antipasti featuring the products that make it the Main Street of Italian gastronomy -- little field-green salads dressed with venerable balsamic vinegar from Modena, carpaccio slicked with oil and topped with flakes of Parmesan cheese, chunks of mortadella from Bologna and leaves of matchless, rosy prosciutto, also from Parma, rimmed with snow-white fat.
The boiled meats roll up to tableside on stainless steel trolleys, kept warm in wells filled with heated stock. The captains ask politely about one's appetite and taste: Oxtail or tongue? Rough-cut cotechino sausage or zampone (pig's trotter)? Chicken or braising beef? Calf's head? Smoked ham? A bite of each, signora? With the seriousness of purpose of surgeons at Johns Hopkins, they fork the desired cut from the well and slice off a few pieces.
As expected, the mostarda was potent and the salsa verde was redolent of capers, garlic and anchovies. One thing was unexpected, however. Offered polpettone, we expected meatballs; instead, we got dumplings made of parsley, eggs, bread, cheese and chicken livers. They tasted better than they sound -- a classic example of the peasant gift for making a lot from little.
Bollito misto is appreciated all over Italy, as is its humbler cousin, lesso misto, which often involves just a piece of brisket. I have eaten bollito tender enough to cut with a spoon amid starlets and celebrities at Dal Bolognese, an institution for four decades on the Piazza del Popolo in Rome, and in Florentine trattorias both plain and fancy.
At Ruggero, on the south side of Florence, the bollito is as bare-bones as the surroundings, but wonderful. Only four meats are served, including calf's foot and rump of veal; no mostarda is offered, and the salsa verde is just a few herbs bathed in olive oil, without garlic. At Zibibbo, Benedetta Vitali's charming new trattoria, the ingredients often include veal chops, veal shank and cappelli da prete (priest's hats, sausages so called because they resemble birettas), which were favorites of Rossini.
We did not get to taste a bollito that included lampredotto, an ingredient unique to Florence. It is a local type of tripe that is made, I believe, from the omasum, the third of the cow's four stomachs.
But we did not miss Nervone, a sandwich stand founded in 1872, which is located at one corner of the beautiful San Lorenzo central market, designed by Giuseppe Mengoni, who also designed the Galleria in Milan. The specialty there is a boiled-beef panino, or sandwich, a delicacy in the same league as the beef on weck at Schwabl's in West Seneca, N.Y., east of Buffalo.
Ask for bagnato. The counterman pulls a rib of beef from its steaming broth, hones a knife reduced to a sliver of steel, cuts thin slices, bathes a roll in meat juices, slaps the meat onto it, adds coarse salt and salsa verde, slips it into a waxed-paper pocket and hands it to you. Manna. Drink a shot glass of Chianti with it.
HARD as it is to find Paris bistros that serve pot-au-feu, it is even harder to find Viennese restaurants of any sort that do not serve tafelspitz or one of its variants. At Zum Schwarzen Kameel (the Black Camel), an Art Nouveau favorite of Ladies Who Lunch, in business since 1618, the beef comes in thick, moist slices, trimmed of fat. That makes it a bit bland, but it no doubt appeals to the L.W.L.
Stomach, an arty, ramshackle beisl, or bistro, near Freud's house, whose name is a play on that of the butcher shop, Tomach, that used to occupy the premises, proposes chunks of cold tafelspitz in aspic squares. And Steirereck, the city's reigning culinary temple, with elaborate furnishings and deferential waiters, serves something called Styrian beef, which turns out to be our old friend tafelspitz, unusually close-grained yet tender enough to cut with a spoon, flanked by beans and black-eyed peas.
But Plachutta is the place to eat Viennese boiled beef. It serves 13 varieties, including tafelspitz, a triangular cut from the steer's aitchbone, or rump. The name is loosely and confusingly applied to other cuts, like kavalierspitz, which comes from the shoulder, but the nomenclature, to be fair, is impenetrable to non-Viennese. As Joseph Wechsberg observes in ''Blue Trout and Black Truffles,'' tafelspitz and hieferschwanzl look like brisket to auslanders.
Plachutta tries to help; when you open the menu, you see a diagram of a steer showing the position of each cut. Green-vested waiters patrol the immaculate dining rooms, which are decorated in hunting green and yellow plaid, ready with more information.
The key to the quality of tafelspitz lies in the quality of the high Austrian pastures on which the oxen graze -- in particular those in Styria and Lower Austria, between Vienna and Salzburg. Plachutta buys beef from seven-month-old brown-and-white steers from regional butchers and hangs it for three weeks. With its two sister restaurants, it goes through more than 300,000 pounds every year -- all heavily marbled and gelatinous, which makes the meat succulent when cooked slowly.
Mario Plachutta's father, Ewald, was the chef at Drei Hussaren, a great Vienna restaurant of the 1960's and 70's; he named his son, now 35, after the singer Mario Lanza, whom he admired. Mario has restored tafelspitz to its central place in the Viennese diet, serving it in broth enriched with leeks and carrots and bone marrow.
The classic accompaniments are lined up on the table like soldiers: puréed spinach, a creamy chive sauce and apple-and-horseradish sauce (apfelkren). But to my regret, rösti has been replaced with plain roast potatoes. I doubt that Emperor Franz Josef (1830-1916), who is said to have eaten tafelspitz every day, would have approved.
MY mother wasn't from Boston, but Fannie Farmer was, and because my mother avidly followed her culinary advice, we ate a lot of New England boiled dinners when I was growing up in Ohio. Lucky us!
Presumably a few home cooks still make this one-pot (or, to be accurate, one-and-a-half-pot) meal; I do, occasionally, and so does my sister, Barbara. But it has all but disappeared from restaurant menus, even in the Northeast. I found one defender of New England tradition: Jasper White. A sweet-tempered mountain of a man, he runs Jasper's Summer Shack, a seafood joint in the far reaches of Cambridge that serves 4,000 meals some weeks.
Mostly, he specializes in oysters and lobsters. But for a month or more in late February and early March, he boils meat.
''Like most great dishes, it originated out of necessity,'' he told me as we dived into a steaming platter of groceries. ''It dates back 300 years, when they cooked in a kettle on a tripod in front of a fire. It's made of things that keep all winter, like corned beef, cabbage and all the great root vegetables -- there's boiling onions in there, parsnips, rutabaga, potatoes, turnips, carrots and beets, which you have to cook separately.''
Three things set Mr. White's boiled dinners on a pinnacle:
He corns (that, is, salts) his own beef, soaking it in brine for eight days, because he knows no butcher who clings to the old ways. He uses neither garlic nor nitrites, so the meat does not turn pink, like kosher corned beef; it is tannish (New Englanders call it gray) and milder in taste.
He also brings haute cuisine techniques to bear on this homely dish. The vegetables are ''turned'' -- whittled into uniform shape -- which makes it easier to ensure that each emerges from the pot al dente, and they do.
He makes his own mustard pickles, the ideal counterpoint.
If I had my way, I'd send Mr. White and his New England boiled dinner to represent us in one of those international cook-offs, where our escutcheon is usually carried by specialists in butter sculpture and room service. He'd show 'em all, the pot-au-feu guys and Clinica and Plachutta, too.
