TOO few soups are both hearty and quick to make, but West Lake soup is a stunning exception. Named after its area of origin, in Hangzhou, China, it is sometimes called a variation on egg drop soup. This is a bit like calling a cream-enriched lobster bisque a variation on creamy potato soup.
When I have eaten West Lake soup in restaurants and homes in this country, it has had wonderfully clear and intense flavors and a marked richness. This comes not only from dropped egg whites but from loads of meat or fish, cilantro, peas and, as I found out in the cooking, a bit of cornstarch.
Most West Lake soup contains ground meat, often pork, sometimes beef. But a couple of months ago I ate a version dominated by plain white fish at a restaurant in Monterey Park, Calif., a largely Asian suburb of Los Angeles. The colors of the fish, the cilantro and the peas offset one another beautifully, and the dish had more flavor than when made with beef.
You can make the soup in the same time with fish or meat (or even ground turkey or chicken, or crab meat). The other ingredients, which include a hefty amount of black pepper and soy sauce, are strong enough so that the results are splendid, especially if you begin by sautéing shallots or onions until they are nicely browned.
Some people will eat nothing with this much cilantro, so I tried preparing the soup with chopped watercress or chopped kale. Both ''worked'' -- as would dark greens like spinach or collards, or even parsley -- though they changed the soup's flavor. Cilantro lovers will probably prefer the original, but no one should pass up this chance to expand a repertory of fast and rich soups.
WEST LAKE FISH SOUP  Time: 30 minutes
2 tablespoons peanut oil, or neutral oil like corn or canola
1/2 cup peeled and chopped shallots or onion  6 cups chicken or other stock, preferably homemade  3 tablespoons soy sauce, or to taste  1 teaspoon (at least) ground pepper  1 cup peas, preferably fresh (thaw frozen ones)
3/4 to 1 pound plain white fish fillets, like flounder, roughly chopped (can use ground meat)  2 tablespoons cornstarch  2 egg whites, lightly beaten  1 cup chopped fresh cilantro leaves  Salt.
1. Put oil in a saucepan large enough to hold all ingredients, and turn heat to medium. A minute later add shallots. Cook about 10 minutes, stirring occasionally until they are golden brown, adjusting heat so they do not burn.
2. Add all but  1/4 cup of stock, and turn heat to medium-high. When contents begin to steam, add soy sauce, pepper, peas and fish, and cook at a gentle simmer (adjust heat as necessary), stirring occasionally, until peas are tender and fish is falling apart, 5 to 10 minutes. In a small bowl, mix  1/4 cup of stock with cornstarch.
3. Drizzle egg whites into saucepan, stirring constantly with a whisk or a pair of chopsticks. Stir in cornstarch mixture. When soup thickens, stir in cilantro. Taste, and add more pepper or soy sauce if you like and salt if necessary. Serve immediately.
Yield: 4 servings
THE MINIMALIST
