An East Harlem man convicted of raping a teenage girl and throwing her battered body from the roof of a 14-story apartment building was sentenced yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to 40 years to life in prison.
The man, William Hernandez, 23, was convicted last month of two counts of second-degree murder -- one accusing him of showing a depraved indifference to human life -- and two counts of rape in the death of Sheinna Morales, 15, who was thrown from atop the George Washington Houses on East 97th Street in September 2002.
Justice Bonnie G. Wittner rejected the prosecution's request for a life sentence, but ordered that Mr. Hernandez serve consecutive sentences for the murder and the rape. The prison terms for the two murder convictions will be concurrent, as will the convictions for rape.
The prosecutor, Bonnie Sard, an assistant district attorney, read a statement from Sheinna's family as her relatives sobbed in the back of the courtroom.
''We will always wonder why Mr. Hernandez felt compelled to commit this crime against a 15-year-old child,'' Ms. Sard read.
''The hideous aftermath has sentenced us to life,'' the family's statement said. ''Sheinna was a good person who loved God, her family and her music.''
Ms. Sard then addressed the court. ''It's impossible to imagine the fear and terror 15-year-old Sheinna Morales experienced in the last moments of her life,'' she said.
Mr. Hernandez, who maintains his innocence, declined an invitation to speak to the court. But his lawyer said Mr. Hernandez had had a troubled childhood.
''He understands what happened to the Morales family and empathizes for the loss of Sheinna Morales,'' said the lawyer, Stanford Hickman, ''but in no way does he say he's guilty of what happened to Sheinna Morales. He believes that other courts will find that he did not cause the death.''
Mr. Hickman described Mr. Hernandez as distressed and suicidal. Some of Mr. Hernandez's supporters in the courtroom, sitting a few feet from the victim's family, cried.
Justice Wittner conceded that Mr. Hernandez had had a troubled youth, but said, ''I can't think of anyone who's done an act like this.''
She added, ''What compelled him to throw a 15-year-old girl to her death, nothing explains that.''
Outside the courtroom, Sheinna's relatives said they were grateful for the consecutive prison terms.
''I thought it was only going to be 25 years, but this is so much better,'' said Sheinna's mother, Nancy Quinones, as she and other family members hugged and praised Ms. Sard.
''Thank you so much,'' Ms. Quinones said. ''Thank you, thank you.''
