On paper the programs that the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam brought to Carnegie Hall on Saturday evening and Sunday afternoon seemed unpromising: four symphonies, one each by Mozart, Beethoven, Brahms and Tchaikovsky, with no new or recent works, no rarities, not even a concerto. The orchestra's music director, Riccardo Chailly, now in his final season, would not be on hand; nor would his successor, Mariss Jansons. Instead the orchestra was to be led by Herbert Blomstedt, the music director of the Gewandhaus Orchestra of Leipzig, the orchestra that Mr. Chailly takes over next season.
But if the prospects looked dim, it was because focusing on the repertory didn't take into account the orchestra itself. Here was one of the world's great music-making machines playing works that deserve its virtuosity and sheer warmth of tone; it would have been pure churlishness to pass it by for lack of novelty.
It turned out that Mr. Blomstedt knew how to make the Concertgebouw players sound their best at Carnegie, something that could not always be said of Mr. Chailly.
Mr. Blomstedt opened the series with a Beethoven Fourth Symphony that largely set the tone for the weekend with its web of carefully balanced contrasts. Mr. Blomstedt's pacing and attention to structural detail had an appealing elegance; but when Beethoven let loose -- in the Allegro vivace of the opening movement for example -- Mr. Blomstedt let the music's adrenaline take over.
It wasn't a matter of abandon: when the music was at full throttle, he used fluid dynamics to keep the phrasing shapely, and the orchestra responded with a unity of purpose that created its own excitement.
The Tchaikovsky Fourth Symphony, which closed the first program, and the Brahms First on Sunday ratcheted up those qualities and magnified other aspects of the orchestra's sonic personality. In both works the brass playing was assertive and solid. The wind sound was bright-hued and tightly focused, and the strings covered the full range, from pointillistic precision (in Tchaikovsky's pizzicato Scherzo) to an enveloping depth (in the finales of both pieces). As in the Beethoven Mr. Blomstedt's work was conducting alchemy at its best: every move seemed thoroughly considered, but the result was a passionate performance.
Mozart's ''Jupiter'' Symphony, which opened the Sunday concert, was the least persuasive reading of the visit, but it was not without its attractions. The velvety string tone and the occasional bursts of textural detail that Mr. Blomstedt brought forth had a certain charm, as did the focus on inner voices in the finale, and the unusually precipitous gallop through the final bars. Mostly, though, the performance wafted by uneventfully, and here the beauty of the orchestra's sound did not make up for the lack of vividness and Mozartean grandeur.
Memories of the Mozart's shortcomings were mostly swept away by the beefier and more thoughtfully nuanced Brahms performance, and Mr. Blomstedt countered them further with the encore, an electrifying performance of Beethoven's ''Egmont'' Overture.
MUSIC REVIEW
