The jury in the aggravated manslaughter trial of Jayson Williams listened on Tuesday to a tape of a frantic call to 911 in which his brother described the shotgun blast that killed a chauffeur as self-inflicted.
''We have an emergency; somebody just got shot,'' the defendant's brother, Victor Williams, shouted to a state police operator who answered his 911 call from Mr. Williams's mansion on Feb. 14, 2002.
As the operator, Celeste Timberlake, pressed for an address, Victor Williams sounded panicky and yelled: ''This man, he just got shot. He picked up a gun that was loaded and it shot him. Please hurry up, ma'am.''
A recording of the call was played on Tuesday as the jury of 12 women and 4 men followed the hectic conversation on a transcript.
Ms. Timberlake, who testified on Tuesday in the Williams trial, asked if the victim, Costas Christofi, 55, was conscious.
''Ma'am, he's down on the ground,'' Victor Williams said. ''He's barely breathing.''
For a few seconds, the conversation turned again to an address. Then, Victor Williams pleaded again for help. ''Oh, my God, please hurry up, ma'am,'' he said. ''This guy just picked up a loaded gun, and he didn't know what he was doing, picked it up and it just shot him in the chest.''
At the time Mr. Christofi was shot, about 2:40 a.m., Victor Williams was asleep in another part of his brother's multimillion-dollar residence, the authorities have said. They said the sound of the blast woke him and he went to the site of the shooting. A few minutes later, he called 911.
Victor Williams said during the call that Mr. Christofi, whom he did not know by name, was drunk, took the gun from a cabinet, loaded it and then shot himself.
The prosecutor in the case, Steven C. Lember, has said the call was part of a elaborate cover-up organized by Jayson Williams, a former star with the New Jersey Nets, to make the fatal shot appear to be a suicide. Defense lawyers acknowledge that Jayson Williams shot Mr. Christofi, but say the shooting was an accident.
Minutes after the shooting, Mr. Lember has contended, Jayson Williams took off his clothes, jumped into his indoor pool, then put on a fresh set of clothes. He gave the clothing he wore during the shooting to a friend in the house, John Gordnick, who hid it, the prosecutor has said.
In addition, Mr. Lember contends that Mr. Williams and another friend, Kent Culuko, wiped the shotgun, apparently in an attempt to remove Mr. Williams's fingerprints, and tried to place Mr. Christofi's fingerprints on the gun to make it appear as if he had shot himself.
For a time during the 911 call, Ms. Timberlake apparently believed that someone else had shot Mr. Christofi. At one point she asked Victor Williams for the identity of the person who fired the gun.
Based on Victor Williams's descriptions of the shooting, Ms. Timberlake testified, she recorded the shooting in her work log as a suicide.
During cross-examination, a defense lawyer, Joseph A. Hayden, pointed out that Victor Williams had never used the word suicide in his 911 call. Ms. Timberlake agreed. She explained that she had used the word because Mr. Williams said the victim had shot himself.
As the second week of testimony started, the prosecution focused in part on the cover-up allegation of its case. Mr. Williams, 35, faces four charges related to it, including tampering with witnesses and evidence. Two state police detectives who investigated the shooting, John Garkowski and Christopher Wagner, testified that tests failed to find any fingerprints on the shotgun. They said they were satisfied early in their investigation that Mr. Christofi had not committed suicide. They said his chest wound was too large to have been self-inflicted at close range.
During parts of cross-examination, defense lawyers tried to undercut the notion of suicide as a cover story for the shooting. In one exchange with Detective Garkowski, Michael T. Kelly, a defense lawyer, introduced two photographs of Mr. Christofi's body just before an autopsy. Both showed the detective holding a shotgun in one hand and Mr. Christofi's outstretched right arm in the other. The end of the barrel is within an inch of Mr. Christofi's chest, and his right arm, stretched out completely by Detective Garkowski, extends only about halfway up the barrel. Mr. Christofi's fingers are several inches from the trigger.
Detective Garkowski told Mr. Kelly that the gun was too long for Mr. Christofi to have used it to shoot himself.
During opening arguments last week, another defense lawyer, William R. Martin, contended that Mr. Williams had not orchestrated any cover-up involving suicide. Instead, Mr. Martin said his client had panicked after the shooting, but had not, with criminal intent, tried to cover up his involvement in it.
