If this is George Steinbrenner's going-away gift for Joe Torre, then he is being awfully generous. Forget the gold watch, the LeRoy Neiman painting or the Hummer. Steinbrenner gave Torre, the Yankees' lame-duck manager, Alex Rodriguez. He gave Torre perhaps the best player in baseball.
Rodriguez's hyped arrival signals that Torre better figure out how to win a title with a team that, more than ever in Steinbrenner's demanding eyes and stretching bank account, is not supposed to lose. Torre understands that ubiquitous pressure, but it is a more intense mandate because the landscape has been altered.
Even the cagey Torre, who has repeatedly said he does not want to discuss a contract extension, was vacuumed into the excitement after the news conference for Rodriguez yesterday at Yankee Stadium. Well, now that Rodriguez is in the house, maybe another year or two of managing a powerful team while having to listen to Steinbrenner squawk is more palatable to Torre.
''It certainly is a possibility,'' Torre said. ''I'm not closing the door to anything. I'm just not ready to commit to that. That's the only thing.''
Interestingly, Torre's value as a soothing manager who succeeds under stress and duress in the Bronx has surely been strengthened by Rodriguez's acquisition from the Texas Rangers. Teflon Torre, who was bruised by Steinbrenner's public criticisms last year, looks sturdier.
Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, has injected Rodriguez, the highest-paid player in major league history, into a high-profile clubhouse, and the questions about who should play shortstop will be as linked to Rodriguez and Derek Jeter as the pinstripes on their uniforms. Steinbrenner will probably need a respected mediator like Torre to suppress any dissension.
''I really hope Joe is here forever,'' a delighted Rodriguez said.
A dour Jeter added, ''Mr. T is pretty good at handling people and keeping us on the same page.''
While Torre stressed that Jeter was his shortstop and that he did not mind not being consulted when the Yankees elected to obtain Rodriguez and make him the third baseman, he also expressed cool confidence in his ability to monitor players.
If the Jeter versus Rodriguez debate ever erupted into the grandmother of all position controversies because, say, Jeter was hurt and Rodriguez took over at shortstop and excelled, would Torre enjoy handling that delicate challenge?
''Yeah, I do, because, again, I'd like to believe, and it's happened here for eight years, that guys sort of trust me,'' Torre said. ''I'm making decisions based on what I think is best for the team.''
Torre's status will be an intriguing story line throughout the 2004 season, although every juicy item has been bumped down a few notches because Rodriguez will command an inordinate amount of attention. Every move Rodriguez makes will be dissected and discussed, making him a miniature version of what Hideki Matsui was to Japan in 2003.
Still, Torre's slight softening about his fuzzy future was notable because he has sometimes spoken as if he were ready to complete his final year in Yankeeland and visit another place. How quickly would the Boston Red Sox unload Manager Terry Francona if Torre became available -- especially after the Yankees grabbed Rodriguez?
By refusing to consider discussing an extension with Steinbrenner, Torre has snatched some control of his situation. If Torre continues to act as if managing in 2005 will be his choice, Steinbrenner cannot wave the possibility of an extension over his head.
As giddy as the Yankees are about adding Rodriguez to what may become a historic lineup, Torre's challenge to make almost $200 million worth of players and egos coexist long enough to win a championship has become even more onerous.
''In reality, it makes his job tougher,'' said the Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson, who is one of Torre's closest friends. ''He now has more ingredients, a better hand, if you will. You're supposed to win with the hand you're dealt. I think Joe's job is tougher than it has been.''
There will always be parts of Torre's job that are humbling, even galling. Torre revealed that General Manager Brian Cashman called him about the Rodriguez trade discussions late last Friday because they were about to be publicized the next day. Until then, Torre knew as much about it as any WFAN caller.
The Yankees told Torre, who has guided them to four World Series titles in the last eight years, that Rodriguez would play third. The manager had no say in the decision, although Torre said he would have made the same choice.
''If I felt the other way, maybe I would resent it,'' Torre said. ''Because I agreed, maybe that's why I didn't think about it.''
Torre was not annoyed by the snub and showed that being humble, at times, has helped him thrive. When a reporter related that Cashman had said Torre would make the lineup decisions, an incredulous Torre said: ''It's my decision? Well, he's playing third.''
Torre called Rodriguez's addition to the Yankees ''fun pressure,'' the kind ''every manager lives for.'' After eight years of pleasant and unpleasant surprises from Steinbrenner, Torre focuses on the pleasant ones: learning that his potential going-away gift is not a watch, it is the best player in baseball.
BASEBALL
