How do you tune a balafon? At an engrossing concert at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn on Friday night, the trombonist Roswell Rudd gave the answer: you don't.
The balafon is a wooden West African instrument that resembles a xylophone, and every balafon produces a slightly different set of notes. So the members of Mr. Rudd's hybrid band made sure their instruments matched Balla Kouyate's balafon. The only way to stay in tune was to be slightly out of tune.
The concert grew out of a 2002 CD called, ''MALIcool'' (Sunnyside/Universal), a collaboration between Mr. Rudd and the Malian kora player Toumani Diabate. (The kora is a 21-string instrument with a long neck.) For the current tour, Toumani Diabate has been replaced by another kora virtuoso, his cousin Mamadou Diabate, but the spirit remained the same. Mr. Rudd and his bandmates explored a world of musical assonance, where instruments echoed one another without quite falling into lockstep.
Mr. Rudd sometimes amused Mr. Diabate and Mr. Kouyate by unleashing wildly off-kilter trombone slides. When he swung his instrument while emitting long warping notes, he looked and sounded like a drunken elephant. Other times Mr. Rudd just sat back and watched, swaying in time to the swinging polyrhythms.
During the CD's title track, Mr. Rudd's graceful solo got a prickly but no less graceful response from Mr. Kouyate. Mr. Rudd directed the musicians with vigorous gestures (a cross between conducting and air guitar), then the musicians hit the penultimate note together, with Mr. Rudd balancing on one foot. After a split second of silence, his other foot hit the stage with a faint thud.
All night long Mr. Diabate unleashed dense, dazzling riffs on his kora, which sounds a bit like a harpsichord. On the album Toumani Diabate found subtle ways to echo jazz harmonies, but Mamadou Diabate's style is more strident. During ''All Through the Night,'' a Welsh folk song featuring the singer Nora York, he took the stately tune in a new direction with a zigzagging solo full of unexpected clusters of notes.
There were times when the overlapping rhythms and laissez-faire arrangements devolved into a multicultural muddle. But more often the musicians' curiosity was contagious, especially during a version of Thelonious Monk's ''Jackie-ing,'' where Mr. Diabate and Mr. Kouyate delighted in Monk's lopsided melody.
At the beginning of the second set, Mr. Diabate took the microphone to say something about the universal language of music. ''We are all eunuch,'' he said, and a murmur arose. But then he continued, explaining that everyone is different, and people realized that they had misheard him.
WORLD MUSIC REVIEW
