Ben Chandler, a Democrat from Kentucky, was elected Tuesday to a House seat, giving his party a rare victory in a special Congressional election and a psychological boost in the uphill fight to reclaim the majority in the House.
Mr. Chandler, a former state attorney general who lost the governor's race in November despite a family name famous in state politics, defeated Alice Forgy Kerr, a Republican state senator. They were vying for the seat vacated by Ernie Fletcher, the Republican representative who defeated Mr. Chandler in the governor's contest.
According to a Kentucky State Board of Elections tally with 100 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Chandler won easily, with 55 percent to Ms. Kerr's 43 percent.
Democrats, who have not picked up a Republican seat in a special election since 1991, portrayed the results as a reflection of a national political mood swing. They said it showed Democrats could compete in Southern states where President Bush is popular.
''Ben Chandler's victory in Kentucky tonight should send a clear message to the arrogant Republican government in Washington that Americans are ready for a change,'' said Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, who is the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.
But Republicans dismissed efforts to draw a national message out of the race for the seat that represents Lexington and surrounding counties.
''If you look at the issues this race has been run on, it is very local stuff,'' said Carl Forti, a spokesman for the National Republican Congressional Committee.
Both national Republican and Democratic Parties, recognizing that the first competitive House race of the 2004 campaign cycle would draw significant attention, devoted substantial resources to the race. The Republican group spent about $700,000, and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee invested about $1.3 million.
All told, when the money raised by two candidates is added in, about $4 million was spent on winning a House seat that will be up for grabs again in November.
Support backed up the money. Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, Republican of Illinois, visited the district on Ms. Kerr's behalf, and Senator Mitch McConnell, a Republican power in Kentucky politics, pitched in too. Democratic leaders journeyed to Kentucky on Mr. Chandler's behalf. Both parties dispatched staff members to work as volunteers.
Democrats, who have experienced setbacks in the typically low voter turnout of special elections, were counting on a victory to provide some enthusiasm and momentum for the November elections. And they needed a seat to compensate for the switch late last year of a Texas Democrat to the Republican Party. At the moment, they need a net gain of 13 seats in November to recapture the majority they lost a decade ago.
Democrats say they also have a good chance of winning a special election to be held in South Dakota on June 1 to fill the seat of former Representative Bill Janklow, who resigned after being convicted of manslaughter in an automobile accident.
