Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that he would ask several people in his administration to relinquish the lights and sirens installed in their city-issued cars, after a news report that one of his deputy mayors frequently used hers for trips that were decidedly not emergencies.
''I have asked Martha Hirst, the commissioner for D.C.A.S., to give me a list of everybody that has lights and sirens, outside of the Police and Fire Department,'' Mr. Bloomberg said yesterday at a news conference outside City Hall, referring to the Department of Citywide Administrative Services, the agency that manages the city's supplies and equipment.
''She sent me that list on Friday. I studied it over the weekend and I'm going to review it again,'' Mr. Bloomberg said, ''as I did when I first came into office, to cut down the number of people who have lights and sirens in their cars. The trouble is when it's there, there is a temptation to use it. And it should only be there for an absolute emergency.''
Mr. Bloomberg's comments came after WCBS television reported that Mr. Bloomberg's deputy mayor for legal affairs, Carol A. Robles-Roman, frequently used her lights and sirens to move through traffic, often while going from her home in Riverdale to City Hall.
Ms. Robles-Roman, who does not drive and whose duties do not include responding to emergencies -- unlike other people on the mayor's staff -- told Mr. Bloomberg that she would like the lights and sirens removed, Mr. Bloomberg said, and he agreed.
He added that other officials, who ranged from Buildings Department inspectors to officials from the city's technology department, might also see their lights and sirens removed soon.
Almost every elected official, city commissioner and deputy mayor has a car with lights and sirens in its rear window, as do other city cars.
Shortly after taking office, Mayor Bloomberg's chief of staff, Peter L. Madonia, sent letters to the mayor's staff members, reminding them not to use their lights and sirens outside of emergency situations.
Asked at a news conference then what he would do to those who used them anyway, Mr. Bloomberg snapped:
''I don't know. We'll shoot them. What do you think is going to happen to them?''
The mayor said then he would lead by example; his police detail rarely hoots or toots its way through traffic, and he sometimes takes the subway anyway.
As such, he was angry with Ms. Robles-Roman, people who spoke with the mayor about the siren issue said.
There are 300 cars equipped with sirens and lights. In 2002, 30 were in the mayor's office.
That has been cut to 12. Over all, there were 80 cars in the mayor's office, a figure that has been cut to 47.
Yesterday, Mr. Bloomberg did not say specifically how many cars would have their lights and sirens removed.
''There are people on the list I've seen where it's hard to understand why they have to rush to get someplace in order to pass a piece of legislation or file a piece of paper or whatever,'' Mr. Bloomberg said.
''There's nothing that's that critical other than a handful of people that must get to, for example, a building that's threatening to collapse.
''You can understand why a handful of people in the Building Department or D.O.T. if there's a real major problem that they might have to get to.''
