FOR most of my life I cherished the view that you were either a baker or a cook. I was resolutely the latter, and regarded bakers as quite a separate species. Cooks thrive on improvisation and prefer the unstructured flow of whatever is to hand. Bakers like formulas, often regarding cooking as messy and unpredictable.
Indeed, the people I met tended to fall into one of either camps. In my experience wonderful cooks -- my mother for instance -- could not bake to save their lives, and gloriously impressive cake makers turned out to be terrible cooks. I still know of such people and don't declare the demarcation entirely erroneous, but some years ago something changed for me: I caught the baking bug.
Baking is indeed different from cooking. You cannot be as laissez-faire about a cake as you can be about a stew. However many carrots or chunks of meat you put into your casserole will not effectively change the entity you produce. You can alter the flavors -- and that's the joy of it -- but you are not messing with its essential properties. When you make a cake you cannot suddenly decide you feel like putting in three eggs rather than two or half a cup of flour instead of the cup and a half the recipe calls for.
But if baking requires obedience, it does not require Soviet-style obliteration of individuality, as my earlier prejudice had led me to believe. Once you understand what the component parts of a recipe are, you can play with them.
The banana bread here is an example of that. As long as you keep the main structure as it is, you can alter the flavors and character of the loaf.
Use raisins in place of the chopped dried apricots, for example, and soak them in rum rather than orange juice, replacing the orange zest with vanilla. Or soak them in coconut liqueur and add coconut essence in place of the orange zest. Add half a cup of chocolate chips -- or replace a tablespoon and a half of flour with cocoa (better, maybe, if you are going the rum-raisin route) for a chocolate version.
What I had not realized -- and bakers keep this a secret for obvious reasons -- is how easy baking is. Many people say that they resent cooking because you spend hours on a meal just to have it demolished in 10 minutes. Well, baking is the reverse. A cake takes scarcely five minutes to mix, you do nothing to it while it bakes and then you have a glorious creation in your kitchen, bestowing welcome all weekend.
Those who remain unconvinced should start off with the all-in-one chocolate cake below. There is nothing to get alarmed about: you just plonk flour, sugar, baking powder and soda, cocoa, butter, eggs, vanilla and sour cream into a food processor, blitz for a few minutes, pour the ensuing Aztec-earth-colored batter into two greased pans and bake.
The hardest thing you have to do to make the frosting is sieve the confectioners' sugar, my most hated job in the kitchen. Melting the chocolate for it is a cinch if you have a microwave; otherwise just chop it fine, and put it in a bowl that can be balanced on top of a pan of simmering water. This is the perfect chocolate cake: beautiful, melting, intense but not heavy.
There are very few rules to remember in baking: First, all ingredients -- unless specified in the recipe -- should be at room temperature before you start. Second, the oven must be preheated to the correct temperature (though you would be surprised how much variation there is in ovens, so always be ready to take a cake out earlier, or leave it in longer). Third, the size of the pan should be right. Stick to these strictures, and there should not be disappointments. I would also recommend buying some Silpat, the reusable nonstick mats. You may as well stack the odds in your favor.
And I cannot tell you how great the rewards are. It is very easy to buy cookies from a store, but nothing gives you the feeling of calm and satisfaction and, indeed, deep pleasure from making your own. These cookies, buttery and chewy and studded with salted peanuts and chocolate chips -- nothing beats the combination of sweet and salty for me -- are life-changingly easy to make. And for someone who has always held that shopping can be the hardest part of cooking, it is a bonus that the ingredients you need are easily kept at hand. You do not need a big kitchen to make sure you always have flour, eggs, butter, sugar, some chocolate chips and cocoa. And while gadgets -- a processor or a mixer -- can help, a bowl, a wooden spoon, a few pans and an oven are all you really need. Those and a willing spirit, maybe. But what you do not need are expertise or arcane gifts. The great thing about baking is that anyone can do it. I should know.
ALL-IN-ONE CHOCOLATE CAKE  Time: 1 hour 15 minutes
For the cake:  Butter for greasing baking pans  1 1/2 cups all-purpose flour  1 cup sugar  1 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/3 cup best-quality cocoa powder  6 ounces (1 1/2 sticks) unsalted butter, at room temperature  2 large eggs, at room temperature  2 teaspoons vanilla
3/4 cup sour cream, at room temperature
For the frosting:  6 ounces good-quality semisweet chocolate, broken into small pieces  3 ounces ( 3/4 stick) unsalted butter  1 tablespoon light corn syrup
1/2 cup sour cream  1 teaspoon vanilla  2 1/2 cups confectioners' sugar, sifted.
1. For cake: heat oven to 350 degrees. Butter sides of two 8-inch cake pans, and line bottoms with parchment paper. In the bowl of a food processor fitted with a knife blade, combine flour, sugar, baking powder, baking soda, cocoa powder, butter, eggs, vanilla and sour cream. Process to make a smooth, thick batter.
2. Using a rubber spatula, divide batter between pans, and smooth tops. Bake until a cake tester inserted in center comes out clean, 25 to 35 minutes; do not overbake. Transfer to a wire rack to cool for 10 minutes before removing from cake pans.
3. For frosting: Combine chocolate and butter in a large heat-proof bowl, and heat until melted in a microwave oven or over a pan of simmering water. Remove from heat, and allow to cool for 5 minutes. Stir in corn syrup, sour cream, and vanilla. Whisk in confectioners' sugar until very smooth. Frosting should be thick and spreadable. If necessary, add a teaspoon or two of boiling water to thin it, or additional sifted confectioners' sugar to thicken.
4. Cut four strips of waxed or parchment paper, and place them side by side on a cake plate, covering the surface. Place one cake layer domed-side down on plate.
5. Spoon about a third of the frosting onto center of cake, and use a knife or a spatula to spread it evenly. Place the other cake on top, domed side up. Spoon another third of frosting on top of cake, spreading to make swirls or a smooth finish. Spread sides of cake with remaining frosting, and allow to sit for a few minutes until set. Carefully remove paper strips. Place cake under glass or in an airtight container, and set aside in a cool place until serving.
Yield: 10 to 12 servings.
FRUITY BANANA BREAD  Time: About 1 1/2 hours, plus 1 hour for soaking apricots
4 ounces ( 1/2 cup, packed) dried apricots
1/3 cup orange juice  Nonstick cooking spray or vegetable oil, for greasing pan
1/4 pound (1 stick) unsalted butter  1 1/3 cups all-purpose flour  2 teaspoons baking powder
1/2 teaspoon baking soda
1/2 teaspoon salt
3/4 cup sugar  Finely grated zest of 1 orange  2 large eggs  1 cup (about 3 medium) mashed very ripe bananas
1/2 cup mixed nuts, chopped  1 tablespoon turbinado sugar or granulated white sugar.
1. Using kitchen shears, cut each apricot in half lengthwise. Holding halves together, cut four or five times crosswise. In a small saucepan, combine apricot pieces and orange juice. Bring to a boil, then remove from heat. Allow to rest until apricots have absorbed most of the liquid, about 1 hour.
2. Heat oven to 325 degrees. Place a baking sheet in oven. Spray or oil a 9-by-5-inch loaf pan, and if desired, line with parchment paper. Melt butter in a microwave oven or small saucepan; reserve.
3. In a mixing bowl, combine flour, baking powder, baking soda, and salt; set aside. In a large bowl, blend together reserved butter,  3/4 cup sugar, and orange zest. Mix in eggs one at a time, then mashed bananas, apricots, and nuts. Stir in flour mixture one-third at a time, stirring well after each addition.
4. Scrape dough into pan, and sprinkle with turbinado sugar. Bake until a toothpick inserted into center comes out clean, 1 to 1 1/4 hours. Place pan on a rack to cool. To serve, remove from pan, and slice thinly. Serve at room temperature.
Yield: 10 to 12 servings.
MY FAVORITE COOKIES  Time: 50 minutes
6 ounces (1 1/2 sticks) unsalted butter  1 packed cup light brown sugar
1/2 cup granulated sugar  2 teaspoons vanilla extract  2 large eggs  2 1/4 cups all-purpose flour  1 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon baking soda  1 cup semisweet chocolate morsels  1 cup salted peanuts.
1. Using a microwave oven or in a small saucepan, melt butter. Allow it to cool for about 5 minutes. In a medium bowl, using an electric mixer or by hand, beat together the butter, brown sugar, and granulated sugar. Beat in vanilla, eggs, flour, baking powder and baking soda. Fold in chocolate morsels and peanuts.
2. Refrigerate bowl of cookie dough for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, heat oven to 350 degrees. Line a large baking sheet (or two) with a nonstick liner or parchment paper.
3. Shape chilled dough into fat disks about 2 1/2 inches in diameter and  1/2-inch thick (slightly less than 3 tablespoons of dough for each cookie). Place cookies on baking sheet 1 1/2 inches apart. Bake until golden brown around edges and cracked and chewy in middle, about 15 minutes. If using two sheets, switch position of sheets halfway through baking. Remove cookies from oven while they are still soft in center or they will lose their chewiness as they cool.
4. Allow cookies to rest on baking sheets for about 3 minutes before transferring them to wire racks to cool. When completely cool, store in an airtight container.
Yield: About 20 cookies.
AT MY TABLE
