Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has said several times, even as recently as last week, that his bid for re-election in 2005 will be his last campaign for any public office.
But that has not stopped Mr. Bloomberg from securing dozens of Web addresses that would prove useful should he decide to run for something long after the mayoral election next year.
In December, lawyers for the mayor bought the rights to at least 100 Web addresses; among themare michaelbloomberg08.us and michaelrbloomberg07.org. Those are in addition to more than 100 Web addresses they secured a year ago.
So, is Mr. Bloomberg allowing for the possibility of a run for governor in 2006 or United States Senate in 2008?
Not so fast, said Edward Skyler, a spokesman for the mayor, who was quick to deny that the Web addresses reflected anything other than a continuing effort to prevent critics from buying them first. Among other names the mayor's lawyers have obtained are stopbloomberg.com and votenoforbloomberg.org, according to Internet registry records.
''The mayor has made it clear that he does not intend to seek election to another office in the future,'' Mr. Skyler said, ''and that hasn't changed."
He declined to comment further on the Web addresses.
With the ascendancy of the Internet, domain names have become a basic component of the political campaign tool kit. Gifford Miller, the speaker of the City Council, who is widely viewed as a likely Democratic candidate for mayor in 2005, has a Web site that accepts online contributions from supporters.
Because they can be purchased by anyone and are relatively inexpensive, Web addresses are sought after by candidates, both as a platform to be heard and raise money, and as a pre-emptive defense against opponents.
Mr. Bloomberg appears to have had the latter in mind when, during his campaign for mayor in 2001, his representatives bought the rights to addresses like ihatebloomberg.com.
Of course, the possible variations being endless, Web addresses like impeachbloomberg.net, purchased by a man in White Plains, and dontblamemeblamebloomberg.com, secured by someone in Mount Vernon, seem to have eluded even the most creative imaginings of Bloomberg aides tasked with nipping such things in the bud.
The latest batch of Web addresses were purchased in December by a Manhattan law firm, Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, that has represented Mr. Bloomberg and the financial information company that he founded, Bloomberg L.P. Those addresses contain specific references to the years 2005 through 2008.
Some previous Bloomberg-related Web addresses purchased by Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher also contained references to 2006, 2007 or 2008, including bloombergalcalde2008.com. Spanish for ''Mayor Bloomberg,'' it suggests that at least in this instance, the mayor and his lawyers did not have higher office in mind.
