WERE it not for the perils of addiction, the perfect pairing for a glass of Armagnac would probably be a Camel filter cigarette, lighted off a wooden match, and a cup of black coffee brewed in the American style.
Or perhaps a cigar, after a fine fat roast duck for dinner.
There are some, particularly in the rolling countryside of Southwest France, where the brandy is produced, who would advise pairing a smooth, relatively low-alcohol Armagnac -- the Samalens V.S.O.P. Bas Armagnac the Dining panel enjoyed, for example -- with a small plate of foie gras as an appetizer.
The drink is also a good pairing with shavings of bitter chocolate after the meal, or with a bright, uncloying chocolate sorbet. (Chocolate-Armagnac ice cream isn't bad, either.)
Dan Halpern, the wry poet, epicure and editorial director of Ecco Press, agreed, and then said he had a particular chocolate in mind: ''Armagnac would be good with some of that artisanal chocolate Faith Willinger has been bringing over from Italy. It's called Amedei. It's not simply sweet. It has real depth of flavor.
''You could also drink it with port,'' he added. ''Although that might be overkill.''
Ariane Daguin, an owner of D'Artagnan, the foie gras and fancy food company, refused to countenance pairing food with Armagnac. ''Traditionally, Armagnac doesn't go with food,'' she said. ''Instead, I would advise sitting in front of a fire with a glass of it, for a half hour or more, smelling the aromas as they change, as the alcohol gets out, relaxing, nowhere near food.''
There are, of course, plenty of ways to cook with Armagnac. Ms. Daguin recommended a venison daube, with a broth spiked with red wine and Armagnac. Gordon Hammersley makes a pot-roasted pork with prunes, Armagnac and walnuts at his bistro in Boston; the recipe is included in his book ''Bistro Cooking at Home'' (Broadway Books).
And those who have both a great deal of time and access to a staff of prep cooks might wish to make use of Jacques Pépin's classic recipe for chicken galantine, in which once you have boned a chicken, you need only stuff it with an Armagnac-scented mixture of pork, black mushrooms, and pistachios, then poach it in stock and serve it in its own aspic.
Terrific picnic fare, although not a good pairing for the drink itself.
For that, said Karen MacNeil, the chairwoman of the Center for Professional Wine Studies at the campus of the Culinary Institute of America in the Napa Valley, stewed fruit would be the best article. On a cold winter's night, she said, ''roasted potatoes and roast duck followed by a warm compote of fruits and a glass of Armagnac is just about perfect.''
Jimmy Bradley, the chef and an owner of the Red Cat in New York, sees no need to stew the fruit. ''Go with a little bit of cut fruit,'' he said, ''some pear or something.''
Mr. Bradley was talking on his cellphone as he walked from his apartment to the restaurant. He began to muse. ''Maybe a little piece of hard cheese,'' he said. ''Or a prune. You could pour it over vanilla ice cream, and that's the end of the meal. I'm thinking you're an older fellow. I'm thinking that would be pretty cool.''
PAIRINGS
