When the Champ Bailey sweepstakes begins at the scouting combine in Indianapolis this week, the Jets will be among the teams making a pitch.
The Washington Redskins put Bailey, one of the N.F.L.'s elite cornerbacks, on the trading block last week, and the Jets have inquired about what it will take get him as part of a sign-and-trade deal. They plan to meet with Bailey's agent, Jack Reale, in Indianapolis, a football official with knowledge of the Jets' plans said.
Jets General Manager Terry Bradway declined comment.
The Jets are expected to release cornerback Aaron Beasley this spring and are in the market for a top-flight cornerback to pair with Donnie Abraham to shore up their secondary.
But plucking Bailey, 25, from the Redskins will not be easy for any team.
Reale said Tuesday that a ''significant number'' of teams are interested in Bailey -- the Detroit Lions have publicly acknowledged their interest -- and that a trade would be costly.
The Redskins had been negotiating an extension with Bailey, who last summer rejected a reported nine-year, $55 million offer, including $14 million in guaranteed bonus money. In addition to meeting Bailey's financial demands, a team would have to meet the Redskins' demands, too, and speculation has centered on their seeking first- and second-round draft choices, perhaps both in the April draft. (The Jets have the 12th overall pick in the first round.) For the Jets, who have holes at receiver and linebacker, that price may be too high, particularly because a rich class of free-agent cornerbacks will come on the market in March.
Bailey is eligible for unrestricted free agency, too. But if he is not traded by next Tuesday, the Redskins will almost certainly designate him as a franchise player, which will allow them to retain negotiating rights.
Bailey was the seventh overall pick in 1999, and in five seasons he has never missed a game. He was selected to the Pro Bowl the last four seasons.
He has 306 tackles and 18 interceptions in his career.
PRO FOOTBALL
