One of the most frantic takeover battles in recent times ended in the early hours of yesterday morning as a legion of bankers and lawyers for Cingular Wireless scurried on foot through the near-empty streets of Midtown Manhattan to hand-deliver a $41 billion bid that snatched AT&amp;T Wireless from the hands of Cingular's rival.
The victory by Cingular over Vodafone of Britain -- whose executives went to sleep in London after believing they had won the contest -- will reshape the cutthroat wireless phone business in the United States.
While the acquisition of AT&amp;T Wireless will not have an immediate effect on the price of cellphone calls, which have dropped sharply in recent years, it could slow further declines because, with fewer players, there will be less competitive pressure to win customers. [Page C1.]
The deal is also a major setback for Vodafone, which had bid $38 billion for AT&amp;T Wireless but lost out when the Cingular deal makers made their trek in the middle of the night to submit a higher offer. Vodafone now faces major obstacles to its efforts to expand its presence in the United States.
The acquisition will make Cingular, a joint venture of SBC Communications and BellSouth, the biggest wireless company in the nation, with 46 million customers, leapfrogging the current industry leader, Verizon Wireless, with 37 million.
The combined Cingular-AT&amp;T Wireless, which will take the Cingular name, will have wireless networks that cover 49 states and will have annual revenue of more than $32 billion. Cingular estimates that the merger will save the combined company $2 billion to $3 billion a year starting in 2006, in part through thousands of layoffs of overlapping positions. Those cutbacks will perhaps be most felt in Redmond, Wash., where AT&amp;T Wireless is based.
Executives said they did not expect any regulatory obstacles to the deal, noting that the combined company would have less than a third of the market. But some consumer groups, including Consumers Union, said they would press regulators to block the deal unless BellSouth and SBC agreed to sell some assets in markets where they are the dominant local phone provider.
Cingular is paying $15 in cash for every share of AT&amp;T Wireless, a 26 percent premium over AT&amp;T Wireless's stock price on Friday. The rich price that the auction -- which was run by AT&amp;T Wireless's bankers, Merrill Lynch, and its law firm, Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz -- indicates that wireless operators might be a more valuable property than investors have thought.
Indeed, the sale of AT&amp;T Wireless is expected to put even more pressure on rivals to merge, potentially setting off a rash of deals.
But any deal to come will be hard pressed to match the dramatics of the rapid-fire battle for AT&amp;T Wireless. Even by the standards of Wall Street -- where high-stakes brinksmanship often determines who wins and who loses in the takeover game -- the takeover battle will long be remembered for its last-minute strategic maneuvering.
The takeover fight ended when John D. Zeglis, the chairman and chief executive of AT&amp;T Wireless, called Arun Sarin, his counterpart at Vodafone, in London at 2:45 a.m. Eastern time yesterday. ''I told him we went another way,'' he said.
Up till that moment, Mr. Sarin -- who had gone to bed confident of victory -- was preparing for a meeting of his own board for a stamp of approval on what he thought was the winning bid. While Cingular executives celebrated, a deflated Mr. Sarin had to tell his board how the deal was lost.
The bidding war began in earnest last month when AT&amp;T Wireless put itself up for auction after receiving a flurry of interest including a letter from Cingular, which indicated it was prepared to pay about $11.25 a share, or $30 billion.
The auction was expected to become a global rumble of sorts as it appeared early on that AT&amp;T Wireless could also get bids from Nextel; NTT DoCoMo, the Japanese wireless giant; Vodafone; and Cingular, which had been virtually stalking AT&amp;T Wireless for three years.
But by the time the initial bids were due on Friday, the race had come down to two competitors: Cingular and Vodafone, which itself did not decide to bid until the very last minute.
The boards of Cingular's parent companies, SBC and BellSouth, met separately on Thursday and Friday in San Antonio and authorized the company to make a bid of $12.50 a share. They submitted the bid about two hours after the 5 p.m. deadline, hoping to gain some intelligence about whether Vodafone was going to bid and at what price. Cingular had an army of bankers and lawyers that had millions of dollars in fees at stake. Lehman Brothers represented Cingular, and its parents, SBC and BellSouth. SBC had its own counsel in Evercore Partners and Rohatyn Associates. BellSouth was represented by Citigroup and the law firm of Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver &amp; Jacobson.
Vodafone's board met Friday and authorized it to participate in the auction. The company lodged a bid of $13.10 a share.
Then the frenzy began, with both sides holed up over the three-day weekend to strike a deal.
Cingular and its army of advisers created a war room on the eighth floor of the Midtown Manhattan offices of the law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, which represents SBC. Vodafone's group was more spread out, with a team in New York and a team in London.
By Sunday morning, Cingular raised its bid to $14 a share. Vodafone raised its bid to $13.35 a share. AT&amp;T Wireless went back to Vodafone, which then matched.
A marathon negotiating session began at 11 a.m. on Monday at Wachtell Lipton, whose 33rd-floor conference rooms served as the weekend home of the board of AT&amp;T Wireless.
There was silence all Monday from AT&amp;T until about 3:30 p.m. An AT&amp;T Wireless board member, Ralph A. Larsen, called both bidders and read from a script telling them they had until 4 p.m. to submit their best and final bid. He gave no indication which bidder was in the lead.
''They said they wouldn't communicate that anymore,'' Stanley T. Sigman, the chief executive of Cingular, said. ''They said, 'Just because you may have been in the lead before doesn't mean you are anymore.'''
At 4 p.m. on Monday, Vodafone submitted the same $14-a-share offer. Cingular also submitted a $14-a-share offer but this time it created a provision to protect AT&amp;T Wireless in the event the deal was held up by regulators -- agreeing to pay AT&amp;T Wireless a 4 percent interest fee every month after 10 months if the deal did not close by then.
The tide was running with Vodafone. At 7 p.m., Mr. Zeglis, the chief executive of AT&amp;T Wireless, told Mr. Sarin that all he needed to do was fiddle with some minor points and the deal was most likely his.
It was around midnight in Britain, and Mr. Sarin was getting tired. Before he went to sleep, he made some last-minute calls to organize a conference call with his board yesterday morning to approve the final offer and seal the deal.
Having heard nothing all night from AT&amp;T Wireless, Cingular had all but given up on the possibility of a deal. Felix G. Rohatyn, an adviser to one of Cingular's parents, SBC Communications, was so resigned to losing he got on his Gulfstream jet to resume his vacation in the Caribbean.
But about 9 p.m., SBC's chief executive, Edward E. Whitacre, and BellSouth's chief executive, Duane Ackerman, held a conference call to figure out what to do. They wanted to know if they could bid again.
The two executives phoned their advisers, who in turn called AT&amp;T Wireless and asked whether the company would entertain an offer of $15 a share. Someone involved in the auction said all the air went out of the room. ''Everybody was like, 'Whoa.'''
The answer came back yes, as long as the bid was submitted by 3 a.m. The bid was contingent on its being accepted immediately.
About midnight, SBC and BellSouth decided they needed to call board meetings.
The boards, which had long sought to merge Cingular with AT&amp;T Wireless, decided that they could not pass up on the chance and approved a final offer of $15 a share.
The lawyers and bankers for Cingular raced to submit the bid formally. They all went to meet with the deal makers for AT&amp;T Wireless ''so that nothing could go wrong,'' as one banker said. ''What if the guy got mugged or hit by a car.''
It was an extraordinary night of deal making. At a floor above, Walt Disney's board was deciding to reject Comcast's takeover bid.
MOBILE MERGER: THE OVERVIEW
