During 24-hour-a-day surveillance in 1999, federal agents watched a New Jersey gas station owner greet and hug a Yemeni sheik who was on a mission to Brooklyn to raise money for international terrorism, a federal prosecutor said yesterday.
The remarks by the prosecutor, Kelly A. Moore, came in her closing argument in a trial of the gas station owner, Numan Maflahi, on a charge of making false statements to federal agents when he told them last year that he was only casually involved with the sheik during the 1999 trip.
The trial of Mr. Maflahi, 30, began last week in Federal District Court in Brooklyn. It has revealed details of a wide-ranging investigation of terrorism financing that federal prosecutors say centers on a network of mosques and money handlers in Brooklyn. It has also displayed the subtle battle between investigators and people they try to turn into informants.
''Lying to the F.B.I.,'' Ms. Moore told the jurors, ''is not acceptable.''
Among the tantalizing but not fully explained facts at the trial has been the description of the round-the-clock surveillance of Mr. Maflahi during four days at the end of December 1999 when the Yemeni sheik visited New York, long before the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001.
In his closing argument yesterday, Mr. Maflahi's lawyer, Hassen Ibn Abdellah, portrayed the case as retaliation by federal investigators frustrated because Mr. Maflahi, a Yemeni who has been in this country for 18 years, was not willing to become an informant against the sheik, Abdullah Satar.
Mr. Abdellah said Mr. Maflahi had told the agents the truth when he described driving Sheik Satar only occasionally and not being an active participant in his fund-raising. Mr. Abdellah said his client's greeting of the sheik was difficult to interpret because in some cultures people are greeted differently.
The federal prosecutors say Mr. Maflahi, who lives in Little Ferry, N.J., was Sheik Satar's driver and personal assistant during the trip, arranged some fund-raising sessions and handled some of the money. Testimony by federal agents showed that Mr. Maflahi was watched, followed, photographed and videotaped during the four days and that there was a wiretap on his cellphone.
Mr. Abdellah said federal agents had wanted to make a case against Sheik Satar much like a case announced last year by Attorney General John Ashcroft against another Yemeni sheik, Mohammed Ali Hassan al-Moayad, who is awaiting trial in Brooklyn on charges of aiding terrorists.
Mr. Abdellah said it was unfair to bring charges because Mr. Maflahi refused to become an informant. ''They thought Mr. Maflahi was close to Satar,'' he said to the jurors, ''and they wanted to use him in the same way they used informants against al-Moayad. And Mr. Maflahi refused.''
According to the Web site of a Yemeni political party, the Yemeni Union for Reform, Sheik Satar said he was surprised by American news reports last week about the Brooklyn trial and denied a link with terrorism. ''We believe in dialogue; we don't believe in terrorism,'' he was quoted as saying.
If convicted, Mr. Maflahi could face five years in prison.
