After avoiding subpoenas for a month, the man at the center of a scandal in Nassau County government, Peter T. Sylver, finally took the witness stand on Tuesday at the County Legislature's hearings and responded to questions by repeatedly invoking his Fifth Amendment right to avoid self-incrimination.
Before Mr. Sylver spoke, his lawyer, Stephen Worth, issued a blanket denial. ''He categorically denies all of the allegations that have been swirling before this committee, from tinted windows of a county car to sexual assault,'' he said. Mr. Sylver was County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi's deputy for economic development until he resigned under fire nearly three months ago. Since then, Mr. Sylver has been the target of numerous accusations that have been a major embarrassment to the Suozzi administration, which has made large strides in stabilizing a county government that was on the brink of bankruptcy.
Mr. Worth described Mr. Sylver as ''a man who has been accused of a great many things.''
Those accusations include conflict of interests, cronyism, hiring consultants without bidding, using a falsely obtained credit card, billing inappropriate expenses to the county, using a forged document, violating civil service rules, misusing federal funds to pay for county workers, political favoritism, poor supervision of the departments under his control and sexually assaulting his executive assistant.
Legislators had tried for last four weeks to serve a subpoena on Mr. Sylver, and his lawyer tried to get him excused from testifying. As the hearing unfolded, Mr. Sylver declined to testify about specific issues. Except for a few preliminary answers about his former title as deputy county executive, he replied to all other questions by refusing to testify under the Fifth Amendment.
After he claimed his right to remain silent about a dozen times, the Legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs, said that there was no point in prolonging the questioning. ''I will not allow it to go on forever,'' she said. ''We excuse the witness.''
The answers may have to come from other witnesses and from the inquiries being conducted by the Nassau County district attorney, the United States attorney, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development. ''There is ample evidence from virtually a thousand other sources, with the exception of the sexual assault charge, to vindicate all the actions that Peter Sylver took,'' Mr. Worth told the legislators. ''At all times while he was an employee of this county he had the best interests of the county at heart and did his very best.''
The scandal has disrupted the agencies Mr. Sylver once ran. An official who testified after him said the county could lose some of its federal grants if it does not catch up to its program deadlines.
In testimony at an earlier session, Mr. Sylver's former housing director, Robin Pelligrini, accused him of seeking help for his brother, a construction contractor, by pressuring a developer who had a proposal before the county. She also said Mr. Sylver had ordered the hiring of two members of his wedding party, including the best man.
The county's former civil service director, Thomas A. Williams, had testified that Mr. Sylver's agencies had violated civil service laws for several employees and had improperly used federal funds for county purposes.
Both Ms. Pelligrini and Mr. Williams were fired and have filed a joint multimillion-dollar suit against the county saying they were punished for speaking up.
Republican legislators have complained that Mr. Sylver's agencies hired consultants without bidding and played politics by giving $750,000 of work to the Crowe Deegan law firm, which gave $33,000 to the campaign of Mr. Suozzi, a Democrat.
Recent audits have showed that Mr. Sylver obtained a credit card by using an application that falsely claimed that a county agency is a corporation, that its board had approved the application and that he was an officer of it.
Mr. Sylver was criticized for various charges on the credit card, including $707 to tint the windows of his county car and $318 for a staff party, though a witness testified that the staff chipped in to share the cost.
After Mr. Sylver ordered his assistant fired, she accused him of repeated sexual harassment and said she was dismissed the day after she refused further advances, legislative aides said. That case was settled by promoting her to a higher paying job in another agency, and she agreed not to pursue her complaint.
