The blockbuster merger of Cingular Wireless and AT&amp;T Wireless -- and the consolidation of the wireless industry to five major competitors from six -- may not lead to higher consumer prices for mobile phone service anytime soon, according to industry analysts. And the merger could spur better quality of service, they said.
Nonetheless, consumer groups plan to challenge the $41 billion merger on the grounds that it could reduce competition in the South and Southwest United States, where BellSouth and SBC, Cingular's parents, are dominant. Consumers Union, an advocacy group, said it thought the acquisition of AT&amp;T Wireless and its 22 million customers could give those two telephone giants excessive power in their local markets.
SBC and Bell South are ''buying up the most likely competition against their own telephone monopoly,'' said Gene Kimmelman, the policy director for Consumers Union, who added that the group intends to lobby the Federal Communications Commission and the Department of Justice to reject the deal as currently constructed. ''This needs to be restricted or rejected to continue to provide lower prices and better service to both wireless and wireline consumers,'' Mr. Kimmelman said.
Some industry researchers, however, have argued that consolidation in the telecommunications market is natural, and could result in better, more reliable service for consumers over the long term. Others have pointed out that new forms of competition -- like Internet phone services -- will continue to push prices lower throughout the industry.
The Cingular merger with AT&amp;T Wireless, which would create a company with 46 million subscribers, is a milestone for the wireless industry, which is rapidly becoming integral to consumers' lives as more mobile phones begin to transmit data, like e-mail messages and Web pages, as well as voice calls.
In recent years, consumers have benefited tremendously from the fierce and chaotic competition for subscribers among the six major carriers -- Cingular, AT&amp;T Wireless, Nextel, Verizon Wireless, Sprint and T-Mobile USA. While monthly subscription rates have declined only slightly, the number of minutes offered in mobile plans have increased significantly. The price per minute for mobile calls has fallen around 22 percent a year for the last several years, according to executives at AT&amp;T Wireless and the Yankee Group, a market research firm. And companies have had to offer deep discounts on mobile phones, or free phones, to build their subscriber base.
The pressure for discounts is not likely to end soon. Roger Entner, an analyst with the Yankee Group, said that despite the shift to five major competitors in the market instead of six, companies would still be forced to offer deals like free phones to retain customers. He said he expected the per-minute price of mobile calls to continue dropping, but less sharply -- by perhaps 15 percent a year for the next several years.
''Going from six to five competitors will have no impact on calming the pricing war in the long term,'' said Eddie Hold, a telecommunications industry analyst with Current Analysis, a research firm in Sterling, Va. In the short term, he said, the merger might actually lead to steeper price cuts. The reason, he said, is that the remaining companies will probably compete to woo subscribers from Cingular and AT&amp;T Wireless as those two companies begin merging their operations, a transition that could well create some temporary customer service difficulties.
Industry analysts are divided over how the merger will affect the customers of AT&amp;T Wireless and Cingular. Jeff Kagan, an independent telecommunications industry analyst, said he expected a ''long-term enormous improvement in the customer experience'' because the two companies could combine their networks to achieve better service.
The merger could also be advantageous as wireless carriers move to offer unlimited calling to subscribers who call the cellphones of people who use the same provider. For instance, Verizon Wireless and AT&amp;T Wireless offer unlimited mobile-to-mobile minutes, as do T-Mobile USA and Sprint on certain plans, said Mr. Entner of the Yankee Group. A similar offer could give the combined Cingular-AT&amp;T Wireless, with the largest subscriber base, a good selling point for attracting subscribers.
But Mr. Entner said the impact would be fairly limited since only about 10 percent of all mobile phone calls are placed to another cellphone.
Some consumer advocates are not convinced that Cingular's purchase of AT&amp;T Wireless would lead to better service. A survey published this month in Consumer Reports magazine found that both Cingular and AT&amp;T Wireless fared less well than the competition in most of a dozen markets where customers were asked to rate their mobile phone provider.
''Two companies that have never been good at customer service are merging,'' said David Heim, deputy director for special sections at Consumer Reports, which is published by Consumers Union. ''I'm not optimistic that their service will improve.''
Consumers Union says it is concerned that the emergence of conglomerates that control local, long-distance and wireless communications in a single market could lead to anticompetitive practices.
Mr. Kimmelman said that Bell South and SBC could, for instance, offer a package that cuts the cost of mobile service below market prices, and then makes up for that by bundling long-distance and local phone service for the same customers. That process, he argued, would make it possible for BellSouth and SBC to drive out wireless competitors in the markets where those companies are dominant.
''This solidifies their dominance,'' Mr. Kimmelman said, ''over the most popular telecom services: local phone, mobile, long distance and high-speed access.''
One immediate difference that AT&amp;T Wireless customers will notice is a name change. Cingular said yesterday that it would phase out the AT&amp;T Wireless brand.
''We believe we've built a strong, recognizable, friendly brand with consumers'' in Cingular, said Clay Owen, a spokesman for Cingular in Atlanta.
MOBILE MERGER: THE IMPACT
