NEW YORKERS can adjust to anything except a wide supermarket aisle. Allow more than five inches of clearance on either side of two passing carts, and the freedom is too much to bear. With no battle for space, New York shoppers go slack. They begin to wander aimlessly and gape. They are lost.
The new Whole Foods Market, a short escalator ride down from the lobby of the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, is almost too much to absorb. It is enormous, for one thing. At 59,000 square feet, it is the largest supermarket in Manhattan. Half of that space is taken up by supermarket shelves, produce stands, and long, long counters displaying meat, fish and cheese. The other half is largely devoted to prepared foods. It includes a sit-down sushi bar, self-service stations selling ethnic food priced by the pound, a coffee-espresso-cappuccino oasis, a brick pizza oven and a wine boutique. Beyond the 42 cash registers lies a 248-seat cafe where customers can squeeze elbow to elbow and eat what they have bought.
''It's very intimidating,'' a stunned customer said to one of three employees who do nothing but direct traffic.
The employee nodded. ''Yes,'' he said. ''Very intimidating.''
Actually, it is not. There is a moment of confusion as the down escalator thrusts you into the floral department, and it is anybody's guess which way to go. The correct answer is left, into the supermarket area. (A right turn leads to the checkout lanes and the cafe.) After you choose a handbasket, a full-length traditional wheeled cart or a double-decker snub-nosed cart, it is smooth sailing. Even the checkout process moves at breakneck speed. If the traffic cops are on duty, the line whips around the magazine kiosk so fast that there is no time to flip through the pages of Animal Wellness magazine.
Whole Foods Market has built its empire of nearly 150 stores in North America by capitalizing on the willingness of consumers to pay more for organic and natural foods. It offers foods free of additives, preservatives, hydrogenated oils and artificial colors and flavorings. Clear labeling distinguishes between organic and conventional foods. As the company promotional literature puts it, ''We believe in a virtuous circle entwining the food chain, human beings and Mother Earth.''
In a peculiarly American way, Whole Foods subscribes to a religion that might be called moralistic hedonism. With an eye to pleasing presentation and attractive packaging, it offers a Venusberg of gustatory temptations, often rarefied, and all guaranteed to be good for you.
Do not look for Pepsi, but expect to find micro-brewed root beers. Do not even think of asking for Count Chocula cereal. The shelves are given over to brands like Nature's Path, Peace Cereal and EnviroKidz, a line that includes Orangutan-O's and Cheetah Chomps.
The great food halls of London's department stores served as a model for the Time-Warner operation, but Whole Foods has a clean, brisk, all-American atmosphere that is miles distant from the heavy sumptuousness of Harrods. In tone and philosophy, it resembles its counterpart down in Chelsea. The wide open spaces of Columbus Circle, however, have allowed for fancy add-ons, like the wine shop, and a more theatrical, eye-popping approach to display.
Much love has been lavished on the produce section. It is impressive, with greens and herbs stacked four feet high in neat displays, their immaculate leaves bedewed with tiny droplets from a misting system in near-constant operation. Throughout the department, a photo ID card atop fruit and vegetable displays provides nutritional information and a brief definition. Helpful tags explain the differences between jalapeño, Scotch bonnet and poblano peppers, along with suggested uses.
I'm not sure I needed to know about Captain Sam and the Vincie N., his day boat, but the fish counter wanted me to make his acquaintance, and to know that the fish at Whole Foods is fresh and treated in a loving, caring way.
It poses no threat to Citarella in quality or variety, but the store includes a couple of attractive features.
The first is a self-service soup stand with chowders, bisques and even a bouillabaisse that can be taken away in cardboard cartons. The second is a stand selling cooked shrimp seasoned half a dozen ways, also available for takeout at $9.99 a pound.
The meat counter bears more of the Whole Foods imprint, with a marked emphasis on organic and free-range products. For whatever reason, the array of sausages is remarkable.
As at the fish counter, some dishes have been semiprepared, like pork roast stuffed with wild rice and mushrooms, or pork chops stuffed with apples and raisins. Like the crab meat-stuffed salmon roast, they are ready for a hot oven.
The cheese counter gives pause. It is ambitious in its range, but the presentation is haphazard and messy, and the overall approach is surprisingly naïve, given the standards set by Artisanal.
The cheese at Whole Foods is cut into pieces, wrapped in plastic and priced, which speeds up the shopping experience but does not do a lot for the cheese, which needs as much tender loving care as Captain Sam's scallops, if not more. It must breathe to live.
For the surrounding area, Whole Foods seems to be shaping up as a quick and easy lunch pit. The sushi bar does a brisk business, although it can inexplicably close down. The pizza oven, with a menu of 10 styles, sells its long, ovoid pies by the pound. I can vouch for the ricotta and zucchini pizza, with a good chewy crust and the unmistakable flavor of good olive oil. It is a far, far better thing than the overladen, bland pepperoni pizza.
The cold antipasto stand, like the produce section, seems to engage the passions of the Whole Foods team, who thrill to the notion of pristine roasted vegetables heaped on a platter.
The ethnic-food steam tables struck me as up and down. Mysteriously, the Asian table never offered any food at any time during my many visits to the store.
The Indian table shied away from full-flavored spicing, and the food therefore did not seem particularly Indian, in marked contrast to the Latino spread, with its hotly spiced rice and beans, basil-glazed plantains and surprisingly good ropa vieja, the kind of dish that can turn evil sitting in a steel tub. Fried yuca cakes were tough on the exterior, but wonderfully fluffy inside, with a snappy tomatillo sauce to make amends.
Sybaritic desserts are not in the store's gene code, but I snatched a blueberry pie that turned out to be superb. You would swear it had fat in it.
The idea is to load up a tray, pass through the checkout lane and fight for a place in the cafe.
There are two kinds of seating. The prime spots are curved booths perfect for two, with two block-shaped seats on the outside. I never managed to secure one of these power tables or the picnic-style tables across from them. The fall-back position is to find a tall stool at one of the translucent, serpentine communal tables near the Jamba Juice bar.
There, when not eavesdropping on insider gossip from a dozen surrounding offices, I pondered the mysteries of Whole Foods. Why are there two flower departments? Why, with a thousand and one spices offered for sale, could I not find coriander seeds, the one spice I needed to make a fish marinade? And why is it that, in a country that drives on the right, it is the left-hand escalator that goes down to the store? There must be a reason, and of one thing I'm sure. It's good for you.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
