In another attempt to uncover the secrets behind the collapse of Parmalat, the Italian food conglomerate, the financial police on Tuesday arrested Francesca Tanzi and Stefano Tanzi, the daughter and son of Parmalat's imprisoned founder, Calisto Tanzi.
They were arrested on suspicion of financial fraud, the police said, as were six other people, including Calisto Tanzi's brother. Eighteen people are now either in jail or under house arrest in the investigation. Francesca Tanzi and Stefano Tanzi were already under investigation in connection with the collapse of Parmalat.
Calisto Tanzi has one other child, Laura, who has no corporate role in Parmalat.
Ms. Tanzi, 36, was a board member of Parmatour, the family's tourism business. She has denied any wrongdoing and has denied holding any management role in the company. She has also said publicly that she did not know about the fraud that supposedly took place at Parmalat and Parmatour. Her lawyer could not be reached for comment.
Calisto Tanzi has said in testimony to prosecutors that he took about 500 million euros ($640 million) from Parmalat and transferred it to several of his family's companies, including Parmatour. He has also said that his daughter knew nothing of the money transfer to Parmatour, a statement that other former Parmalat managers have disputed. They have said in testimony that Ms. Tanzi ran Parmatour and closely followed the company's finances.
Calisto Tanzi is suspected of having shifted a total of 900 million euros ($1.15 billion) over time from Parmalat to Coloniale, his family's holding company, the Italian news agency, ANSA, reported on Tuesday, without giving a source for its information. About 400 million euros ended up at Parmatour and other family tourism companies, ANSA said, and prosecutors have not been able to trace the other 500 million euros.
Stefano Tanzi, 35, was chairman of the AC Parma soccer club, which is owned by Parmalat, and was also a board member of Parmalat and Coloniale.
He has also denied any wrongdoing in the Parmalat scandal. His lawyer did not return calls seeking comment after the arrest.
The investigation into Parmalat's tangled finances is about to enter its third month. More than 50 people who worked either at Parmalat or for its banks and auditors have been through hundreds of hours of interrogations. Italian press reports on Tuesday said that testimony by Fausto Tonna, a former Parmalat chief financial officer, led to the arrest of Ms. Tanzi.
While Parmalat's financial imbroglio is said to be rooted in more than a decade of financial fraud, the company did not collapse until two months ago when it became known that an account that was supposed to hold 4 billion euros did not exist.
The company's new auditor, PricewaterhouseCoopers, found that Parmalat had more than 14 billion euros in net debt, rather than the 1.8 billion euros declared by previous managers.
Enrico Bondi, Parmalat's government-appointed administrator, will present a restructuring plan by the end of this month, the Italian government has said.
A new law grants him until June to present his plan, which analysts expect to include asset sales and an offer to bondholders to convert their bonds into shares in a new company.
The others arrested on Tuesday are Giovanni Tanzi, Calisto's brother and a former member of Parmalat's board; Roberto Tedesco, former chief executive of Parmatour and chairman of Hit, a holding company that controlled Parmatour; Angelo Ugolotti, a switchboard operator and Hit board member; Claudio Baratta, chief of Hit and also a Hit board member; and Camillo Florini, a manager at Hit.
Fabio Branchi, a Hit board member and chairman of the board of internal auditors at Coloniale, was placed under house arrest.
In other news, Italian investigators asked their Swiss counterparts in Berne for help investigating possible money laundering at Parmalat.
Sabine Zaug, a spokeswoman for the Swiss Justice Ministry in Berne, said that prosecutors in Milan had asked their Swiss colleagues to obtain documents relating to a number of Swiss bank accounts, and that the Swiss were considering the request.
She would not say which banks or whose accounts were involved, or how much money might be involved.
Parmalat has two subsidiaries -- Geslat S.A. and Parmalat International S.A. -- registered in Lugano, Switzerland.
Mr. Ugolotti -- unbeknownst to himself, according to Swiss company registration records -- is also listed as a board member for Geslat and a network of other Parmalat subsidiaries. He was also listed as chief executive of 25 of the conglomerate's units.
The Swiss federal prosecutor's office said last week that it was investigating four Italian nationals, whom it did not identify, on suspicion of laundering money in connection with Parmalat's collapse.
The prosecutor's office also said that it had frozen several accounts, but did not name the account holders or the banks.
