The federal judge overseeing the Martha Stewart trial said late yesterday that jurors would be permitted to hear evidence that appears to support the testimony of Douglas Faneuil, the government's chief witness.
Mr. Faneuil is the former assistant to Peter E. Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart's former stockbroker who is being tried with her on charges including conspiracy and obstruction of justice. The ruling permits jurors to hear evidence of Mr. Faneuil's conversations with his friends, in which he apparently told them he had done something wrong and was worried about it.
''The statements Mr. Faneuil made to his friends were made before the effort'' to bargain with the government on his own behalf, Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum said yesterday, responding to a defense lawyer's contention that Mr. Faneuil had done whatever he could to avoid punishment for himself. ''He told his friends he had done something wrong, and had been told to do it, and was now worried because he was pressured to do it.''
Mr. Faneuil faces a possible prison sentence for his role in what he has described as an orchestrated cover-up of Ms. Stewart's December 2001 trade of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems stock. She has said her trade was ''entirely lawful,'' and was a result of an agreement she and Mr. Bacanovic made earlier to sell if the price dipped below $60 a share.
Mr. Faneuil testified this month that Mr. Bacanovic told him to tell Ms. Stewart that members of the Waksal family, then running ImClone, were selling their shares on Dec. 27, 2001. Ms. Stewart sold her stake minutes later. He also testified that Mr. Bacanovic initially said the trade was made to offset profits from other sales in Ms. Stewart's portfolio, and later switched to the $60-a-share story.
Judge Cedarbaum said that in his conversations with his friends, Mr. Faneuil had implicated himself as well as Mr. Bacanovic. These conversations have already been alluded to in court.
''Your thrust during cross-examination was that he was lying when he inculpated himself, because he wanted to curry favor with the government,'' she told David Apfel, a lawyer for Mr. Bacanovic, after the jury had been excused for the day. Instead, she ruled, what he told his friends amounts to ''a prior consistent statement when he had no belief that he needed to curry favor with the government.''
The judge dealt a blow to the prosecution yesterday as well, ruling that an early-morning call between Mr. Bacanovic and Ms. Stewart on the day she was scheduled to meet with investigators for the first time could not be construed by the jury as anything but talk, or efforts to talk. The call was made at 7:09 a.m. on Feb. 4, 2002, and is listed as one example of the reported conspiracy between the defendants.
''I don't want you to speculate as to what was discussed,'' Judge Cedarbaum told the jury. ''The government cannot prove the substance of these conversations, what was said, solely through the records.''
Telephone records culled from cellphones, business lines, home telephones and car phones owned by Ms. Stewart, Mr. Bacanovic, Mr. Faneuil and others were the focus of much of the testimony yesterday. Michael Ryan, a special agent with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, testified that he sorted through a virtual mountain of phone records in tracing calls between various people involved with ImClone trades on Dec. 27, 2001.
The government was also not allowed to use the complete form of a chart that prosecutors had assembled for the jury. It originally showed cellphone and land-line calls between Ms. Stewart, Mr. Bacanovic and Mr. Faneuil, along with e-mail messages from Mr. Bacanovic and Mr. Faneuil. But by the time it was flashed up on the courtroom screens, the e-mail messages had been blacked out, leaving only the phone messages symbolized by tiny cellular phones or push-button desk phones, the kind last seen in the early 1980's.
On cross-examination, Mr. Ryan admitted he had no way of knowing whether any of the people who owned the phones were actually on the calls that he detected. ''You don't know whether Martha Stewart was on any of those calls?'' Mr. Apfel asked.
''I do not,'' Mr. Ryan said. Calls from Ms. Stewart's company, for example, used a trunk line and did not show which person or extension made each call, he added. The attribution of a call to Aliza Waksal, the daughter of Samuel D. Waksal, then the chief executive of ImClone, was also vague, Mr. Apfel suggested to the jury. That call was made from a room at the hotel in Sun Valley, Idaho, where she was staying.
