A federal appeals court on Tuesday upheld the government's right to help people shield themselves from unwanted telemarketing calls.
A panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Denver ruled that a do-not-call registry created by the federal government last fall helped to combat abusive telemarketing and ''prevents the invasion of consumer privacy.''
''The challenged regulations do not hinder any business's ability to contact consumers by other means, such as through direct mailings or other forms of advertising,'' the ruling said.
The telemarketing industry said it was considering an appeal to the United States Supreme Court. But the Supreme Court may not feel the need to take the case because it does not involve any conflicts among circuit courts, said Gregory A. Castanias, a Washington lawyer who specializes in appeals involving constitutional issues and technology law.
The chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, Timothy J. Muris, said Tuesday that the do-not-call registry had been very successful and that ''we are pleased that this popular program, like America's dinner hour, will not be interrupted.''
H. Robert Wientzen, president and chief executive of the Direct Marketing Association, which represents nearly 5,000 companies in the United States and elsewhere, said an appeal to the full Tenth Circuit or to the Supreme Court was possible. Meanwhile, he said, his group will follow the voluntary policy it has had for 18 years: ''If people don't want to be called, we don't want to call them.''
Since the F.T.C. and the Federal Communications Commission established the registry last fall, it has grown enormously. It now includes more than 50 million telephone numbers.
Telemarketing interests have maintained that the calls are a legitimate business technique, and that the new federal regulations could cost as many as 2 million jobs in an industry that now has 6.5 million workers. But the court was not swayed. ''Just as a consumer can avoid door-to-door peddlers by placing a 'no solicitation' sign in his or her front yard, the do-not-call registry lets consumers avoid unwanted sales pitches that invade the home via telephone,'' Judge David M. Ebel wrote.
The appeals court set aside a ruling by Federal District Judge Edward W. Nottingham of Denver, who had found that the list violated the right to free speech. The appeals court said that the First Amendment did not prevent the government from giving consumers the do-not-call option. It had allowed the government to enforce the program pending the outcome of the case decided Tuesday.
The ruling combined the government's appeal of Judge Nottingham's decision with two related cases. One was a case brought against the Federal Communications Commission by Denver telemarketers, and the other was an appeal by the Federal Trade Commission of an Oklahoma ruling that said it had no authority to create and enforce a do-not-call list.
