Now that it has lost the battle for AT&amp;T Wireless, what does Vodafone do next?
That is the question investors and analysts are raising with Arun Sarin, who became Vodafone's chief executive last July with the promise of reducing the excesses of his predecessor, Sir Christopher Gent, and of avoiding costly big acquisitions.
By bidding so aggressively for AT&amp;T Wireless before losing at the 11th hour to Cingular Wireless, Mr. Sarin, 49, clearly conveyed to skeptical investors that he believes that Vodafone -- the world's largest wireless company -- has no choice but to try to build its presence in the United States.
Through a partnership with Verizon Communications of New York, Vodafone has a 45 percent share in a company with 37 million American cellphone customers. But because the British company is only a minority stakeholder, it was forced to ride along in the passenger's seat at Verizon Wireless, a fact painfully driven home when Verizon adopted a network that was not compatible with what Vodafone offers in the rest of the world.
''One of the problems that this whole issue has highlighted is that Vodafone's United States strategy is not a long-term solution,'' said Morten Singleton, an analyst at Williams de Broe in London. The company does not have the decision-making control that it needs in the United States, Mr. Singleton said, or the ability to extend its brand.
Mr. Sarin now faces the challenge of doing a more complicated deal in the future. ''He was caught between a rock and a hard place,'' said Chris Ansell, an analyst at Nomura Asset Management in London.
On one hand, many investors think it is essential for Vodafone at some point to increase its presence in the United States market. On the other hand, they do not want Vodafone to pay a high price. Accomplishing both will be difficult, if not impossible.
In a statement, Vodafone said that it had acted in the best interest of shareholders by pulling out of the bidding for AT&amp;T Wireless when the price got too high. ''This was not a big deal, for a big deal's sake,'' a Vodafone executive said.
Vodafone also insisted that it remained committed to its joint venture with Verizon but several analysts said that Vodafone's obvious eagerness to chart its own path in the United States suggested that the partnership might be more troubled than either side publicly admits.
Now that it has lost out to Cingular, Vodafone is not without other opportunities in the United States. The company's deal with Verizon allows it to sell $10 billion of its stake this summer, and another $10 billion next year. The entire stake is worth an estimated $22 billion to $25 billion. If it went ahead with those sales, Vodafone could purchase another company, like Nextel, an independent company that is the fifth-largest wireless operator in the United States with 12.3 million customers at the end of the third quarter; or T-Mobile, which is owned by Deutsche Telekom and is the fourth-largest wireless operator in the United States with 13 million customers at the end of 2003.
''Part of the logic of exiting Verizon would be to buy into a comparable network,'' Mr. Singleton said.
For Vodafone, the United States is a more promising market than Europe, because fewer people have cellphones and there is more room for growth, said Alan Beaney, who manages $1 billion in assets, including Vodafone stock, at Principal Investment Management.
The failed bid for Cingular may mean that Vodafone will have greater difficulty getting any deal done in the near future. Investors who feel burned by Mr. Sarin's willingness to go far beyond what many outsiders considered a reasonable value of AT&amp;T Wireless to Vodafone are likely to insist that he go out of his way to restore credibility before entering the fray again.
''Vodafone shareholders are feeling a little bruised by this experience, and they're unlikely to rush into doing another deal,'' said one banker who specializes in mergers.
For Mr. Sarin, it may just have come down to poor timing. Buying AT&amp;T Wireless might have been a good move for Vodafone down the road, Mr. Ansell of Nomura said, but he was forced to bid now.
The general sense of relief among investors that Mr. Sarin finally pulled back from the brink was reflected in Vodafone's stock price on Tuesday. The company's shares rose 4.5 percent on the London Stock Exchange, to 138.50 pence. But that is still well off its recent high of 149.5 pence, where the stock traded in January before news of the bid came to light.
Wary investors remember that Ian MacLaurin, Vodafone's chairman, promised in a July 2003 meeting that the strategy followed by Sir Christopher, who built Vodafone into a giant involved in more than 25 countries by making acquisitions of $270 billion, would not continue. Mr. Sarin also pledged publicly that he was not interested in big deals.
When Sir Christopher left, ''investors wanted to see more of a hands-on, operational manager to really drive home the benefits'' of Vodafone's size, Mr. Beaney said.
Mr. Sarin fulfilled some of those wishes last November by saying that he would increase the company's dividend and buy back more than $4 billion in shares.
For now, Vodafone is expected to turn its attention to France. Mr. Sarin said in November that he was determined to buy the remainder of SFR, the French mobile phone company, that Vodafone does not already own -- a deal that could cost as much as 20 billion euros. So far, though, Vivendi Universal, which owns the rest of SFR, has been unwilling to sell its stake.
After Vodafone's bidding for AT&amp;T Wireless, shareholders say they have their guard up. ''The market is expecting him to make an acquisition of some sort in France or a full bid for Verizon,'' said Charles Roundell, a fund manager with Sagitta Asset Management in London. While most people are doubtful that Vodafone will ever mount an attack on Verizon, uncertainty over Mr. Sarin's long-term strategy may ''act as a cap for the shares,'' Mr. Roundell said.
For Mr. Sarin, it may be a balancing act between rounding out the company's assets, and avoiding the mistakes of his predecessor.
''North of $30 billion was a ridiculous price for AT&amp;T Wireless,'' Mr. Singleton, the Williams de Broe analyst, said. ''I would not like to see Vodafone exercising more shareholder value destruction by overpaying.''
MOBILE MERGER: THE RUNNER-UP
