IF Derek Jeter was feeling the heat from the newest star in the Yankees' expanding galaxy, he didn't show it. If he was feeling defensive about remaining the shortstop of the team he captains, he didn't sound it.
Sitting atop a worktable yesterday in the Yankee Stadium pressroom, where thousands of words are bound to be written measuring Jeter's value against Alex Rodriguez's, Jeter calmly answered the necessary challenges to his rights of incumbency with no sign of anxiety, without the loss of even one bead of sweat. He was characteristically cool as any starry October Bronx night.
''The measuring stick is how many championships you win,'' Jeter said, the implicit message serving as a reminder that in this statistical category, it is Jeter 4, Rodriguez 0.
Jeter made his case with all due respect to Rodriguez's Most Valuable Player award, Gold Glove and 47 home runs in 2003. But he planted an off-limits sign at short because he, not A-Rod, has been making all those classic October plays, walking tall, toeing George Steinbrenner's bottom line.
It was Jeter who sprayed big postseason hits all over the Stadium in the late 1990's, who led off Game 4 of the 2000 World Series against the Mets with a don't-even-think-it home run and who hit another to tie the Series finale the next night. It was Jeter who nailed Jeremy Giambi at the plate in the 2001 playoffs with his great positional intuition and who that fall was hailed as the modern Mr. October and even Mr. November, while Alex Rodriguez was already on vacation.
''I'm taking for granted that A-Rod is a performer in the month of October,'' Reggie Jackson, the original man of that month, said at the news conference yesterday during which Jeter stood behind Rodriguez and helped him slip into pinstripes but made it clear that he still regards himself as the Yankees' leader.
Taking for granted and knowing for sure are not the same, and that is why, in Jeter's mind, his credentials ring louder than Rodriguez's. He has won on baseball's most pressurized stage for the most demanding owner in the history of sports.
To all who are asserting that it is Jeter's place as captain and consummate team player to cede his position to a player widely regarded as his superior, Jeter would argue that he has already proved himself to be the most accountable Yankee of the Joe Torre era. For Jeter, we are merely at the point of the story where Rodriguez has the opportunity to prove he also has those transcendent qualities. It is A-Rod's turn to sacrifice.
Why would Jeter see it any other way? For eight years now, he has been celebrated for intangibles, for contributions that are not quantifiable. His approach to the game has been conditioned by Steinbrenner's terms of employment, best described by Jackson, who said, ''It only matters if you win the last 11.''
When someone baited Jeter by asking if he's a better shortstop than Rodriguez, he joked: ''I don't have to answer that question now.'' He has been around New York long enough to know that even with A-Rod already calling himself ''a former shortstop,'' the question isn't soon going away. Recognizing that resistance was futile, Jeter left it at: ''I'm playing shortstop now.''
In five years? Three years? Listen, these are the Yankees we're talking about. By August, more than a third of the roster is liable to have turned over. As with everything and everyone around the Yankees, the outcome of this experiment will be evaluated less on the basis of baseball logic and mainly on the mood of the owner after the last game of the season.
Jeter will continue to be Jeter, but how tempting it becomes for Steinbrenner to start squawking about A-Rod's wasting away at third will probably depend more on Mariano Rivera's ability to hold the lead in a key postseason game, or the fate of the Red Sox. The more years without a World Series banner to run up the Stadium flagpole, the more 2000 will loom as ancient history and the less the Yankees will be Derek Jeter's team, especially if A-Rod is hitting 50 home runs.
Andy Pettitte was allowed to leave this winter. Bernie Williams may be out of center field. Torre is in the last year of his deal. The Yankees begin spring training this week with four holdovers from their last championship team. Most people assume Jeter, who has a no-trade contract, is a Yankee for life, but what if out of Tampa one day comes a decree for Jeter to slide over to second?
''I'm not moving to second,'' he snapped when asked if the thought had so much as occurred to him.
In the event he ever gets the Bernie Williams treatment, might Jeter opt for moving out altogether, with Steinbrenner paying some of his contract, the way Texas is picking up a healthy portion of A-Rod's? All he knows right now is that he is staying right where he has been, and he'll deal with the prospect of the man he called ''arguably the best player in baseball'' stationed alongside.
They flew in together from Tampa on Monday night, Rodriguez taking the opportunity to tell Jeter that he is ready to switch for the long haul. With regards to winning, the newest Yankee was kind enough to compare Jeter yesterday to Magic Johnson. Was it sincere, or does A-Rod still believe what he told Esquire magazine a couple of years ago, that Jeter is no game-changer, no drink-stirring straw like Reggie?
It doesn't matter, because this is just the beginning and everyone is on the same page, with A-Rod at third and Jeter at short and the Red Sox in shock. By next season, who knows? Maybe Nomar Garciaparra is at second.
Sports of The Times
