Major developments yesterday will affect how America Online, based in Dulles, Va., markets itself to consumers.
Len Short is stepping down after 13 months as executive vice president for brand marketing as part of a change in management direction, said Ruth Sarfaty, a spokeswoman for AOL, which is a unit of Time Warner. Mr. Short could not be reached for comment.
As Mr. Short, 44, shifts to handling strategic projects for AOL, Ms. Sarfaty said, his duties will be assumed by Richard Taylor, 46, senior vice president for promotions, who will become senior vice president for brand advertising and promotions.
Under Mr. Short, a former top marketing executive at Charles Schwab, AOL significantly intensified its efforts to capture the attention of computer users with campaigns featuring celebrities like Sharon Stone and the sponsorship of the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show. AOL also shook up its agency roster under Mr. Short, hiring high-profile agencies like BBDO Worldwide in New York and Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.
Also yesterday, AOL decided to continue with Initiative Media in Los Angeles and New York as the media agency of record on its account, an assignment that Initiative has handled for seven years. Billings were estimated at more than $200 million.
The decision came after a four-month review, begun by Mr. Short, that had been narrowed to Initiative, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies, and Carat North America in New York, owned by the Aegis Group. The Starcom MediaVest Group in Chicago, part of the Publicis Groupe, was originally named a finalist along with Initiative and Carat, but withdrew from consideration last week, citing a potential conflict with a client, the Walt Disney Company. The review was managed by Pile &amp; Company in Boston.
The decision concluded the second of two reviews recently under way at America Online.
Last month, the company ended a review for its interactive account by dividing duties between New York agencies: Atmosphere/BBDO, part of the BBDO unit of the Omnicom Group, and Digitas.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
