A Roman Catholic priest accused of illegal gun possession and making harassing phone calls admitted on Tuesday that he stole $50,000 from collection plates of a Bethpage church over five years to finance his retirement, prosecutors said.
The priest, the Rev. John F. Johnston, 64, pleaded guilty to grand larceny in the third degree, a class D felony, quietly acquiescing to a judge's questions in court Tuesday morning, said a Nassau County assistant district attorney, Stephani Meister. Father Johnston, who told investigators he skimmed $100 per week as his ''401(k) plan,'' agreed to return $50,000 to the church, St. Martin of Tours in Bethpage.
Father Johnston, who has been a priest for 40 years, was arrested in October after the police received complaints he had been making obscene phone calls to a high school in Fort Greene, Brooklyn. When investigators went to Father Johnston's apartment in Jackson Heights, Queens, they found an unlicensed gun, the bag full of stolen cash, Nazi memorabilia and pornography, investigators have said.
Father Johnston, who was free on bail Tuesday night, still faces charges of gun possession in Queens and harassment in Brooklyn. His lawyer, Joseph Stello, said he hoped to settle the remaining charges by April 16, when Father Johnston is to be sentenced by Judge Donald E. Belfi in Nassau County Court.
''Nothing's really done yet,'' Mr. Stello said.
After Father Johnston's arrest, priests, students and others who knew him described him as a precise and supportive literature teacher, an aloof colleague and a haughty neighbor. He was ordained in 1964, served as an associate pastor in three parishes and taught at schools in the New York region for more than 20 years.
Law enforcement officials said at the time of his arrest that Father Johnston thought he had been pushed out of his teaching position at Oratory Preparatory School in Summit, N.J., by the school's new headmaster, who had come from Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Fort Greene. Father Johnston took revenge, law enforcement officials said, by calling Bishop Loughlin and making abusive statements.
From 1998 until October 2003, Father Johnston also skimmed money from the collection basket at St. Martin in Bethpage, where he had said Mass on Sundays for 30 years, prosecutors said. After his arrest, Father Johnston was removed from the parish, said the Rev. James Vlaun, a spokesman for the Diocese of Rockville Centre.
Father Vlaun said the diocese had no idea exactly how much Father Johnston had stolen.
''We have no reason to believe it was more than he admitted,'' Father Vlaun said. ''He has been very forthright. He was good enough to admit it and seek help, for which I give him credit.''
