MAYBE restaurants in home furnishing emporia are not meant to last long. Maybe the stores are more taken with the idea of having a dining spot near the carpets or kitchen equipment than with creating a place that has staying power.
Lucy Mexican Barbecue, the latest Nuevo Latino incarnation at ABC Carpet, following Colina and Chicama, has a nice staff and good drinks.
The servers and managers are friendly and helpful and actually know what they are serving, patiently explaining each unfamiliar dish. You will never find yourself in the position of having to stand up and flag down a waiter.
One night a manager highly recommended a Spanish wine for our second bottle. I did not think much of it and he took it back immediately, later telling me it was not at all what he had tasted in the past.
The restaurant also serves mostly marvelous drinks from margaritas and sangria to Mexican hot chocolate, scented with cinnamon and served at the table. Lucy's mojito is better than any I tried in Cuba, though the caipirinha had a peculiar off taste.
The cooking, mainly Oaxacan, if the personnel is to be believed, bears the same relationship to the food in that Mexican region as Outback Steakhouse does to Peter Luger. You can divine what the kitchen is trying to do by reading the the menu, but not by eating the dishes. The owner, Phil Suarez, the experienced restaurateur who also owns the highly regarded Patria, should know better. Especially as Andrew DiCataldo, who oversees the kitchens at Patria, is in the kitchen at Lucy.
Oaxaca is the land of seven moles, known for their depth of flavor and their complexities. Lucy has moles, too, each of which sings only a single note. The green mole served with fish tasted only of tomatillos; the flavor of the poblano pepper had vanished. A yellow mole could have been any bland vegetable.
It is as if the cooks are afraid that real Mexican food would frighten Americans, much the way most Thai restaurants in New York are afraid people will not like the complexity of their flavors and instead make them all sweet.
Lucy's menu is based on the food of the interior, which is generally far more sophisticated and subtle than what we know as Tex-Mex or border food. Here, the flavors come across as undistinguished rather than subtle. With few exceptions, the food is bland.
Having said that, I am a sucker for fresh guacamole and the first time I tried it at Lucy, it had a nice little bit of spice; the second time, it was bland, offering nothing to distinguish it from hundreds of other fresh guacamoles all over town. The red, white and blue tortilla chips accompanying it were a nice touch.
The barbacoa, slow-roasted spice-rubbed lamb wrapped in avocado, banana and hoja santa leaves, was at the delightful falling-apart stage and quite tasty served with excellent warm flour tortillas and three toppings: tomato jalapeño salsa; cilantro and onion; and tomatillo with avocado. Hoja santa, also known as the root beer plant because it smells like the sassafras used to make root beer, adds the flavor of anise.
One lunch started off promisingly. A small dish of bubbling cheese and chorizo served with crisp tortillas was eagerly sampled several times by all. It's hard to ruin melted cheese. But a posole rojo, pork and hominy with chilies, avocado and chicken in a tomato base, is more difficult to make well. It was very satisfying, the posole well cooked, the avocado added at the last minute to keep it fresh.
Do you suppose they serve beef short rib sandwiches in Oaxaca? Maybe Mexico City. The globalization of cooking makes it possible. But why do restaurants that advertise their ethnicity feel an obligation to add some American-style food to the menu? And pile gobs of mayonnaise on sandwiches?
The black beans were advertised as seasoned with epazote, a very pungent herb, which supposedly can counteract the unpleasant side effects of eating beans. If it was there, it escaped my notice.
What distinguished tacos filled with bistec al carbon, or grilled skirt steak, was the salsa that accompanied it. Otherwise the steak was a boring piece of grilled meat. Crisp roast chicken was not. Others do barbecued ribs far better and a spicy shrimp salad was neither spicy not flavorful. A chiles rellenos salad contained burned peppers.
In the evening the restaurant looks presentable, and attractive linen-shaded hanging lights provide a pleasant glow. But at lunch the harsh light of day uncovers the condition of the physical plant. The appointments might qualify as shabby chic if only they were vintage instead of just secondhand. The tables, without the white cloths that cover them at night, bare their scratched and marred surfaces. The slipcovers on the chairs are stained, as are the menus. The place mats, which could easily be washed, are also food-spotted, though the waiter is happy to give you a clean one if you ask. Next time there is a sale at ABC, maybe Lucy should send somebody shopping.
Lucy Mexican Barbecue
Satisfactory  35 East 18th Street, Flatiron District; (212) 475-5829.
ATMOSPHERE -- Pleasant at dinner; slightly tacky at lunch.  SOUND LEVEL -- Fairly civilized but not quiet.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Guacamole; chorizo con queso; posole rojo; barbacoa.  SERVICE -- Helpful and friendly.  WINE LIST -- Interesting Spanish and South American, reasonably priced.  HOURS -- Lunch, Monday to Friday noon to 3 p.m.; brunch, Saturday and Sunday noon to 3 p.m.; dinner, Monday to Thursday 5:30 to 11 p.m., Friday and Saturday 5 p.m. to midnight, Sunday 5:30 to 10:30 p.m.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $6 to $16; entrees, $14 to $26; desserts, $6 to $8.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Full wheelchair access.
What the stars mean:
(None) Poor to Satisfactory  * Good  ** Very Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambiance and service with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
ON THE WEB
PAST REVIEWS from the New York Times, with additional capsule reviews by Times critics:
nytimes.com/dining
RESTAURANTS
