Israeli lawmakers approved more than $20 million on Monday night for new spending on Jewish settlements, two weeks after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon suggested he might remove most of the settlers in the Gaza Strip.
Palestinians and Israeli opposition politicians said the move demonstrated that Mr. Sharon's government was committed to the overall development of settlements, despite his talk of a unilateral withdrawal from some of them.
The Palestinian labor minister, Ghassan Khatib, said: ''In case there was any doubt, this shows that Sharon's policy is settlement expansion. This policy makes peace impossible now, and also in the future.''
Mr. Sharon said on Feb. 2 that he was considering withdrawing most of the 7,500 settlers in Gaza. He has also suggested that Israel would have to give up some isolated settlements in the West Bank.
But he has given no indication that he would relinquish any of the larger settlements, which account for most of the roughly 230,000 Israelis living in the West Bank.
In the parliamentary vote on Monday, the finance committee approved nearly $22 million for housing projects, and lawmakers said almost all the money was likely go to settlements, primarily in the West Bank.
Yuval Steinitz, a prominent legislator from Mr. Sharon's Likud Party, said on Israel Radio, ''It is our obligation and our right to care for the settlements that exist under difficult circumstances.''
Palestinian factions have regularly attacked settlers during the last three years of violence.
Settlers and their supporters are working to prevent even a limited withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza, areas the Palestinians claim for a future state. This week, a group of Gaza settlers has been marching toward Jerusalem to protest Mr. Sharon's talk of a pullout. ''We have roots here -- we are deepening our roots,'' Micha Hada, a resident of Gaza, said on Israel Radio.
Effi Eitam, leader of the National Religious Party, which belongs to Mr. Sharon's coalition government, said he planned to introduce a bill that would prohibit the Israeli military from dismantling settlements. Mr. Eitam, an ardent supporter of the settlers, said the Army's role in removing settlements would be deeply divisive. Such actions should be left to the police, he said.
In Berlin on Tuesday, the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, denied reports he had threatened to resign after a dispute with the Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat.
''Resigning? Why? I am here as the prime minister. I am not thinking about that,'' said Mr. Qurei, who was meeting with German leaders as part of a European tour.
Earlier in the day the Reuters news agency, citing unidentified Palestinian officials, said Mr. Qurei had threatened to quit, after less than five months in office.
The disagreement was linked to a long-running issue over how the Palestinian security forces are paid, The Associated Press reported. For years, senior Palestinian security officials have been given large sums of cash, which they use to pay tens of thousands of security workers.
Critics say that method has contributed to widespread corruption. Last Saturday, Mr. Qurei said that the practice would end and that salaries would be deposited directly into security officers' bank accounts.
Mr. Arafat has controlled the security forces since the Palestinian Authority was established in 1994 and has resisted calls that he share or relinquish that authority.
