The 17th-century fabulist Jean de la Fontaine may have borrowed the plots of many of his animal allegories from Aesop and early Persian storytellers, yet the resulting ''Fables'' could not be more French. They were wildly popular in la Fontaine's lifetime as commentaries on human nature, and they have been taught in primary schools here ever since. To this day there is hardly a Frenchman or woman who cannot recite several of the tales.
Now a Texas-born director with only rudimentary French has for the first time staged a selection of the fables at the Comédie Française, the shrine of French literary classicism. Yet in French cultural circles, Robert Wilson is no ordinary American. It was in France that he made his name as an avant-garde director three decades ago, and it is in France, more than the United States, where he enjoys the status of a major theatrical figure.
As a result many of the French luminaries who turned up for the opening night, Jan. 30, were drawn as much by curiosity to see how Mr. Wilson would interpret la Fontaine as by childhood memories of, say, ''The Crow and the Fox.'' When the curtain fell 105 minutes later, they seemed amply satisfied, giving Mr. Wilson and his team an ovation.
Theater critics were no less enthusiastic. The left-of-center daily Libération headlined its review ''Fabulous Wilson'' and said the director had breathed new life into ''Les Fables.'' In the right-of-center Figaro, Hervé de Saint Hilaire said, ''The miracle is that Bob Wilson succeeded in awakening and exciting the eye, the ear and the spirit.''
The approach Mr. Wilson chose as he turned poems into a visual spectacle was to evoke a tableau vivant: his geometric décor and multicolored lighting created a backdrop of austere beauty for actors wearing imaginative masks and splendid costumes. Unusually, given Mr. Wilson's penchant to have actors move in a highly stylized manner, here they are free to run and jump, squeak and roar.
Still, the Comédie Française took a gamble. Long before the premiere it scheduled ''Fables de la Fontaine'' to run in repertory through May 15 and to return to its main Salle Richelieu over Christmas this year. Further, as Mr. Wilson put it, ''they let this guy from Texas come and direct a treasure of their culture.''
Since the 1970's, he said, he had wanted to create a work linked to French history. But, he was asked in conversation with a small group of reporters, did he already know ''Les Fables''?
''Not as well as the French,'' he said, conceding the obvious.
His first task was to pick from among the 245 fables, totaling 12 volumes, that were published in three collections in 1668, 1678-79 and 1694. Having decided to use only those fables involving animals, his dramaturg, Ellen Hammer, drew up a short list. ''Sometimes three or four were offered, and I chose those that complemented each other,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''It was a bit like putting beads on a necklace.'' In the end 19 fables were performed.
Simultaneously 15 actors were chosen from among the 60 members of the Comédie Française who auditioned. These players were called on to abandon the classical oratorial style they usually adopt in performing Molière, Racine and Corneille. ''There is a Wilsonian aesthetic that goes toward purity of movement,'' said Laurent Stocker, who appears as a frog and a tiger, ''but I think the actors express themselves more here than in other Bob Wilson pieces.''
Mr. Wilson, who worked with an interpreter during rehearsals, was delighted by their openness to his technique. ''I began directly silently, with no text, only movement, which was strange for them because they usually start with text,'' he explained. ''It was surprising to see that they were willing to let go of their ideas about acting and about 'Les Fables,' to deconstruct and reconstruct them,''
Still, he had to provide continuity to what are individual poems. Music offered a partial solution: Michael Galasso's Baroquelike score, using harpsichord, wind instruments and some modern rhythms, accompanies most of the action. The repeated appearance of some characters -- like the lion, the fox, the wolf and the frog -- also helps. But the key was to have la Fontaine himself, played by the actress Christine Gersen, serve as host for the evening.
Ms. Gersen's la Fontaine, dressed in the black satin and white frills of a 17th-century bourgeois, introduces the animals, speaks some lines of some fables and presides over the finale when the animals choose not to become humans. la Fontaine's presence serves to remind that the tales enacted onstage are allegories about human behavior.
Talking animals that display human characteristics existed in fiction before la Fontaine and have reappeared frequently since, powerfully in George Orwell's ''Animal Farm'' and also in animated movies and generations of children's books. La Fontaine's talent, though, was to create satires and minidramas in verses as short as a sonnet and rarely running more than 30 lines.
Mr. Wilson's show opens with ''The Lion in Love'' warning of the perils of blind love: the lion allows his claws and teeth to be cut and is promptly killed by dogs. The lion, played by an African actor, Bakary Sangaré, whose roars are amplified by the body microphones worn by the actors, reappears in ''The Lion and the Gnat.'' Here la Fontaine's moral is that the smallest enemies can be the most dangerous.
Along with ''The Crow and The Fox,'' in which the wily fox flatters the crow into dropping a piece of cheese, the show includes many of the most popular fables: ''The Oak and The Reed,'' in which a small reed bends in a storm while the mighty oak cracks; ''The Grasshopper and the Ant,'' which warns against singing all summer and not preparing for winter; and ''The Frog Who Wanted to Be as Big as the Ox'' and literally explodes with ambition.
And Mr. Wilson's favorite? ''I usually like the scene I'm watching,'' he said with a smile. ''If the rabbit is onstage, I like the rabbit best.''
