As John Kerry squeaked past John Edwards to win the Wisconsin Democratic primary on Tuesday, he and his advisers were left to do something they have rarely had to do since he defied the polls to win the Iowa caucuses: explain away a performance far less convincing than had been expected.
''A win is a win, and then you move on to the next location,'' Senator Kerry said early in the evening as surveys of voters leaving the polling precincts showed him ahead by only a few percentage points.
The Mr. Kerry's campaign had spent the day sparring with President Bush's over job losses and military pay, and previewing the race in Ohio -- not the primary there on March 2, but the general election in a battleground state.
But by nighttime, Wisconsin voters had sent a message that sounded much like a line Senator Edwards used in Sunday's Democratic debate: ''Not so fast, John Kerry.''
As he edged past Mr. Edwards to take his 15th contest out of 17 so far, Mr. Kerry spoke of ''the power of change'' and utterly ignored Mr. Edwards, making no overt nod to his rival's surprisingly strong showing.
But he seemed to adapt his message subtly for a potentially prolonged battle with Mr. Edwards, dwelling on the issues of jobs and trade that Mr. Edwards had hit hard in Wisconsin, while injecting a note of the optimism that Mr. Edwards has made a trademark.
''We've seen the hurt of workers without work, the hurt of families without health care struggling to afford it if they have it and struggling to find it when they don't,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''But I've also seen everywhere, in every community -- rural and urban, all across this land and particularly in the last days here in Wisconsin -- the sense of hope, a sense of the possibilities of our nation and a resolve to make a new future, to lift our country up and reach for the America that we know we have yet to become.''
Barely 300 people here heard Mr. Kerry in person, making for a victory party that could have easily fit in a ballroom half the size. Down the hall, reporters besieged the senator's deputy campaign manager, Steve Elmendorf, with questions about the surprisingly close outcome when he made the mistake of helping himself to dinner in the pressroom.
Mouth still full, Mr. Elmendorf played down the meaning of Mr. Edwards's strong showing. ''A win's a win, especially when you've won 15 or 16,'' he said. ''We play everywhere, unlike John Edwards and Howard Dean and anyone else in the race. We always entertain the possibility we could lose a state. I'll take our record against anyone else's.''
Mr. Elmendorf refused to guess why Mr. Edwards had outpaced Mr. Kerry among independents, saying he had not seen the surveys of voters leaving the polls.
Other aides raced to explain. They pointed to Mr. Edwards's focus on Wisconsin, where they said he dug in and outspent Mr. Kerry by 20 percent, with $316,000 in television advertisements to $263,000 by Mr. Kerry, according to an analysis by a Wisconsin news media consortium.
They pointed to Mr. Kerry's victory Saturday with 63 percent of the votes in Nevada, a swing state in a general election, as proof that his ''national campaign'' was paying off.
And they asserted that Mr. Edwards would be hard-pressed to have much to show for his efforts in the 10 nominating contests on March 2, which include the big, costly advertising markets of California and New York.
Still Democrats unaffiliated with the campaign suggested Mr. Kerry had been given a valuable jolt.
''I think John Kerry learned an important lesson tonight, which is that every vote needs to be earned,'' said Joe Lockhart, a Democratic strategist who was press secretary to President Bill Clinton.
Mark Penn, who was Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's pollster, said the Wisconsin vote suggested a bit of ''buyer's remorse as voters take a closer look at their front-runner -- though they have fewer questions about Kerry than they had about Howard Dean.''
''What he's been telling them is that he has the momentum to beat Bush, just like Dean did. But when you don't fill out an anti-Bush message with more substance about your vision for the country, that's more vulnerable than it seems.''
Privately, some Kerry advisers were wondering if Mr. Edwards would become more combative, and what other dangers might stand between Mr. Kerry and the nomination.
Mr. Lockhart said: ''I'm not sure there's real danger. The danger may be if the field ever clears itself out, if Howard Dean ever stops getting 16 or 20 percent of the vote. I'd be worried where that's going.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
