The personal trainer for Barry Bonds told federal agents that he gave steroids to several baseball players, according to an affidavit that the United States Attorney's office made public Tuesday.
In releasing the documents via e-mail to The New York Times, the attorney's office inadvertently revealed that Yankees outfielder Gary Sheffield sent mail to the supplements laboratory that is being investigated as the source of the steroids. The documents do not allege that Sheffield used steroids.
He had already been identified as one of a number of professional athletes who testified before the federal grand jury investigating the laboratory, known as the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, or Balco.
But Sheffield's name is the first to come out in documents released in the six days since the grand jury handed up indictments against Bonds's trainer, Greg Anderson, and three other men, all on charges of illegally distributing anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs to dozens of professional athletes.
Anabolic steroids are a controlled substance, and under federal law it is illegal to distribute them without a prescription.
Anderson, 37, pleaded not guilty last Friday, as did the three others, Victor Conte Jr., 53, who founded Balco and is its chief executive; James J. Valente, 49, the vice president of Balco; and Remi Korchemny, 71, a track coach.
Balco was thought to be a blood and urine testing company that provided supplements to athletes. But last year, an anonymous track coach handed over a vial of THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone, a previously unknown steroid designed to avoid detection. Last September, federal agents raided Balco.
The affidavits released Tuesday were filed with the United States District Court on Sept. 4 as part of a request for warrants to search Anderson's home and vehicle. Agents who subsequently searched Anderson's house that month said he voluntarily agreed to talk to them.
''Anderson initially denied 'distributing' steroids, but acknowledged that he sometimes 'gave' steroids to persons whom he knew,'' said one affidavit written by Jeff Novitzky, a special agent for the Internal Revenue Service. ''Upon further questioning, Anderson admitted that he had given steroids to several professional baseball players whose names I was familiar with from my review of other documents in this investigation.''
The two affidavits outlined in greater detail the case against Anderson and his links to Balco and baseball players.
Sheffield's connection to Balco became known as part of the agents' periodic search of the trash outside the laboratory.
On Feb. 17, 2003, his name was found on a Federal Express package receipt that had been sent to Balco. Sheffield, a 15-year veteran who signed a three-year contract with the Yankees during this off-season, played with the Atlanta Braves in 2002 and 2003.
''Gary worked out with Barry Bonds for a while; that's pretty widely known,'' Sheffield's agent, Rufus Williams, said in a telephone interview Tuesday night. ''To the extent he worked out with Barry, some of the people involved in this, he met that way. But in terms of Gary taking steroids, that's not Gary.''
Sheffield could not be reached.
Bonds has repeatedly denied knowingly taking steroids.
Sheffield's name was blacked out in the documents that were given to reporters at the news conference in San Francisco, and the United States Attorney's office said it had been mistakenly revealed when the affidavits were sent by e-mail to The Times and other news organizations.
Sheffield testified before the grand jury on Dec. 11. That same day, Yankees first baseman Jason Giambi also testified.
Anderson's name was obtained by a narcotics task force in San Mateo County from a confidential informant, one of the affidavits said. That informant, who had previously pleaded guilty to felony charges of steroid distribution, told the task force that ''Greg Anderson is well known within the 'steroid community' as a steroid dealer and that his steroid clients included professional baseball players,'' the affidavit said.
Major League Baseball is scheduled to start punitive drug testing this season, after more than 5 percent of its players' tests were found to be positive for steroids last year, the first year of testing.
One of the documents released Tuesday says that Conte, the founder of Balco, told agents he gave Anderson steroids to give to professional baseball players. In an interview with I.R.S. agents that they described as ''voluntary,'' Conte said he knew the substances were illegal and assumed Anderson knew that as well.
Conte also linked Anderson to baseball players in a statement he gave to agents last fall. ''Conte stated that he specifically gave a clear steroid-like substance to Anderson to give to a professional baseball player in early 2003,'' according to one affidavit. The ''clear'' has been identified by agents as a code name for the steroid THG. Conte told agents that he also gave Anderson a cream containing a steroid and a steroid- masking agent. Conte said he understood that Anderson intended to give that substance to a professional baseball player.
The affidavits indicate Anderson was a regular visitor to Balco. The agents said they once saw Anderson lock the front door of the lab with a key in his possession.
On another day, Sept. 23, 2002, agents who had Balco under surveillance noted that Anderson arrived at 1:14 p.m. in a vehicle driven by a professional baseball player. The two were met in the parking lot by Conte and Valente, the affidavit said. Anderson introduced the player to the two men and the four walked inside the Balco building.
Earlier, on Sept. 11, 2002, agents trailed Anderson as he drove his Chevy Tahoe with the license plate ''W8 GURU'' from Balco to Pacific Bell Park, where he parked in the players' lot. The Giants played the Los Angeles Dodgers at home that day.
BASEBALL
