The European Union took its objections about the way the United States calculates antidumping duties to the World Trade Organization on Tuesday.
The United States moved quickly to block a ruling, but its action can only delay the issue by a month, when the European Union will probably raise its objection again, the Dow Jones Newswires said.
The European Commission said in a statement that the United States overcharged when it set antidumping duties on 31 different products imported from the European Union, including pasta, ball bearings, chemicals and hot-rolled steel.
It has asked the W.T.O. to set up a panel to examine the legality of the United States policy, which it says affects hundreds of millions of dollars in imports from Europe.
The practice, called zeroing, overestimates the amount of antidumping fines to be paid by importers, the European Union contends. Dumping fines are generally calculated by subtracting the price a company sets for its products in a foreign market from the price it charges at home each month.
In zeroing, however, the calculation excludes months when the imports were sold above the home price; the higher price differential is simply counted as zero. The lower prices are then tallied and used to calculate the antidumping duties.
The commission said that without zeroing, the dumping margin in most of the 31 cases under review for dumping would be negligible or vanish, and no duties would be due. Pasta producers from Italy, for example, have been selling their spaghetti cheaper stateside than at home. Antidumping duties are levied on the pasta companies by the United States to deter the practice, because it drives down prices for local producers.
''The U.S. zeroing practice is negatively affecting our exporters to the U.S. and the problem will only grow further if zeroing is allowed to continue,'' Pascal Lamy, the European trade commissioner, said in a statement.
The European Union was found guilty of zeroing when setting antidumping duties on imports of Indian bed linen in 2001. The Union scrapped all antidumping duties on imported Indian bed linen that year.
