As it nears its fourth birthday, the short, unhappy life of AT&amp;T Wireless as a stock owned by the public is coming to an end. It will be remembered as an emblem of the way Wall Street fads can come and go, enriching investment bankers while damaging investors who follow those fads.
AT&amp;T Wireless was born not as a real stock but as a tracking stock, a way for boring old AT&amp;T to demonstrate the value of its really hot property, the wireless telephone service.
When the initial offering of 360 million shares was sold to investors on April 26, 2000, the company boasted that it had allocated more than 90 million of them to retail brokerage firms. That was on top of the 36 million that were allocated to AT&amp;T workers, more than 66,000 of whom participated in the initial offering. They got to pay $29.50 a share.
In those days, investors in new offerings expected their investment to soar overnight, and AT&amp;T Wireless was something of a disappointment, rising only 8 percent the first day. On May 1, 2000, the share price leaped as high as $36, or 22 percent over the offering price. That was the top.
The buyers of that offering have fared the worst. But no one who responded to an offering document and bought AT&amp;T Wireless stock, then held on until the end, which appears to be at hand, will emerge from the experience with a profit. These investors are set to receive $15 a share from Cingular Wireless.
In May 2001, owners of shares in the parent, AT&amp;T, were offered the choice of keeping them or exchanging them for shares in AT&amp;T Wireless, which by then were trading for $18 a share.
Investors in AT&amp;T would have done better then if they had simply sold their shares. The second best option would have been to keep them. The worst, with benefit of hindsight, was to take the AT&amp;T Wireless shares.
Investors who owned 1,000 shares of AT&amp;T then had a stake worth $21,060. If investors chose to swap, they ended up with 1,176 shares of AT&amp;T Wireless, which will be worth $17,640 if this deal goes through.
Investors who chose to stick with AT&amp;T now have a much more diversified portfolio. They have 200 shares of AT&amp;T, after a one-for-five reverse split, and they also have 323.5 shares of Comcast Class A, which were received when Comcast acquired AT&amp;T's cable operations. And the investors have 321.8 shares of AT&amp;T Wireless, picked up when AT&amp;T completed its disposition of the company. (These investors thus have a stake in the two most notable takeover tales of the moment, since Comcast has made an unsolicited offer for Walt Disney, at least temporarily depressing the Comcast stock price.)
That package of shares is now worth $18,771, valuing AT&amp;T Wireless at the $15 price Cingular agreed to pay and the others at market value. Add in the dividends received, and the total value is $19,203.
In July 2001, as AT&amp;T finished its involvement with AT&amp;T Wireless, it sold its remaining shares to the public at $17.05 a share. AT&amp;T Wireless became an independent company, its tracking stock converted to real shares.
By then the tracking share fad had been discredited. Investment bankers who collected fees for advising AT&amp;T to set up the tracking stock then got more fees for advising it to dispense with the structure.
In just the two public offerings of AT&amp;T Wireless stock, the underwriting discounts collected by Wall Street totaled $349.9 million.
At least public investors always paid the market price for the stock. NTT DoCoMo, the Japanese wireless giant, was so eager to invest in AT&amp;T Wireless that it agreed at the end of November 2000 to invest $9.8 billion to buy 406 million shares at an average price of $24.15, at a time when the shares were trading for $18. It also got warrants to buy more shares at $35 each, but those warrants will not be exercised.
There are investors who made good money in AT&amp;T Wireless after AT&amp;T orphaned its offspring. But AT&amp;T Wireless's early days as an independent company were painful for its owners.
In early 2002 the stock fell below $15 a share. When it hit bottom on Oct. 10, 2002, it sold for only $3.15 a share. The price to be paid by Cingular is nearly five times that low price, but it is just over half the initial offering price back in 2000, when AT&amp;T employees and public investors leaped in to buy the shares.
After that offering, which came just as the boom in new offerings was ending, AT&amp;T said that more shares had been allocated to individual investors than in any other initial public offering. Those who were allowed to buy them then may not be especially grateful now.
MOBILE MERGER: MARKET PLACE
