In a bizarre accident, a 77-year-old woman was killed in south Brooklyn yesterday when a rock bounced from the wheels of a passing dump truck and crashed through the windshield of the car she was riding in with her husband.
The woman, Credo Veira, was in the passenger seat of a red Toyota traveling southward on Ralph Avenue near East 66th Street in the Flatlands section about 10:50 a.m., the police said. The dump truck was passing in the opposite direction on Ralph Avenue, the police said, when a brown basketball-sized rock that had been lodged between its wheels suddenly flew up, smashed through the Toyota's windshield and struck Mrs. Veira in the head. She was taken to Kings County Hospital, the police said, where she was pronounced dead a half hour later.
''I heard a big bang, and it sounded like the car hit the truck,'' said Norman Thomas, 69, who lives in a house on Ralph Avenue near where the accident took place.
When Mr. Thomas emerged from his house, he found a horrific scene. The car had come to a halt in the street, and Mrs. Veira was lying prone behind the shattered windshield, covered with blood. Her husband, Aubrey Veira, 81, struggled briefly to revive his wife, but quickly realized that it was futile, said Vernon Veira, one of the couple's 12 children. The couple had been married for 60 years, he added, and have more than two dozen grandchildren and several great-grandchildren.
At the time of the accident, Mr. and Mrs. Veira had been on their way to the Kings Plaza Mall to have Mrs. Veira's hearing aid repaired, Vernon Veira said.
The driver of the truck, which was empty, had been on his way from a construction site about a block away, Mr. Thomas said. The driver walked back to the scene of the accident, Mr. Thomas said, and was overcome with grief when he saw what had happened. The truck belongs to Ferrara Equipment Inc., a law enforcement official said. Efforts to reach the company yesterday were not successful.
One of the police officers on the scene said it was the weirdest accident he had ever seen, said Suzanne Veira, one of the couple's daughters, who lives nearby. The officer told her that the rock that struck Mrs. Veira weighed about 20 pounds, she said.
A large group of relatives and friends gathered to mourn Mrs. Veira's death and comfort her stricken husband outside the family's two-story brick house on Flatlands Ninth Street.
''He's very shaken up,'' David Veira said of his father, ''But he's a strong man, so he's going to pull through it.''
Mrs. Veira worked for three decades as a nurse at Bellevue Hospital before retiring 13 years ago, her children said. Although she had diabetes, she was still able to get around and volunteered at a hospice in downtown Brooklyn, they added.
Several of the children said the randomness and violence of the accident made it even worse.
''I wish to God it didn't happen like this,'' said David Veira.
But Suzanne Veira said that her mother's deep religiosity lent a certain meaning to the accident, however awful.
''She was like a saint,'' she said. ''People like her don't come often, and they don't die of natural causes. When God wants them he takes them.''
