THE SWALLOWS OF KABUL  By Yasmina Khadra  Translated by John Cullen. 195 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $18.95.
Yasmina Khadra's harrowing new novel is set in Taliban-era Afghanistan and with economical precision depicts Kabul as a city ''in an advanced stage of decomposition.'' It is a novel very much in the tradition of Albert Camus, not only in its humanism and concern with the consequences of individual choices but also in its determination to bear witness to the absurdities of daily life in that country and the extreme psychological and cultural isolation its residents experienced day to day.
The long war with the Soviet Union and years of civil war have devastated Afghanistan, and under the iron rule of the Taliban, its citizens are unable to indulge in the ordinary pleasures of daily life: taking a stroll with one's beloved or listening to music is apt to result in a flogging or much worse. The blasted landscape of the country has become a metaphor for the blasted hopes of its residents.
''The ruin of the city walls has spread into people's souls,'' Yasmina Khadra writes in ''The Swallows of Kabul.'' ''The dust has stunted their orchards, blinded their eyes, sealed up their hearts. In places, the buzzing of flies and the stench of animal carcasses declare the irreversibility of the general desolation. It seems that the whole world is beginning to decay and that its putrefaction has chosen to spread outward from here, from the land of the Pashtuns, where desertification proceeds at a steady, implacable crawl even in the consciences and intellects of men.''
It turns out that Yasmina Khadra is actually the pseudonym of one of Camus's countrymen, a former Algerian army officer named Mohammed Moulessehoul, who took a woman's pen name to avoid submitting his manuscripts for approval by military censors. He has since left the army and lives in the south of France.
Yasmina Khadra -- whose previous books have chronicled Algeria's savage civil war, pitting Islamic fundamentalists against the army-backed government -- is intimately familiar with the consequences that war and religious extremism have on people's daily lives, and in this book he gives the reader a tactile sense of what life under the Taliban might have been like.
He describes burka-clad women, rendered anonymous, ''mummified in shrouds the color of fever or fear,'' and men, driven wild by the frenzy of the mob, rapturously stoning a woman to death. He shows us the refuge many of Kabul's residents take in spinning stories -- pipe dreams of escape or nostalgia-colored reminiscences -- and he shows us just how thoroughly politics has infected and warped personal relationships.
All of his central characters have found their previous lives overturned by the war and the rise of the Taliban: they are all afflicted by an alienation and despair so pronounced that they have begun to question their own beliefs and their own capacity for hope.
Mohsen Ramat, the son of a prosperous merchant, has lost his business; his wife, Zunaira, a former magistrate, has lost her job. Their house was bombed, and most of their friends and relatives have died or moved away. Mohsen, a sensitive but weak-willed man, was so shocked by the first public execution he witnessed that for many nights ''his sleep was dazzled by nightmarish visions.'' But ''time has passed, and scaffolds have come to seem more and more a part of ordinary life, so much so that the citizens of Kabul grow anxious at the thought that an execution might be postponed.''
Now as ''expiatory victims are dispatched in droves,'' Mohsen has gradually stopped dreaming. ''The light of his conscience has gone out.''
When Mohsen confesses that he has taken part in the stoning of a prostitute, his wife is appalled. She begins to wonder who she and her husband have become. After another incident involving the Taliban, their marital arguments escalate, with violent consequences that affect not only the Ramats, but also their neighbors, Atiq Shaukat, a part-time jailer for the Taliban, and his ailing wife, Musarrat.
In orchestrating the events that bring these characters' lives crashing together, Yasmina Khadra wants to make some philosophical -- indeed Camusesque -- points about free will and the individual's relationship to society. In doing so, however, he resorts to plot contrivances that fly in the face of the psychological dynamics he has so carefully constructed in the first half of the novel.
Yet if this jerry-built conclusion reveals just how deeply flawed ''The Swallows'' is as a piece of storytelling, even it cannot diminish the book's chilling portrait of fundamentalism run amok and its fallout on ordinary people who want only to go about their mundane lives.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
