WOKE up yesterday, the national holiday that is popularly if incorrectly known as Presidents' Day, raring to go to a parade.
That's what Americans do on holidays, no? They march. Think of Memorial Day, Veterans Day, Labor Day, Independence Day and, in some cities, New Year's Day and Thanksgiving.
Sometimes people prefer contemplation to marching, as on Martin Luther King's Birthday. On occasion, they do both. That brings us back to Thanksgiving and New Year's, days of parades and of contemplating helmeted men on television smashing into one another every few minutes.
On those holidays, communal activity is emphasized. But Presidents' Day is an orphan. It has no event like a rally or parade.
That raised a quandary yesterday. What was a patriotic New Yorker supposed to do -- go alone to the George Washington Bridge or the Lincoln Tunnel?
It would have made perfect sense to visit Federal Hall, on the site in the financial district where Washington was inaugurated in 1789. But the building was closed for the holiday. Natch. On a day set aside to honor Washington, why keep open the most important place in New York associated with him?
That is a detail commonly overlooked these days. The holiday exists specifically to commemorate Washington's birthday. That was Congress's intent more than three decades ago when it designated the third Monday in February for that purpose. It never created anything called Presidents' Day.
But then Abraham Lincoln was thrown in, and before you could say Franklin Pierce, a mishmash of other presidents entered the mix. That troubles people like Representative Roscoe G. Bartlett, a Maryland Republican who for years has proposed legislation to restore Washington's and Lincoln's birthdays to their separate glories -- Feb. 22 and Feb. 12. (New York is one of several states that give Lincoln's birthday separate recognition.)
Presidents' Day ''raises the mediocre and the notorious to the same level with the superlative and the great,'' said Lisa Wright, a spokeswoman for the congressman. She mentioned no names, so do your own separating of chaff from wheat.
FOR now, Mr. Bartlett's bill is headed nowhere. Presidents' Day will be around for some time, leaving us with that nagging question of how to celebrate.
One thought yesterday was to honor not Washington and Lincoln so much as presidents with New York connections. But watching traffic on the F.D.R. Drive seemed no more inspirational than bowing one's head at the Lincoln Tunnel.
A better choice was the General Grant National Memorial on Riverside Drive, honoring Ulysses S. Grant, the only president buried in New York. Everyone knows it better as Grant's Tomb, though a more accurate punctuation would be Grants' Tomb. The general-president's wife, Julia Dent Grant, lies there, too.
Whatever you call the place, few people bother with it nowadays. All of three visitors were there late yesterday morning. By now, the site may be better known for Beyoncé Knowles, who almost literally danced on Grant's grave last year in a Fourth of July celebration of dubious taste.
Another possibility was to go to 28 East 20th Street, site of the first home of the only president born in New York, Theodore Roosevelt. Or perhaps to hold vigils outside residences of the four presidents who died here: James Monroe, Chester A. Arthur, Herbert Hoover and Richard M. Nixon. But none of those ideas seemed too uplifting.
With frustration creeping in, thoughts turned to shopping. That is what everyone believes Presidents' Day is all about in the first place. Logic pointed to the ballyhooed mall in the new Time Warner Center, on Columbus Circle. Oops! Shouldn't say mall. ''Urban retail center'' is what the developers prefer. ''Mall'' sounds so Sheboygan.
The center is not fully in gear. Yet to open are several restaurants designed to remove many dead presidents from customers' wallets. It is reported that dinner at Masa, a Japanese restaurant, will cost about $400. O Tempura! O Morels!
On reflection, though, pressing one's nose against the glass where the rich will gather seemed unsuitable to the day. Then inspiration struck.
Horrors like 9/11 aside, why do modern presidents come to New York? To take its money, of course. President Bush has done this. No one was more expert at it than Bill Clinton, who visited often for fund-raisers.
If withdrawing cash is what the city is all about for our national leaders, only one thing seemed to catch the day's true spirit.
I went to an A.T.M.
NYC
