City Councilman Allan W. Jennings Jr. has racked up more enemies in his two years in office than other politicians do in a career. He crossed the Bloomberg administration by voting against its property tax increase and has not been able to renew his official city parking permit. (He drives around with an expired one.)
He berated Speaker Gifford Miller for removing him from a finance committee, dramatizing his plight in one of the strangest moments on the Council floor by standing up with outstretched arms, and likening his treatment to the crucifixion of Jesus.
He infuriated the powerful Queens Democratic Party and lost its support by splashing his private life across the pages of the Chinese-language press, advertising his love for his girlfriend, a Chinese actress, while married to another woman.
''I was born 6-foot-4 -- tall, dark, and handsome -- so I am always standing out in the crowd anyway,'' said Mr. Jennings, with no apparent regrets. ''I'm well loved in my district. I'm not by political pundits. It may be jealousy, maybe they're afraid I'll step on their toes.''
Mr. Jennings, 37, has brought the kind of attention on himself that would make other politicians cringe. Yet he has also secured millions in city money for his historically underserved district in southeast Queens, which spans Jamaica, Rochdale Village and Richmond Hill, and was re-elected to a second term in November.
Now, however, Mr. Jennings's troubles have taken on a far more serious turn, and even the constituents who are sympathetic to him and the handful of colleagues who support him are questioning whether he can survive. The councilman has been accused of sexual harassment and misconduct by two of his former aides. City officials are investigating the claims, and are expected to report their findings this month.
Mr. Jennings has denied any wrongdoing but refused to comment on the accusations on his lawyer's advice.
Last month, Council leaders also took the unusual step of removing Mr. Jennings as chairman of the Civil Service and Labor Committee, a coveted position that comes with a $10,000-a-year bonus. They said the move was prompted not by the investigation, but by Mr. Jennings's lackluster work, his failure to call regular meetings and his rudeness to colleagues and staff. Council members have also criticized what they see as Mr. Jennings's inordinately large expenses for cellphone service, office furnishings and travel, including an extended stay in Puerto Rico in November 2002 after his flight back from an annual meeting of black and Hispanic legislators was delayed.
Mr. Jennings counters that he has worked tirelessly for his constituents and that his efforts have been blocked by political rivals and misinterpreted by the media. He said that Council leaders had turned against him at the behest of the Queens Democratic Party, which tried to knock him off the ballot in November, and failing that, fielded a candidate to run against him.
Michael H. Reich, a spokesman for the Queens party, said Mr. Jennings was trying to blame others for his own missteps.
''He's an absolute embarrassment,'' Mr. Reich said. ''Allan does not know how to quietly and diplomatically work out his issues with people to be effective. He's the buffoon of the Council.''
State Senator Ada L. Smith, a longtime Queens politician whose district overlaps that of Mr. Jennings, questioned how he could effectively serve his constituents when he had little influence with other elected officials.
''In this business, you naturally talk to each other,'' she said. ''If you're not on speaking terms, or you don't have a relationship, how do you go to them and ask for something? He can't get anything from the state and federal government.''
But many of Mr. Jennings's constituents and a few unions that have supported him have rallied behind him. They said that he earned their loyalty when he sided with them on property taxes and other issues important to their communities, and that they did not want to judge him until they knew the facts behind the sexual harassment and misconduct claims.
''He's somebody who's a good friend to this institution,'' said Wanda Williams, political director of District Council 37, the city's largest municipal union, which campaigned for Mr. Jennings. ''I don't think anything has changed in terms of our relationship with him.''
Mr. Jennings grew up in Queens Village, the third of four children of Jamaican immigrants. As a high school student, he lived for a year in Cologne, Germany, an experience that he said opened his eyes to the racial divide at home.
Mr. Jennings joined a Korean church upon returning to Queens, and learned to speak and read the language. He began singing in Korean, too, and later won singing competitions in Flushing. He also speaks Mandarin Chinese, and, including his German and English, can communicate in four languages.
After graduating from John Jay College of Criminal Justice in 1990, Mr. Jennings worked briefly as an investigator for the city's Department of Correction and then as a special assistant to Cynthia Jenkins, a former state assemblywoman from Queens.
He later left government and became a mortgage banker. He opened his own business in Flushing in the mid-1990's but closed it after he was elected to the Council in 2001. ''I'm a full-time-and-a-half councilman,'' he said. His salary is $90,000 a year.
Mr. Jennings, who shows up everywhere in a suit and tie, measures his success as a councilman by his good deeds for the district. During the blackout last August, he delivered bottled water and flashlights to older residents and jumped into a busy intersection to direct traffic when no one else would.
He goes out to major crime scenes, no matter the hour, to try to comfort victims and their families. On the night of his hard-won primary in September, Mr. Jennings said he went to the scene of a quadruple murder around 11 p.m. and stayed until 3 a.m.
''I always think of people in these bad situations, that it could have been me,'' Mr. Jennings said. ''I consider myself the mayor of this district, so if anything happens to them, I try to go there and comfort them.''
Police officials declined comment on Mr. Jennings. He has had strained relations with the department since he held a Council hearing in April 2002 in which the identities of some undercover police officers were disclosed.
By Mr. Jennings's count, his district office helps more than 400 residents a year to navigate the labyrinth of city agencies -- far more than any other Council member, he claims. The front of his 2,500-square-foot district office near the busy Sutphin Boulevard subway station features a giant billboard of Mr. Jennings.
''For a man to put his picture outside in the busiest section of the district, that's brave,'' said a 42-year-old assistant manager of a Home Depot, who sought help from Mr. Jennings after his landlord tried to evict him, and who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''It's too accessible for a politician.''
But critics point out that Mr. Jennings took six months to open his office -- while other Council members opened theirs right away -- leaving his constituents with nowhere to go in the meantime. Mr. Jennings said he was waiting for the renovations to be finished and during that time visited people in their homes.
Mr. Jennings said his biggest accomplishment so far had been to extract a promise from Council leaders to set aside $7.5 million over three years to equip each third-, fourth- and fifth-grade public school student in his district with a new laptop computer. Only one-third of that money, though, has actually reached the schools.
Mr. Jennings said Council leaders reduced the financing last year after he voted against the property tax increase.
Mr. Miller declined to comment, but his aides said there was a cut in the financing because of budget constraints. ''No one is reneging on the money,'' said Fred Baldassaro, Mr. Miller's spokesman. ''There's no punishment for the property tax. Every council member is being treated equally.''
Mr. Jennings became the focus of a Council investigation last month after two women filed complaints against him with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The women accused Mr. Jennings of making sexist comments, forcing them to clean his home on work time, and presenting one of them with a doll with an oversize penis, according to sources familiar with the complaints.
Mr. Miller hired a private firm to investigate the claims, and the council's Committee on Standards and Ethics referred the matter to the city's Department of Investigation, which is also reviewing it.
A sampling of voters in Mr. Jennings's district last week found that many voters continued to support their councilman. ''I really think there are people who are vindictive and going after him,'' said David Singh, 41, a real estate developer in South Ozone Park. ''They have a grudge, and they want to cause turmoil for a guy who tries to help people.''
But other voters, especially women, were more troubled by the sexual harassment and misconduct accusations against Mr. Jennings, and less willing to dismiss them as mere political wrangling.
''I really think it has to be investigated,'' said Leighann Lord, a standup comedian in her 30's who voted for Mr. Jennings. ''If he's guilty, that takes away his credibility with people because it's an abuse of the public trust. Once again, it's Bill Clinton revisited. Can't I ever vote someone in, and not think about it?''
Mr. Jennings said that his problems had not affected his work, and he seemed determined to prove that he could still help his constituents. As Mr. Jennings listened sympathetically, the Home Depot assistant manager told him he owed $4,700 in back rent and was being evicted by his landlord.
Mr. Jennings called the landlord, and after 20 minutes of negotiations, the councilman worked out a payment plan that allowed the man to stay in his home. Then Mr. Jennings jokingly suggested that perhaps the landlord, who was also a lawyer, could do something to help him stay in office.
''Do you do malice suits, too?'' Mr. Jennings asked. ''If people say bad things about you? I'm a nice guy, but I won't get into that now.''
Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  An article on Tuesday about the political travails of City Councilman Allan Jennings referred imprecisely to his marital status in March 2003, when he lost the support of Queens Democrats by placing a newspaper advertisement in which he cited his love for his girlfriend. Though he was still married, he was estranged from his wife and had filed for divorce.
