After weeks of political deadlock, Serbia appeared yesterday to be on the verge of forming a new government. But the composition of the minority coalition, and the members' shared opposition to the war crimes tribunal, may sour already difficult relations with the West.
For weeks the moderate nationalist leader, Vojislav Kostunica of the Democratic Party of Serbia, had been trying to form a coalition to prevent the hard-line nationalist Serbian Radical Party from taking power. The Radical Party was the clear winner of parliamentary elections last December, but gained too few seats to rule alone.
The Serbian Socialist Party of the former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic said Monday that it was willing to back the minority government.
The Serbian Socialist deputies would support the coalition in Parliament but would not take part in the administration, said Zoran Andjelkovic, secretary general of the party. Mr. Milosevic, who is being tried by the tribunal on war crimes charges, is still the official leader of the party.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Andjelkovic said that by the end of the week ''Mr. Kostunica will be given a mandate to form a new government'' after four parties, including the Socialists, held talks yesterday with the Parliament's speaker.
By turning to the Socialists, Mr. Kostunica has allied himself with his former foes. In the 2000 presidential elections, he led an 18-party coalition that defeated Mr. Milosevic. The same coalition then extradited Mr. Milosevic to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague.
While Mr. Kostunica has apparently succeeded in blocking the ultra nationalists, his proposed government is unlikely to please the countries that Serbia is relying on for financial aid.
All four coalition parties have voiced their opposition to the United Nations war crimes tribunal. Cooperation with the court is a prerequisite for American aid worth up to $100 million as well as membership in institutions like NATO and the European Union. Congress is to vote on the aid package next month.
The court's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, said last week that Serbia had become a ''safe haven'' for war criminals. She said that at least 15 people charged with war crimes were at large in the country, including the tribunal's two most wanted men, Dr. Radovan Karadzic, the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serbs, and Ratko Mladic, the commander of the Bosnian Serb Army.
The Socialist Party's opposition to the tribunal is well known. Mr. Kostunica's two main allies in government also recently signed an agreement that would in theory prevent the government from handing key suspects over to the court.
The document, signed on Jan. 21 by his Serbian Democratic Party as well as the Serbian Renewal Party and the pro-reformist party G17 Plus, is intended to prevent the extradition of Serbs charged with crimes linked to ''command responsibility.''
The agreement is thought to refer to the indictments of four senior police and army generals indicted by the tribunal in October and accused of committing war crimes during the conflict in Kosovo in 1999.
The deal also stipulated that the three parties opposed any ''new indictments.''
Cooperation between Serbia's outgoing government and the court had already broken down over the refusal to extradite the four generals. Officials at the tribunal, however, were dismayed that the new coalition appeared to be making this stance one of the founding principles of the new administration.
''It's a bad sign,'' said Florence Hartman, the spokeswoman for Ms. Del Ponte. She said the coalition's platform was ''openly calling for a breach of their international obligations.'' She said, however, that the tribunal would wait for the new government to take office before it made any judgment about cooperation.
Officials from Mr. Kostunica's party sought to defend the new alliance with the Socialists, who are blamed by many Serbs for dragging the country through three wars and plunging it into economic ruin.
