Ever since Jason J. Mattera first came from Brooklyn to Roger Williams University in Bristol, R.I., he has stirred things up on the quiet campus of 3,400 undergraduates.
Mr. Mattera, 20, founded the College Republicans, which soon became one of the largest groups on campus. Under his leadership, the club started a publication called The Hawk's Right Eye, which upset college officials with its critiques of Islam and homosexuality.
But nothing else has attracted as much attention as the club's scholarship for whites.
''Only students who can truthfully answer yes to the following question may be considered for this award: Are you a student of noncolor, Caucasian descent (white)?'' reads the application for the scholarship, whose winner, it said, would receive $50. ''In 100 words or less, write why you are proud of your white heritage and explain what being white means to you.''
The scholarship, Mr. Mattera said, was intended as a parody of scholarships available only to minorities. It was conceived this summer, he said, after he learned the university had compiled a list of such scholarships.
''If you are a white student on campus, you don't have anyone helping you, there is no one compiling a list of scholarships just for you,'' he said. ''Why is it that only students of color have this?''
Most of all, said Mr. Mattera, a junior, the scholarship was intended to encourage debate on campus over affirmative action and race-based scholarships. ''It's definitely ruffled feathers,'' he said. ''It's definitely challenged the status quo on campus, which I think is good.''
On Sunday, The Providence Journal published an article about the scholarship, which has since become the talk of Bristol and beyond. Mr. Mattera spent yesterday fielding calls from reporters and requests to be a guest on talk radio. Even ''Today'' called, he said.
A man from nearby Lincoln drove to Mr. Mattera's dormitory and delivered a check for $200 to supplement the scholarship, and since then Mr. Mattera has received dozens of e-mail messages offering donations of $5 and up.
''Your Caucasian Scholarship idea is genius!'' one supporter wrote.
A California man who offered to donate $1,000, wrote, ''Kudos for your efforts to expose the hypocrisy of affirmative action.''
June Speakman, a political science professor who is the faculty adviser to College Republicans (and College Democrats, she notes), said that she sometimes disagreed with the club's tactics, which she called ''excessively provocative,'' but added that the club served an important role on campus.
''Once the turmoil dies down, it will probably be a more active and inquisitive campus,'' Ms. Speakman said.
On campus, some of Mr. Mattera's critics have pointed out that he received a $5,000 Sallie Mae Fund scholarship for Hispanic students.
''You should practice what you preach,'' said Maria Ahmed, 20, president of the university's Multicultural Student Union.
