Richard Thomas rides the waves of Richard Wagner's music like a strapping heldentenor on a surfboard. Not that Mr. Thomas, a slender man, sings a note in ''Prelude and Liebestod,'' the terrifically enjoyable second part of the unbalanced evening by Terrence McNally that opened last night under the title ''The Stendahl Syndrome.'' But portraying a preening orchestra conductor who finds an autoerotic mirror in music, Mr. Thomas generates a stormy passion that surely qualifies as Wagnerian.
For this production from Primary Stages, the first at the company's new home at the Elysabeth Kleinhans Theater Center on East 59th Street, the man who became famous on television as John-Boy Walton has grown a manicured beard that makes his cherub's face look Mephistophelean. And he throws himself with unconditional, lusty commitment into a role that in more cynical hands might have emerged as a mean-spirited caricature.
Directed by Leonard Foglia and assisted by the ravishing Isabella Rossellini in her New York stage debut, Mr. Thomas churns up the seemingly shallow waters of this portrait of a flashy star of classical music who brings to mind glamour-boy conductors like Thomas Schippers and Leonard Bernstein. His character, identified simply as the Conductor, cannot see past his towering self-admiration, which of course is matched by equally outsize self-disgust.
Still, as the Conductor leads his orchestra and a young soloist through pieces from ''Tristan und Isolde,'' simultaneously conducting an internal monologue to the swirls of Wagner, Mr. Thomas makes it clear that this nasty, strutting egomaniac is rising to heavenly heights. His intensity rivals the production's recorded music. Great art, it seems, does not require purity of soul from those who create it or, for that matter, from those who experience it.
This paradoxical coupling of mortal limitations and immortal music is a favorite subject of Mr. McNally's. It has been entertainingly evident in everything from ''Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune,'' the 1987 play that was recently revived on Broadway, to ''Master Class'' from 1995, his Pulitzer Prize-winning study of the twilight of Maria Callas.
It is also, less successfully, the idea behind ''Full Frontal Nudity,'' the play that opens ''The Stendahl Syndrome.'' (The title refers to the novelist Stendahl's description of being physically overwhelmed by a work of art.) In ''Nudity'' a group of Americans and their tour guide (Ms. Rossellini) contemplate Michaelangelo's David. Like Mr. McNally's ''Lisbon Traviata'' and ''Frankie and Johnny,'' ''Nudity'' explores the chasm between the smallness of ordinary lives and the vastness of timeless artworks, as well as the fleeting moments in which that gulf is bridged.
But whereas in these earlier, more substantial works, Mr. McNally's characters seemed truly to experience the impact of art, with varying degrees of self awareness, they simply tend to describe the same phenomenon in ''Nudity.'' Both the so-called philistines in the tour group -- a lonely young divorcée (Jennifer Mudge) and a would-be Don Juan from New Jersey (Yul Vázquez) -- and its resident intellectual (Michael Countryman, as a newly widowed English teacher) are implausibly eloquent in doing so.
Mr. Foglia, who directed ''Master Class,'' has lent little crispness or clarity to a play in which the speakers move confusingly between conversation and spoken thoughts. And despite an elegantly minimal set by Michael McGarty, fleshed out by multiangled photographic projections (Elaine J. McCarthy) of the statue, the epiphanies that are supposed to occur never register. The performers are all fine here, but they can't rise above a script that still feels like a series of ideas that have been sketched but not shaded.
''Prelude and Liebestod,'' which was seen in an earlier version in a Manhattan Class Company production in 1989, finds everyone involved in much better form. Despite the tonal variety of Wagner's music (the first-rate sound design is by David Van Tieghem), the play is essentially one-note, or would be without Mr. Thomas.
A nod of sorts to Preston Sturges's 1948 movie ''Unfaithfully Yours,'' in which Rex Harrison played a jealous conductor given to murderous fantasies on the podium, ''Prelude'' follows the mind of Mr. Thomas's character as he reflects on his appetites for fame and bisexual conquest. The play also enters the heads of his adulterous wife (Ms. Rossellini) and a handsome would-be groupie (Mr. Vázquez) in the audience, and of the jaded Concertmaster (a dryly funny Mr. Countryman) and the soloist (Ms. Mudge) onstage.
Even as the music rises into Olympus, the thoughts of both listeners and musicians often sink into the mundane, the trivial and the vulgar. Ms. Rossellini, who as a former spokesmodel for Lancôme cosmetics has spent plenty of time with the partygoing rich, perfectly nails the restlessness, arrogance and insecurity of a certain breed of bored society women.
But it's Mr. Thomas, who surrenders himself without irony to the Conductor's grandness and pettiness, who makes ''Prelude'' so much fun. The theme of artistic heroes with feet of muck is of course a favorite of potboiling novels by the likes of Jacqueline Susann, and Mr. McNally shares some of the heavy-breathing prurience of that genre.
But let's face it, almost anyone who has spent any time with a performing megastar knows that there's truth in the works of Susann. Big talents often have big libidos and small minds, and part of the miracle of artistic masterpieces is how they transcend their merely human creators. As the superb Zoe Caldwell did when she played Callas in ''Master Class,'' Mr. Thomas makes you believe in, and relish, both sides of the equation.
THE STENDHAL SYNDROME  Two one-act plays by Terrence McNally; directed by Leonard Foglia; associate director, Tyler Marchant; sets by Michael McGarty; costumes by David C. Woolard; lighting by Russell H. Champa; original music and sound by David Van Tieghem; projections by Elaine J. McCarthy; prop design, Laurie Marvald; production stage manager, Renee Lutz; assistant stage manager, Tammy Scozzafava; production manager, Lester P. Grant. Presented by Primary Stages, Casey Childs, executive producer; Andrew Leynse, artistic director, in association with Ted Snowdon. At 59E59 Theaters, 59 East 59th Street, Manhattan.
FULL FRONTAL NUDITY
WITH: Isabella Rossellini (Bimbi), Jennifer Mudge (Lana), Michael Countryman (Hector) and Yul Vázquez (Leo).
PRELUDE AND LIEBESTOD
WITH: Richard Thomas (Conductor), Ms. Rossellini (Conductor's Wife), Mr. Vázquez (Young Man), Mr. Countryman (Concertmaster) and Ms. Mudge (Soprano).
THEATER REVIEW  Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  A theater review on Tuesday about a pair of one-act plays by Terrence McNally misspelled the 19th-century novelist's name that forms part of the overall title. As shown correctly in the subheading and picture captions, it is ''The Stendhal Syndrome,'' not Stendahl. The article also misidentified a major award won by Mr. McNally's 1995 play ''Master Class.'' It was the Tony Award, not the Pulitzer Prize.
