When the Knicks returned to practice on Monday, there might as well have been jackhammers and scaffolding in the gym, along with a sign that read: ''Caution: Work in Progress.''
On Sunday, Keith Van Horn became the eighth player traded by Isiah Thomas in seven weeks, while Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed became the fifth and sixth new players he has added to the Knicks' roster. They were due to arrive on Monday night for their physicals.
The Knicks are still a team in transition and Isiah Thomas has made no secret that he wants to keep moving players from the Scott Layden era before the trading deadline at 3 p.m. Thursday. And do not, Thomas cautioned, think this team is a championship contender.
''We're still going in the right direction,'' Thomas said. ''That doesn't mean it's fixed. Don't mistake going in the right direction for being completely done.''
James L. Dolan, the chairman of Madison Square Garden, said before the All-Star Game break that the Knicks could win a championship this season. But Thomas denied that assertion Monday.
''No, no, no,'' Thomas said with a laugh. ''I know everybody is excited about us getting started. It's going to take us a while before you can really start talking about winning the championship this year. If these guys do, then God bless them.
''But you want to get in the playoffs, and then you want to take your chances,'' he said. ''Right now, we're in a position where we have a shot at making the playoffs.''
The Knicks (25-29) are in seventh place in the Eastern Conference heading into Tuesday night's home game against Detroit. The top eight teams make the playoffs.
''Whenever you're starting from the bottom, there's going to be a transition period,'' Thomas said. ''Until we reach our goal of being the best, that's when you stop.''
The players know uncertainty hangs over the team. Thomas is looking into deals for Shandon Anderson and Othella Harrington, an Eastern Conference official said. Thomas said he was still interested in the former Celtic Vin Baker and the Hawks' Rasheed Wallace, but the chance of the Knicks' acquiring Wallace seems more likely during the summer.
Making the situation more muddled is Allan Houston, who will remain on the injured list indefinitely because his sore knees have not recovered.
After watching change hit the Knicks in tidal waves this season, Houston still felt confident that his team would be able to jell in time for the playoffs.
''The ideal would be to do it before camp, but that's not happening, that's not realistic,'' he said. ''I think it's possible to build a championship level-type team.''
Thomas took forward Kurt Thomas and center Dikembe Mutombo aside after practice on Monday to tell them to ignore rumors and just play.
But the addition of Mohammed could make Thomas more inclined to trade Mutombo. Mohammed, a backup throughout his six-year career, is a more agile center than the 37-year-old Mutombo.
''I think he has a bright future,'' Isiah Thomas said of Mutombo before being asked whether that future was in New York. ''I would say so,'' Thomas responded.
But he made it clear to the news media and to his players that Mohammed was the key to the deal.
''I don't think it's a sideways trade,'' Houston said. ''I think Keith and Tim were very similar players. Naz I think can help us. He's a very good player, with size.''
Stephon Marbury called Thomas and Mohammed ''a good fit for our team'' and did not think incorporating them into the team would be a problem. He said the team would adjust once again.
''As far as chemistry, the chemistry has been great because everybody has been willing,'' he said.
Marbury shrugged off as business the trading of Van Horn and Michael Doleac -- with whom Marbury clicked on the pick-and-roll. Marbury dismissed speculation that Thomas made the trade because of his rocky relationship with Van Horn when they played on losing Nets teams.
''We just didn't play well in New Jersey together,'' Marbury said. ''We didn't have great chemistry. When I came here, he was a better player, and I was a better player.''
But Isiah Thomas made an intriguing comment in his address to the news media Monday when he admitted that he discussed bringing in Thomas and Mohammed with his current players.
''I try without asking if you approve or not; you want to know if this player has a history with another player,'' Thomas said. ''Lot of things happen off the playing field that we're not aware of. I poked around a little about Tim and Nazr, not to ask them if they endorse the trade. You just never know sometimes in our business, and I leave it at that.''
Tim Thomas, a small forward, never seemed to reach his potential in Milwaukee, but Houston said he would be a strong component on the Knicks.
''I'd rather have a guy help you win a championship than a guy who averages 20 points a game,'' Houston said.
On a poor Atlanta team, Mohammed averaged 17.7 minutes behind Theo Ratliff and scored in double figures just 10 times in 53 games.
When Thomas was the Pacers' coach, he was interested in Mohammed as a free agent in the summer of 2001, as was Layden, the Knicks' former president and general manager.
Coach Lenny Wilkens did not say Mohammed would start over Mutombo, who was traded from Atlanta to Philadelphia in 2001 in a deal that sent Mohammed to the Bucks.
''When we get him here and work with him, we'll have a better read,'' Wilkens said. ''I think he can play four and five, so we'll see.''
''I've seen Tim quite a bit and certainly he's a guy who can make shots, he runs the floor, I think he can be a better defensive player than he's shown. But I'm excited. Tim should add some consistency to our ball club.
''Our core nucleus has been playing pretty good, and we want to build around that,'' Wilkens said. ''Who is the core? I would say at this point in time Stephon, Allan Houston, Kurt Thomas, Othella and Dikembe.''
Under Thomas, that could still change.
PRO BASKETBALL
