Journalists who faced personal danger to cover wars in Iraq and Africa, and others who exposed perilous working conditions, predatory lending practices and the sexual exploitation of homeless children, were among the winners of 14 George Polk Awards for 2003 announced yesterday by Long Island University.
Two awards each went to journalists from The New York Times and The Los Angeles Times, while representatives of four other newspapers, four broadcasters, two magazines and an Internet publisher were cited for distinguished journalism in the tradition of George W. Polk, a correspondent for CBS who was killed in 1948 covering the civil war in Greece.
Somini Sengupta of The New York Times won the Polk Award for foreign reporting for her articles from Congo, Liberia and other war-torn areas of West Africa. While giving readers ''a political and human dimension to the horrific conflicts,'' the awards committee said in its announcement, Ms. Sengupta ''often exposed herself to great personal risk in pursuit of her stories.''
Anne Garrels of National Public Radio won an award for radio reporting of the war in Iraq. Working in Baghdad, the only United States network broadcaster there early in the fighting, she endured bombings, blackouts, short supplies of water and intimidation by the Iraqi secret police to report from the besieged capital, the judges said.
Carolyn Cole of The Los Angeles Times won the Polk Award in photojournalism for what the judges called her ''brutally honest'' and ''epic and intimate'' portraits of the wars in Iraq and Liberia.
The Polk Awards, established in 1949 and administered by Long Island University, are based on recommendations by a national committee of news executives, journalism teachers and working journalists; final selections are made by a panel of faculty members and alumni of the university. The awards will be presented at a luncheon at the Roosevelt Hotel on April 2.
The economics reporting award went to Nancy Cleeland, Abigail Goldman, Evelyn Iritani and Tyler Marshall of The Los Angeles Times, whose series, ''The Wal-Mart Effect,'' explored the role of the world's largest corporation in shaping the cultures and economies of countries.
Pete Engardio, Aaron Bernstein and Manjeet Kripalani of Business Week won the Polk Award for business reporting for ''Is Your Job Next?,'' which showed how American corporations relocate white-collar jobs to developing countries where skilled workers are paid less.
David Barstow, Lowell Bergman and David Rummel of The New York Times and Neil Docherty and Linden MacIntyre of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation won for labor reporting with ''A Dangerous Business,'' an investigative print-television co-production by The Times, the CBC and the PBS Television program ''Frontline.'' It exposed safety violations at the foundries of McWane Inc., the nation's largest maker of cast-iron pipe, that contributed to the work-related injuries of 4,500 employees and the deaths of nine workers.
The Polk for national reporting went to Cam Simpson, Flynn McRoberts and Liz Sly of The Chicago Tribune. Their series, ''Tossed Out of America,'' exposed ethnic profiling by the government and the mass deportation of Muslims who posed no risk to national security.
Charles Lewis, executive director of the Center for Public Integrity, a nonpartisan research group in Washington, won the first Polk award for Internet reporting for ''Windfalls of War: U.S. Contractors in Iraq and Afghanistan,'' whose online reports led to wide print and broadcast coverage and stepped up Congressional oversight of military spending.
Southern Exposure, a quarterly published by the Institute for Southern Studies, won the magazine reporting award for ''Banking on Misery: Citigroup, Wall Street and the Fleecing of the South,'' which detailed predatory corporate lending practices that victimized poor black and elderly Southerners.
Dave Altimari, Jon Lender and Edmund H. Mahony of The Hartford Courant won the award for state reporting for articles on Gov. John G. Rowland's questionable dealings with state contractors in Connecticut and his use of state workers in renovating his lakeside cottage.
The award for education reporting went to Daniel Golden of The Wall Street Journal for articles documenting favoritism toward white children of alumni and prospective donors in the admissions practices of selective colleges and universities.
Duff Wilson, Brian Joseph and Sheila Farr of The Seattle Times won the local reporting award for ''The Art of Deception,'' an investigation that exposed forged Asian art and prompted federal and state inquiries that led to the closing of a gallery.
Andrew Smith and Liviu Tipurita won for television reporting for a ''CNN Presents'' program, ''Easy Prey: Inside the Child Sex Trade,'' which documented the sexual exploitation of homeless children on an international scale.
F. Gilman Spencer, former editor of The New York Daily News, The Philadelphia Daily News and The Trentonian, won the George Polk career achievement award. He was cited for inspiring and guiding many distinguished editors, reporters and columnists.
