Two months ago, while admitting that he had accepted free improvements to his lakeside cottage, Gov. John G. Rowland explained that he and his wife had always intended to repay many of the people and the companies that had helped them years earlier. In December he released documents showing that he and his wife had written about $13,000 in checks last fall to contractors who had never been paid or had been paid by someone else.
Legal experts say the question of whether some of the work was offered as a gift or constituted income that was required to be reported on tax returns could raise another avenue of inquiry in the federal investigation of the governor. Both Mr. Rowland and his wife, Patricia, have received subpoenas for financial records, including tax returns, dating back eight years.
Michael Wolf, director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Connecticut, would not say whether agents were examining Mr. Rowland's tax payments. But he did note that tax charges were pursued in recent corruption cases involving mayors in Bridgeport and Waterbury.
''On this one, if it is appropriate to work with the I.R.S., we would,'' Mr. Wolf said in an interview at his New Haven office on Thursday.
Mr. Rowland's lawyer, William F. Dow III, did not return two phone calls to his office. Mrs. Rowland's lawyer, Robert M. Casale, said he did not know whether the Rowlands filed jointly or separately. ''I have no idea about their taxes,'' he said Monday.
Several tax experts said someone in the Rowlands' position would probably argue that any favors accepted from friends and business acquaintances were nothing but gifts. If so, the recipient would have no tax obligation, said Mortimer Caplin, who was commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service during the Kennedy and Johnson administrations and is a tax lawyer in Washington.
''Unless these things were given out of love and affection or for some charitable purpose, they would be considered income,'' Mr. Caplin said.
If the Rowlands' legal team cannot establish that the favors were gifts, it might argue they were loans, since those, too, would not have obliged the governor or his wife to declare them as income at the year's end, tax experts said. In one case, Mrs. Rowland wrote a $5,680 personal check for a new heating system after being told the bill had been paid in full years before. She included a handwritten note apologizing for what she called a mix-up.
Joseph A. Galasso, special agent in charge of the Internal Revenue Service criminal investigations for New England, would not comment directly on the Rowland investigation. But he said agents would be skeptical if someone repaid a loan only after an investigation had begun.
''If you pay it back after a criminal investigation is under way, it's not going to hold up to the sniff test,'' Mr. Galasso said.
Tax experts said the worst case, from the Rowlands' point of view, would be the government's concluding that the home improvements and other services had been given to the governor in exchange for something in return. In that case, on top of possible exposure for violating federal bribery and gratuities statutes, Governor Rowland could be accused of failing to report the bribes or gratuities on his taxes. All income is taxable, including illegally earned income, according to the I.R.S.
One factor the government would consider in trying to determine whether there were strings attached to any of the items accepted by the governor would be the contributors' intent, tax experts explained.
For instance, tax experts said, the government might be persuaded that the hot tub that the governor has admitted receiving in 2001 from his secretary, Christine Corey, and her husband, Paul Corey, whom the governor had appointed earlier as chairman of the Connecticut Lottery Commission, was a gift among friends.
Prosecutors might have a harder time, tax experts said, seeing the many improvements performed on the house at the direction of the Tomasso family or O&amp;G Industries, both large players in the construction industry, as pure and simple gifts. People associated with the Tomasso family of New Britain and with O&amp;G have been significant donors to Mr. Rowland's campaigns, and their companies have won millions of dollars of state contracts during his tenure.
The generosity demonstrated by Mr. Rowland's former aides is a more ticklish legal question, tax experts said.
Gifts for tax purposes are defined as ''proceeds from a detached and disinterested generosity, out of affection, respect, admiration, charity or like impulses,'' according to a 1960 United States Supreme Court case, Commissioner v. Duberstein.
But if the gifts were exchanged in a business setting -- say, from an employee to an employer -- prosecutors would have to determine whether a friendship existed as well. ''Did they go to ballgames together or was the person giving the gift doing so to stay in good graces?'' said Bernard Wolfman, a Harvard law professor who co-wrote a popular tax book, ''Standards of Tax Practice.''
Mr. Rowland has said that the new heating system in his cottage was initially paid for by two former aides and their wives. One aide was Peter Ellef, a former chief of staff who is being investigated by federal agents in connection with an inquiry into the awarding of state contracts. The other was Lawrence E. Alibozek, a former deputy chief of staff, who pleaded guilty last March to accepting cash and gold coins in exchange for steering state contracts.
While Mr. Rowland might be able to take the position that he was friendly with Mr. Ellef, he has less leeway making the same claim about Mr. Alibozek. He has told reporters that he rarely socialized with Mr. Alibozek. ''I didn't know him before he took the job, and I don't consider him a friend,'' he said in December.
Even if the government takes the view that taxes are owed, tax experts said, the back taxes will become a criminal problem only if prosecutors can argue that the governor or his wife acted in bad faith or engaged in subterfuge. For a conviction, the government would have to prove Mr. Rowland ''knowingly and willfully'' did not report goods he had received as income on his tax return the year he received them, Mr. Wolfman said.
