Seeking to cement his position as the front-runner in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, Senator John Kerry crisscrossed Wisconsin on Monday, promising voters he would stanch the flow of jobs overseas.
On the eve of the Wisconsin primary, Mr. Kerry was trying to deflect criticism of his 1993 vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement.
At a town-hall-style meeting in Wausau, a woman told Mr. Kerry that she had lost her job last year. Saying that his views on the trade agreement, Nafta, ''are still throwing some red flags in my mind,'' she asked, ''Am I going to have a job?''
Mr. Kerry replied that the problem was not Nafta per se, but rather the Bush administration's failure to press compliance with nonbinding treaties that would raise labor and environmental standards overseas, making American companies more competitive. He pledged a 120-day review of every trade agreement, Nafta included, if elected.
''We're going to identify every single imbalance or place in which there is an unfairness that has not been addressed, and we're going to address it,'' Mr. Kerry said, adding, ''I'm not going to throw out Nafta completely. I'm going to fix it.''
The twin issues of jobs and the trade agreement are very much on the minds of people in Wisconsin, where Mr. Kerry has taken pains to remind voters that 75,000 jobs have been lost since President Bush has taken office. One of Mr. Kerry's rivals, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, has been critical of Nafta, and is making it an issue.
Mr. Kerry followed the town-hall-style meeting with a two-hour drive across the snow-covered landscape of Wisconsin to Green Bay, where he attended a rally with Senator Edward M. Kennedy, his fellow Massachusetts Democrat. He then went on to Milwaukee for a second rally and a second enthusiastic crowd.
Mr. Kerry is hoping a victory on Tuesday will push his two main Democratic rivals, Howard Dean and Mr. Edwards, out of the race. But he dismissed reports that he and Dr. Dean would meet to discuss how Dr. Dean, who is expected to withdraw from the race soon, might work with the Kerry campaign.
''I may,'' he said, when asked if he had talked to Dr. Dean after Sunday night's debate here. ''I mean, I talked to him last night on stage last night a little bit. We had a nice chat.''
Mr. Kerry began his day in Wausau, touring a machine shop at a vocational school and fielding questions in a workshop where students learn construction skills. Wearing an open-necked shirt and drinking from a bottle of water to ease a persistent cough, he tried to play down his image as a front-runner, insisting he was courting every vote.
''I want you to grill me,'' he said. ''If there's anybody undecided here, I don't want you leaving here undecided. So ask me what you need to check my heart, my gut.''
Later, at a rally at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, Mr. Kerry, with Mr. Kennedy at his side, declared that Tuesday would be a ''critical moment of decision'' in the country. ''I am here,'' he said, ''to mark with you the beginning of the end of the Bush presidency.''
It was a standard line from his stump speech. The crowd roared.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
