That So Often Occurs When Rushing
Would that we could reprint the word that KIMBERLY STEWART had on the front of her pink leather skirt while attending JENNIFER NICHOLSON's fashion show the other day, but taste demands otherwise. Suffice it to say that the word was extremely crude. Ms. Stewart, who is blond and pretty and 24, wore the skirt very low on her hips, exposing most of the tattoo that read Daddy's Little Girl. Daddy is ROD STEWART and the word Stewart was written on the back of Ms. Stewart's skirt in silver studs. We leave it to the psychoanalysts among you to decipher what issues Ms. Stewart, a child of divorce whose mom is ALANA HAMILTON, may be grappling with. We have but two questions: When Ms. Stewart sits, can it be a very comfortable outfit? And when she sheds the skirt, does it, y'know, leave a mark?
Make that three questions: Is the reader also aware that in January Ms. Stewart was seen wearing a jacket saying Mrs. Affleck?
Clearly, this is a young woman with such identity problems that we shall have to take a moment to write a rare Boldface open letter. ''Kimberly, sweetie. Stop this desperate borrowing of the accomplishments of others. Cultivate your own identity as the blond girl in the trashy, low-cut leather skirt imprinted with an ugly word. No one will take you seriously if you are merely known as a daughter of, nor will you be able to receive any substantive press coverage.''
Where were we? Oh, right, the collection of Jennifer Nicholson, daughter of JACK NICHOLSON. Dad wasn't there, but there was a gaggle of rich kids: AMANDA HEARST, ELISABETH KIESELSTEIN-CORD, IVANKA TRUMP and JAMIE JOHNSON.
Rich grown-ups included GRACE HIGHTOWER, MUFFIE POTTER ASTON and SOMERS FARKAS. Ms. Farkas, tall and thin, in pythonesque pants and a white turtleneck sweater, was wearing a large silver jeweled cross. If it was meant to ward us off, as the old joke about the Jewish vampire goes, gornisht helfen (it won't help). If you don't understand the joke, we'll explain it some other time, when we don't have PRESIDENT BUSH's daughter in the column.
Most stunning moment in the show: when SENA , a lanky blond model, tore down the runway with the bodice of her floral dress so agape that her breasts were entirely exposed. At the post-show dinner at Sette, Sena told us that she had rushed to cede the runway to the star model, CARMEN KASS. ''It was an issue of self-sacrifice for a supermodel I really admire,'' she said.
And you thought they were superficial.
Ms. Nicholson has a wide face and a Raggedy Ann smile and does not resemble the painfully thin or chic women one sees at fashion events. She wore a lacy purple layered dress and gold ankleboots.
Her boyfriend is said to be WARREN HODE, 24, who was the only male to walk the runway, though he told us they were ''just friends.'' (Don't do that, pal! It makes us feel like LOUELLA PARSONS.)
Being finely attuned to judging Ms. Nicholson solely on her own merits, we asked first about her father's influence and that of the film world.
''A lot of the time I spent with my father was on sets and traveling to wherever he was making a film and hanging out on the set,'' Ms. Nicholson said. ''I think a really impactful film that I was on, as a child, a very young child, was 'Chinatown' with FAYE DUNAWAY. I remember being so amazed as a child how beautiful she looked, the whole feeling that the clothing gave you and could give you.'' She also remembers she was not allowed to go on the set that day. ''My dad said it was a kissing scene and I wasn't allowed to watch.''
Mr. Nicholson's most recent film, ''Something's Gotta Give,'' involved a lot of mature nudity, with DIANE KEATON. We particularly recall a scene in which the stars roll around under the sheets, their bodies suggesting steamed dumplings.
''He's always done things that embarrassed me, so it's not odd,'' Ms. Nicholson said. ''But it's still embarrassing because it's my dad's'' -- oops, let's say derrière.
At the after-party at Viscaya, BARBARA BUSH, whose daddy is the president of the United States, was seen sipping Veuve Cliquot with FABIAN BASABE. Later, the Daily News photographer RICHARD CORKERY captured Ms. Bush, in a skimpy top, doing some daring dips. GORDON JOHNDROE, press secretary to LAURA BUSH, declined to comment on whether the First Mom had something to say about that photo op.
with Lily Koppel
Boldface Names
