Ten days after President Pervez Musharraf pardoned Pakistan's top nuclear scientist for sharing nuclear technology with Iran, North Korea and Libya, the upper house of Parliament debated the issue for the first time on Monday night.
General Musharraf's government has rebuffed requests from opposition political parties to call a joint session of Parliament to discuss the issue. The rejection led to an intense four-and-a-half-hour debate in the usually staid Pakistani Senate.
Opposition parties accused the military-dominated government of hiding the army's role in the proliferation scheme; humiliating the scientist, Abdul Qadeer Khan; appeasing the United States; and bypassing the elected legislators.
''We are moving toward a massive whitewash,'' said Raza Rabbani of the Pakistan People's Party, ''so that responsibility can be placed on one person or a group while others get away scot-free.''
But members of a pro-Musharraf party said the nuclear scandal was a ''sensitive issue'' that should not be politicized. They said General Musharraf had made wise decisions, and they accused the opposition of sensationalizing the issue and ignoring global realities.
''We have to decide,'' said Sheik Rashid Ahmed, the government's information minister. ''Do we want to walk with the world or do we want to fight with the world?''
The debate came on a day when rumors that Dr. Khan had suffered a heart attack briefly drove down prices on the Karachi Stock Exchange. Many Pakistanis appear to continue to consider Dr. Khan a national hero and to say that the charges against him were fabricated.
Government officials said the reports were baseless. But relatives of six of Dr. Khan's aides who have been detained by the government said in a news conference on Monday that the scientist was in poor health.
''One thing is very clear -- that he is very ill,'' said Ehsam ul-Haq, the brother of Dr. Khan's longtime principal staff officer. ''We have no information about what kinds of medicines are being administered to Dr. Khan.''
The 67-year-old scientist has been under virtual house arrest for two weeks. Security agents, including soldiers, surround his house in Islamabad. On Friday a man guarding the house said the government had barred Dr. Khan from meeting with visitors for 10 days.
Members of a coalition of hard-line religious parties have repeatedly said Dr. Khan must be allowed to address a news conference. The day before General Musharraf pardoned Dr. Khan, the scientist read a statement on national television in which he said he was responsible for all of the proliferation of nuclear technology that had occurred.
Maulana Sami ul-Haq, a leader of the religious coalition, said the government had used Dr. Khan to cover up the army's role in the sale of nuclear technology abroad. ''Dr. A. Q. Khan was made a scapegoat to save the generals of that time,'' he said.
But a pro-Musharraf senator who served as the chief of the country's powerful military intelligence agency in the mid-1990's said military intelligence had played no role in providing security at the Khan Research Laboratories, the top-secret nuclear institute named for Dr. Khan.
The senator, Javed Ashraf Qazi, said the director general of the agency, Inter-Services Intelligence, needed Dr. Khan's permission to visit the laboratories.
The opposition parties said excluding Parliament from the investigation showed that Pakistan effectively had one-person rule.
''If Parliament cannot discuss the security of Pakistan, then it should be wrapped up,'' Senator Rabbani said. ''What is this Parliament in existence for?''
