In a documentary with ''The Damned,'' available today for the first time on DVD, Charlotte Rampling describes what must have been both a blessing and a burden for a young actor working with the director Luchino Visconti. ''He sees his whole creation in you,'' she says.
Ms. Rampling, who has been in nearly 60 films since ''The Damned'' was released in 1969, was in her early 20's when she played Elisabeth Thallman, the doomed wife of an equally ill-fated relative of the von Essenbeck family, the industrialists and weapons makers who were modeled after the Krupp dynasty, which helped turn out Hitler's war machine.
Visconti's von Essenbecks include a Marlene Dietrich impersonator and mama's boy (Helmut Berger) who is among the last left standing in the family's internal battle to align themselves with the Nazis in the early 30's. Roughly valid in a social and political sense, the film is more ''mind-blinding as a spectacle of fabulous corruption,'' Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times.
''The Damned'' (150 minutes) preceded Visconti's ''Death in Venice'' (1971, 130 minutes), also released today for the first time on DVD. In the first film, Dirk Bogarde plays a murderous corporate Macbeth; in the second, adapted from Thomas Mann's novella, he's the fussy German aesthete enthralled by the pretty boy (Bjorn Andresen) he encounters on the Lido.
Documentaries with both films make much of Visconti's noble lineage (going back to Charlemagne's son-in-law, according to one documentary) and place him among the royalty of Italian filmmaking along with Federico Fellini and Michelangelo Antonioni.
Fellini doesn't figure in today's releases, but Antonioni's ''Blow-Up'' (111 minutes) is also available for the first time on DVD. David Hemmings is Antonioni's frenetic British photographer in a picture, Bosley Crowther wrote in The Times, with ''something real to say about the matter of personal involvement and emotional commitment in a jazzed-up, media-hooked-in world so cluttered with synthetic stimulations that natural feelings are overwhelmed.'' And that was in 1966.
Released by Warner, the films are $19.98 each.
'Runaway Jury'
''We love fat women, people,'' says Rankin Fitch (Gene Hackman), a high-priced juror handicapper in the employ of a gun manufacturer.
Fitch's job is to pack a jury with those likely to vote against a lawsuit brought by a woman whose husband and 10 others were shot down by an office malcontent.
There's conflict with the plaintiff's lawyer (Dustin Hoffman) and a sleeper on the jury (John Cusack) who says he will throw the verdict either way for $10 million.
Gary Fleder's film is adapted from John Grisham's novel. ''The schematic crassness of the narrative provides a group of actors with the opportunity to deliver some fine work,'' Elvis Mitchell wrote in The Times.
Mr. Hackman and Mr. Hoffman have known each other since the 50's, and in the best of a good set of featurettes about the making of the movie, they talk about working together. Even old pros get nervous with a five-page scene hanging over their heads. 2003. Fox. $27.98. 123 minutes. PG-13.
'Pickup on South Street'
In an essay with a special edition of his film released today by Criterion, the director Sam Fuller wrote that Betty Grable wanted a lead role provided she was given a dance number. With no place for hoofing in a noirish tale set along the Manhattan waterfront, Fuller gave the part to Jean Peters.
A hard-boiled pickpocket named Skip McCoy (Richard Widmark) lifts a wallet from a purse and with it a piece of microfilm coveted by the Russians. Immaculate in suit and tie, Skip smacks Candy (Peters), an unwitting courier for the Communists, and maintains a jaunty lifestyle in a shack on the harbor complete with hammock.
Fuller, who died in 1997, is loquacious about the movie on the DVD. If you want to trust someone, make it a petty criminal, he says; they're never late and they never scare. In another interview Mr. Widmark calls Fuller the Grandma Moses of filmmakers, primitive, direct and journalistic.
Fuller explains what he was after. ''A director should see that the finished film is what excited him in the first place,'' he says. 1953. $29.95. 80 minutes.
'Stone Reader'
In 1972 the filmmaker Mark Moskowitz, then 18, read a rave review of a first novel called ''The Stones of Summer'' by Dow Mossman but found the book difficult to read. Years later he re-encountered the novel, loved it and tried to find subsequent Mossman works. There were none, which seemed odd for a writer hailed for such a brilliant and substantial first effort.
Mr. Moskowitz determined to find out why Mr. Mossman's output presumably ended with one book and make a movie about it, ''Stone Reader,'' released today on DVD by New Yorker. Many literary people are interviewed during a story about a book few remembered and an author who had apparently disappeared. The critic Leslie Fiedler says it was fairly common for a writer of note to produce a first work and then retire, at least for a time. Ralph Ellison was one; Margaret Mitchell wrote one novel; J. D. Salinger could be called a one-book writer.
Mr. Moskowitz picks up the trail by seeking out anyone who had any connection to the book or Mr. Mossman, including his mentors and fellow students at the Iowa Writers' Workshop. ''Stone Reader'' eventually winds up on the author's front porch in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Mr. Mossman, a friendly, open man of 56, welcomes Mr. Moskowitz. He has no definitive explanation for writing only one book. Life was busy and messy; there were psychiatric problems; things just worked out that way. He has done some writing, but nothing as large and important as ''The Stones of Summer'' has begun to take shape.
More than a dozen extra features explore the situation and the general literary climate. ''The Stones of Summer'' is now back in publication. One editor says it was the book Mr. Mossman was born to write. 2003. $39.95. 128 minutes. No rating.
NEW DVD'S
