For someone who never went to overnight camp as a youngster, 22 years of traveling to Asia has been an adventure. There is still an excitement when I get ready for a trip.
It is especially noticeable since 9/11, when I start packing, get all the files together, load everything up into the car and head to the airport. But before you've even gotten on the first plane, you feel dehumanized -- you are profiled, poked and prodded.
Being a diabetic has been the most challenging thing, trying to maintain a sugar balance when you are crossing time zones and your entire body clock has completely shifted. So having religious and dietary restrictions, I pretty much bring my own food, enough to last for a couple of weeks. (I just clean out the hotel minibar and put my own stuff in.) I look like I'm emigrating, because I have a lot of luggage and our Department of Homeland Security considers my blocks of cheese as suspicious.
I always carry a few cans of Diet Coke, which I pack in my luggage. My bags always get opened. But the last time I put all the soda in a separate bag, and all the food in another. They never even put the soda through the CTX scanner, but my bag with the food did go through.
What is really striking is how some people in the travel industry go out of their way for you. In boarding a Singapore Airlines flight from Hong Kong to San Francisco, I was told a late-booking first-class passenger had been given the Hermolis kosher meal I had ordered and the airport caterer had provided a substitute meal with an inferior brand.
Before I even had a chance to express disappointment, the purser delayed the flight, called the caterer and asked him to bring my preferred brand to the plane. The pilot announced that we were ''waiting for some catering supplies.'' We were delayed for 45 minutes.
Once a colleague and I had this bright idea of flying overnight from Singapore to Osaka Itami to catch a domestic flight to Haneda Airport, to save money and avoid the long bus ride into Tokyo. We had a three-hour layover, and to escape the hard plastic benches for coach passengers, asked a Japanese woman who worked for Singapore Airlines if its lounge was open. It wasn't, but she opened it for us since we flew with them from Singapore, and just kind of left us to ourselves. She simply asked that we turn off the lights and lock the door when we left -- showing us trust and respect. I don't drink and we had no desire to take advantage of them, but we were left with enough liquor to open a tavern.
The thing that has always fascinated me about Asian cultures is their deep respect for the elderly, and their younger people understanding they need to pay their dues. It's a culture that is more family based, not like American culture, which is a little bit off the rails. People do what they want and then justify it later. Asian cultures are a little bit more bound by rules.
I find it so refreshing that my Muslim colleagues in Indonesia will take time out from meetings for prayer call. Our office has a room where they can say their prayers. And generally I will have some prayers that I need to say at some point during the day, and will go off to the side and do it also in the office.
These are the kind of people that I feel a kinship to -- they respect my feelings and I respect theirs. These people have this as part of their life on a day to day basis and for some reason I am kind of tickled by it.
Frequent Flier
