When the Martha Stewart trial resumes today, there will be a lot of talk about a person colorful and compelling enough to be known by one name.
No, not Martha. Sam.
As in, ''Can I tell her about Sam?'' the question a stockbroker's assistant testified that he asked his boss before giving Ms. Stewart what the government calls a secret stock tip.
As in Samuel D. Waksal, founder of ImClone Systems, patron of the arts, friend of Martha Stewart and currently an inmate at a federal prison in Pennsylvania.
Dr. Waksal is serving seven years after pleading guilty to crimes including securities fraud for trying to dump stock in his own company in late 2001. He knew the company was about to announce bad news: the government had refused to review the application for ImClone's drug, Erbitux (which the Food and Drug Administration approved on Thursday).
Though he is not present in the federal courthouse in lower Manhattan, Dr. Waksal haunts the Stewart trial, and his name has been invoked by the prosecution or the defense every day.
His finances have been examined, his social life discussed and his sanity questioned because his crimes seem so blatant that he was almost certain to get caught. ''Nobody in his right mind would have done this,'' Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, told the jury early on.
The trial ended early on Friday because of a dispute among the lawyers about phone and fax records relating to Dr. Waksal, his family, Ms. Stewart, Peter Bacanovic (Ms. Stewart's co-defendant and her former stockbroker) and his former assistant and main prosecution witness, Douglas Faneuil. For both sides in the Stewart case, Dr. Waksal plays a crucial role. Because if there is one thing they might agree on, it is this: If Dr. Waksal had not tried to sell his shares on Dec. 27, 2001, Martha Stewart would not be on trial.
The government argues that a tip about Dr. Waksal's attempted sales prompted Ms. Stewart to sell, too. Prosecutors have not charged her with insider trading, but rather with obstruction of justice and securities fraud, contending that she lied about her actions.
As far as the defense is concerned, Ms. Stewart sold her shares because the price dropped, whether or not she actually heard Dr. Waksal was selling. But if he had not decided ''to go crazy,'' as Mr. Morvillo put it, no one would have cared about Ms. Stewart's sales.
Transcripts of pretrial interviews with the jurors in the Stewart case suggest that they knew little about Dr. Waksal (one member of the jury pool thought that he was Ms. Stewart's stockbroker).
They have since learned a great deal about him. Some of it is interesting if inconsequential. For instance, to distribute invitations to his holiday party, Dr. Waksal used a public relations firm -- the one run by Lizzie Grubman, no less (this was well before her own run-in with the law).
And he served as a reference for Mr. Bacanovic when he applied to become a broker at Merrill Lynch after working at ImClone. Dr. Waksal also appears to have employed a pretty pushy accountant, according to Mr. Faneuil's testimony.
Dr. Waksal declined a request for an interview last week.
Some of Dr. Waksal's relationship with Ms. Stewart has been chronicled. They went to parties in each other's honor, she attended Seder at his house, and they once went to a wedding together on the West Coast, said her assistant, Ann Armstrong, adding ''I think they saw each other in East Hampton.'' Dr. Waksal also dated Ms. Stewart's daughter, Alexis.
Other evidence has been more revealing, if not about Ms. Stewart, at least about Dr. Waksal's own rather baffling behavior.
Testimony from the Securities and Exchange Commission showed that Dr. Waksal had not always been fastidious about following the laws about reporting when he bought and sold shares in his company (some transactions appear to have been reported about a decade late).
And a Merrill Lynch executive said that Dr. Waksal had borrowed against the ImClone shares in his account and that he had chronic ''margin problems.'' Which means that he would be asked to put up more money or sell shares to satisfy the terms of his margin loan.
It seems unlikely that Dr. Waksal himself will ever show up in the courtroom; a spokesman for the United States Attorney's office declined to comment and a spokesman for the defense did not respond to a telephone query last week.
But a transcript of the trial proceedings makes it clear that Ms. Stewart's lawyers would prefer that he not be tied too closely to their client. After prosecutors offered evidence about the friendship between Ms. Stewart and Dr. Waksal, Mr. Morvillo complained that they were trying to taint his client.
''Everyone now knows that Mr. Waksal is a disgraced and fallen man,'' he told the judge, ''and they want to rub Ms. Stewart's nose in it.''
