L. Paul Bremer III, the chief American administrator in Iraq, dropped into this holy city on Monday to give the revolution a gentle nudge.
Mr. Bremer shook hands with a group of Iraqi women, some of whom needed the permission of their husbands before they could attend the day's events. He posed with them in pictures, with some wearing the traditional head-to-toe abayas. He inspected a range of women's projects being realized with American money.
With about 100 Iraqi women seated before him, Mr. Bremer promised America's continued support for the profound changes in the works for Iraq's women.
''Anyone seeing all this talent and ability here, they would recognize that barriers placed in the way of women are barriers to the development and growth and prosperity of Iraq, and indeed the Arab world,'' he told them. ''We in the coalition are committed to continuing to promote women's rights in Iraq.''
The Iraqi women gave Mr. Bremer a hefty round of applause. The husbands, who had been asked to stand in the back, clapped too.
The event was the opening of the Zainab al-Hawraa Center for Women's Rights, a former Baath Party building converted with $163,000 in American money to a place where women can acquire job skills and learn about their political rights.
It is a modest place, a four-story building, in this city famous for its Shiite shrines. The center has a library, a computer room and an area for sewing lessons.
But the center is a small part of a much larger effort under way, backed by the American government, to broaden the opportunities for women and ensure them a role in governing their country.
The most striking proposal, now included in a draft of Iraq's transitional constitution, asks that 40 percent of seats in the National Assembly be set aside for women. It would also ensure that men and women are treated equally under the law.
Such proposals are regarded by many here as too much too soon. When the draft began circulating last month among members of the Iraqi Governing Council, there were grumbles that the language about women needed to be scaled back.
Mr. Bremer, whose word carries the extra weight of veto power over the temporary constitution, seemed unbowed by those complaints. In his speech he cited a recent United Nations report that attributed many of the Arab world's human and economic problems to poor treatment of women.
''The Arab world is largely depriving itself of the creativity and productivity of half of its citizens,'' he said.
In an interview afterward, he said that while he was ''uneasy'' with the notion of quotas, he believed it necessary for Iraqi women to have a ''very substantial presence'' in political institutions.
''You have to have more than a token representation,'' Mr. Bremer said. ''There has to be a kind of critical mass, where the women draw confidence from each other's presence.''
Mr. Bremer pointed out that women are a clear majority in Iraq, in large part because of the deaths of so many men in the wars, foreign and domestic, of Saddam Hussein.
Many of the women who gathered here were widows, and they seemed especially grateful for the place. One was Nawal Jabar, a 44-year-old mother of five, whose husband died in 1987 in the war with Iran.
Since then, Ms. Jabar said, she has depended on her brother and father to support her family, which includes a 24-year-old disabled son. Her father, who is elderly, is now ill as well, and so Ms. Jabar's quest for a better life has taken on an added urgency.
''I have to learn a skill,'' she said, before Mr. Bremer's speech. ''I will do anything to support my family.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: RECONSTRUCTION
