''Protect Yourself in the Hospital,'' by Thomas A. Sharon. Contemporary Books, $12.95.
''Health Smart Hospital Handbook,'' by Dr. Joseph Sacco. Alpha Books, $14.95.
''Dr. David Sherer's Hospital Survival Guide,'' by Dr. David Sherer and Maryann Karinch. Claren Books, $14.95.
''The sooner patients can be removed from the depressing influence of general hospital life,'' Dr. Charles Mayo observed in 1916, ''the more rapid their convalescence.''
Indeed, hospitals are essential, but too often they are bastions of bureaucracy, neglect and sometimes outright ineptitude. One often cited statistic from a 1999 Harvard study puts the hazards of a hospital stay in chilling perspective: hospitals kill nearly 100,000 people a year because of human error, faulty techniques, malfunctioning equipment, wanton carelessness, oversights or assaults.
''Many more leave the hospital worse off than when they went in,'' writes Mr. Sharon in his book, one of these three that outlines the pitfalls of a hospital stay and how to make the best of it.
Mr. Sharon, a registered nurse and legal consultant, offers what he calls ''insider tips for avoiding hospital mistakes,'' information that includes ways to prevent mishaps in intensive care units, play the ''emergency room waiting game,'' communicate with staff to get better service and deal with managed care when you're told that ''your request for treatment has been denied.''
Much of his advice depends on the patient's asking questions and being observant and insistent. In the I.C.U., for example, he advises asking the nurse what each wire and tube is for, checking for swelling and redness from the insertion of intravenous lines, and seeing to it that, in the case of a transfusion, the nurse matches the serial numbers and the blood type between the transfusion ticket and the label on the blood product unit -- in the presence of a second nurse.
''Pay attention to how many patients your nurse is assigned to,'' he writes. ''If there are three or more, lodge a complaint with the health administration and follow up with the health department if you do not get a satisfactory response.''
Dr. Sherer is an anesthesiologist, and a chapter in his book addresses what to expect and ask for in his specialty.
The team should know, for example, if you use more than one pillow at night (people who need to be propped up may experience breathing difficulties because of ''the unfamiliar distribution of weight on your diaphragm''); where major dental work has been done to avoid damage to crowns and implants; and whether you are right- or left-handed so an IV can be placed in the opposite arm to allow you to write, eat and drink more easily.
Dr. Sherer also suggests avoiding elective surgery in July because of ''the July syndrome.'' Then, those doctors who have finished training are replaced by ''fresh faces.'' If you find yourself in a hospital in July, he writes, ''and see a young person hovering over you nervously with a needle, you are hereby warned that you, too, could be in for the pincushion treatment.''
Dr. Sacco, a medical director at Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center in New York, offers a comprehensive analysis of a hospital's workings and of ways to deal with the ones that affect patient care. He also provides a detailed primer on diseases; qualifications of various professionals; and information on tests, medicines and equipment from Foley catheters to nasogastric tubes; and end-of-life care.
He advises patients to ask doctors on rounds to wake them so questions can be asked, and to question if they really need an IV instead of antibiotics or other medications by mouth, or a transfusion. As to whether someone needs to be in a hospital, Dr. Sacco says patients have a variety of choices. ''More and more,'' he writes, ''conditions once felt to require in-hospital care are now being managed at home or in subacute settings such as nursing homes or rehab centers.'' Doctors admit people for many reasons, he says, ''not all of which have to do with the need to be in the hospital.''
BOOKS ON HEALTH
