During today's Democratic primary, weather forecasters say the temperature might reach 32 degrees, making it one of the warmest days we've had in a couple of months. I know because I checked on the Internet, which is the way we get much of our information in this part of the state.
My home is in far western Wisconsin, right across the Mississippi River from Minnesota. It's a small village of either 97 people or 82, depending on which way you come into town. We don't get the big newspapers from Milwaukee or Madison, and the St. Paul paper doesn't always carry much Wisconsin news, so we learned about Howard Dean's need for a victory here mostly from the radio or the Internet.
It's always safe to talk about the weather, and in this rural community, it's always of interest. My neighbor and I might not agree on who should be mayor or president, but we can still stand next to each other and watch the funnel clouds drop out of the sky when a storm is brewing.
Howard Dean may have made a mistake when he announced earlier this month that the Wisconsin primary would make or break his campaign. In fact he admitted as much a few days later, when he said that Wisconsin would not be his last hurrah after all. Even if he doesn't come out No. 1 today, he said, he will remain in the race until at least March 2, the next big day of primaries.
I have my own reason for thinking he made a mistake: Wisconsinites don't like to be put on the spot. Some states -- California, New York, certainly Florida -- are accustomed to being in the limelight, but it doesn't sit easy with us.
Not everyone is uncomfortable about it. Dr. Dean has changed a quiet, midwinter primary into a must-attend event. One of the election judges in our village said that before Dr. Dean's statement, she had planned to bring a book to read because she didn't expect many voters. Now she's excited about all the attention.
It's more common, though, to hear people express reservations. The rest of the country deserves a chance to decide on the Democratic candidate, some people say. It doesn't seem fair that poor results in the first few primaries can force a hopeful to drop out. All the states should hold primaries on the same day. Some people are considering voting for Dr. Dean just to keep him in the running.
But others are facing the same dilemma as Democrats around the country: to vote for the candidate they really like -- or to vote for the one who will have the best chance against President Bush. As John Kerry continues to win more primaries, his name keeps coming up as the best bet.
Around here, Mr. Kerry is seen as being out of touch with the farmers who feed this country. But most farmers are also realists. If they're Democrats, they want a winner.
Weather is fickle in Wisconsin. If there's one thing you learn here, it's that you don't always get what you want when you need it. We could get two feet of snow today. Dr. Dean might win the primary. But the forecast is for no snow, and it's usually right.
Op-Ed Contributor Mary Logue, a poet and novelist, is the author of the forthcoming ''Bone Harvest.''
