George Steinbrenner embodies the ''evil empire'' to the Boston Red Sox, but as the principal owner of the Yankees, he is more like the chairman of the Federal Reserve Board in his ability to influence Major League Baseball's financial landscape.
The baseball community reacts as intensely to Steinbrenner's actions as an owner as Wall Street does to the interest-rate ruminations of Alan Greenspan, the real Fed chairman. Some disagree with Greenspan's views, but no one has called him evil.
Steinbrenner is a laissez-faire spender who has uncorked his money supply to deploy free agency as the ultimate capitalist tool.
As the Broadway producer Max Bialystock says nightly in ''The Producers,'' ''If you've got it, flaunt it, baby, flaunt it.''
Now that he has acquired Alex Rodriguez from Texas, Steinbrenner can flaunt the fact that after a fevered off-season of player movement and financial legerdemain (including having Texas pay $67 million, or 37 percent, of what remains on Rodriguez's contract), his projected $180 million payroll for 2004 is not much different than it was at the end of last season.
But the Boss couldn't extol this payroll stability if he didn't have the cash flow to get to $180 million in the first place.
''Although our revenues are higher than most, and our expenses are higher than most, we still have to operate rationally and prudently,'' Randy Levine, the Yankees' president, said yesterday in an interview.
The Yankees hardly need to justify what they do. Cash pours into the Yankees like no other baseball team, starting with well more than $100 million in revenue (in 2001, they reported $98 million) from nearly 3.5 million paying customers, who have been paying steadily more over the past few years.
Then there is about $60 million in annual payments from the YES Network and about $10 million more from WCBS Radio; at least $30 million from national television, licensing and sponsorship revenues; and still more from local sponsorships and concessions.
Total revenue is not public, but when baseball opened its books after the 2001 season, the Yankees' revenue that year was $242 million. It's fair to say that it is considerably higher now. Andrew Zimbalist, a professor of economics at Smith College and the author of two books on baseball finances, suggested yesterday that the Yankees may be bringing in at least $330 million. It is serendipitous that Cash is the nickname for Brian Cashman, the Yankees' general manager.
Whatever the Yankees' actual revenue is, it must support the payroll, revenue-sharing and luxury-tax payments, and various other expenses like player development. And it still must not choke Steinbrenner's bottom line.
For the 2003 season, revenue-sharing and the luxury tax cost the Yankees a combined $60 million. The Yankees were the only team to exceed the luxury-tax threshold for 2003 -- they did so by having a payroll of more than $117 million -- and were the only team to pay a luxury tax. In the Yankees' case, that meant a payment of $11.8 million based on a 17.5 percent tax on the amount that their payroll exceeded $117 mllion.
Assuming that Steinbrenner doesn't rashly cut $65 million from his 2004 payroll in a midseason purge, the Yankees will be taxed at a second-offender's rate of 30 percent for the coming season and the luxury-tax could surge to $15 million or more, depending upon the makeup of the roster and how much the payroll exceeds $120.5 million.
''Just say they finish at $190 million, and they're $70 million over the luxury-tax threshold,'' Zimbalist said of the Yankees' situation in 2004. ''The tax would be $21 million.''
As if the Yankees needed something else to crow about financially, here is one more: a debt-free team.
''He doesn't have a huge acquisition cost like the Red Sox or the Dodgers,'' Marc Ganis, an industry consultant, said.
Steinbrenner bought the Yankees in 1973 for $10.3 million. But Frank McCourt's highly leveraged $430 million purchase of the Dodgers last month requires that he make debt payments of $18 million to $25 million part of his annual financial picture, Ganis estimated. That translates into one expensive player McCourt cannot afford.
The Yankees hope that Rodriguez, the expensive player they can easily afford, will bring still more fans, who will ideally pay more each year and buy more season tickets, beer and merchandise. If Rodriguez guarantees seven more years of postseason appearances, that will also please Steinbrenner, the unrestrained capitalist.
''We're a very aggressive, well-oiled machine,'' Cashman said yesterday during a conference call, ''and we operate under his guidelines and within his culture.''
SPORTS BUSINESS
