No matter who ends up with AT&amp;T Wireless, one company could end up a winner: Verizon Wireless.
The sale of AT&amp;T Wireless is expected to change the state of competition in the industry, Wall Street and industry analysts said. Although Verizon Wireless is not a bidder, the turmoil could actually help strengthen its position as the nation's dominant mobile phone company, analysts say, if the company maintains its quality of service and exploits its strong brand name.
Although the board of AT&amp;T Wireless appeared late last night to be leaning toward a sale to Vodafone, a final decision had not been made. Cingular Wireless, which is owned by BellSouth and SBC Communications, is the other bidder.
Verizon Communications, which owns 55 percent of Verizon Wireless, has expressed optimism that the sale of AT&amp;T Wireless can work to its advantage, regardless of which competitor acquires it.
Should Vodafone, which is based in Britain, succeed in its bid, it would have to divest itself of the 45 percent share it holds in Verizon Wireless. That would leave Verizon Communications as the sole owner of the nation's largest mobile phone network.
''They would love to see Vodafone get out of the deal,'' Michael Grossi, an analyst with Adventis, a consulting firm, said, noting that Verizon still needs to debate decisions with Vodafone. ''Both parties would be happy to see that union move on.''
Should Cingular wind up prevailing, it would offer a different advantage: it would consolidate the market to five players from the existing six (Verizon, Nextel, Cingular, T-Mobile USA, Sprint and AT&amp;T Wireless). In turn, the competition would be less fierce, leading to some relief for the companies from brutal price wars and relentless marketing.
''We see consolidation of wireless as a very healthy development, which, if anything, will strengthen our market position,'' said Ivan G. Seidenberg, chief executive of Verizon Communications, in recent remarks to analysts. He added, ''Verizon Wireless can only benefit from the consolidation of the entire industry.''
If Vodafone wins AT&amp;T Wireless, the United States would still have six major players, but the position of AT&amp;T Wireless would be filled by Vodafone, the world's largest cellphone company.
For its part, Vodafone has been interested in AT&amp;T Wireless because that acquisition could give it total control of a company based in the United States, industry analysts said.
Vodafone and Verizon Communications have been in intense talks over how to end their four-year-old partnership if Vodafone were to buy AT&amp;T Wireless.
Verizon Wireless is run by a nine-member governing board. Five of the board members are appointed by Verizon Communications and four by Vodafone, giving Verizon Communications control of the operations.
The chief executive of Verizon Wireless, Dennis F. Strigl, is one of the Verizon appointees. Some industry analysts said that Verizon may be eager to end its joint venture with Vodafone so it can have total control of its wireless business.
Patrick Comack, an analyst with Guzman &amp; Company, put the value of Vodafone's stake in Verizon Wireless at $26 billion to $28 billion. It is far from clear how a buyout of Vodafone would work, but it could involve an exchange of assets between the companies, or Verizon could issue debt to pay Vodafone for its share in the joint venture.
Nancy Stark, a spokeswoman with Verizon Wireless, declined to comment on the interaction between board members, or the status of the relations between the companies.
In remarks to analysts late last month, Mr. Seidenberg said he was neither surprised nor put off by Vodafone's interest in AT&amp;T Wireless.
''We feel very good that our existing relationship with Vodafone is working very well,'' he said. ''To the extent that Vodafone chooses a different strategic path and might be interested'' in AT&amp;T Wireless, he added, ''we certainly would not shy away from wanting to own 100 percent of Verizon Wireless.''
But a Vodafone purchase of AT&amp;T Wireless could intensify pricing and competitive pressures in the industry. For one thing, AT&amp;T Wireless's service, which has been plagued by operational and technical problems, could be significantly improved by Vodafone, said Kevin Roe, a telecommunications analyst with Roe Equity Research. ''Vodafone is a much more powerful, much more formidable competitor in owning AT&amp;T Wireless than AT&amp;T Wireless was alone.''
Other analysts agree with Mr. Seidenberg that Verizon's strength in service, brand name and stability will give it a big advantage in a turbulent market, regardless of what happens with the AT&amp;T Wireless sale.
