It looked more like a community-board meeting in a church basement than a cutting-edge security conference as various officials sat around folding tables with cookies and diet soda, looking at graphs, maps and charts displayed by an overhead projector.
But the conversation could hardly be described as pedestrian. The police officers, doctors and emergency management experts were talking about the worst kind of public disasters and how to react if they hit New York.
William F. Pelgrin, a computer expert, expressed worries about superviruses with names like Slammer and Mydoom, capable of paralyzing whole nations' cyber-infrastructures. Dennis P. Whalen, a health official, raised the specter of monkeypox. Wayne E. Bennett, the State Police superintendent, discussed the possibility of terrorists slipping through New York's border with Canada.
Adding immediacy to the discussion, the deadly poison ricin had been found in a United States Senate office only 48 hours before they met. James W. McMahon, who headed the session, said it was a stark reminder that a calamity can be just one envelope away.
The meeting, on Feb. 4, afforded a peek behind the curtain at a new state agency, the Office of Public Security, and how it is operating in its infancy.
Set up by Gov. George E. Pataki in the aftermath of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks to reassure a jittery public and shape the state's response to terrorist threats, the still-evolving state agency passes along to localities hundreds of millions in federal aid intended to shore up the nation's defense against terrorism. Its own budget is $14.8 million, including $3.9 million for offices in Albany and Manhattan and salaries for the 25 full-time employees, who include lawyers, counterterrorism experts and an array of technical analysts.
Yet more than two years after it was formed, few state legislators or members of the public, know exactly what it does or how it operates, and some question whether it is even necessary.
The governor, in an interview earlier this month, said that in an age of increasing threats, the mission of the new agency was one of the most important priorities of government. He indicated that its success would be one of his most important legacies.
''I think it's extraordinarily important,'' he said of the security office. ''You can never know with absolute certainty how important.''
Others agreed that it was important but felt that it had a way to go to fulfill its mission.
''I can tell you that in a post-9/11 world, we have created so many different entities and they haven't had a good chance, like good wine, to breathe and develop,'' said Harvey W. Kushner, the chairman of the department of criminal justice at Long Island University and the author of the Encyclopedia of Terrorism.
He added, ''I am a bit concerned that the stakes are so great that the learning curve is, I am afraid, very dangerous.''
The Office of Public Security is run by Mr. McMahon. Its overarching goal is to coordinate the resources the state has, distribute the new resources from the federal government, and collect and disseminate information quickly that could either head off a new attack or, should it happen, help in the response.
So far, it can count a short, tangible list of achievements. The office has used federal funds to put trailers, costing roughly $200,000 apiece, in every county in the state, each stocked with a variety of equipment, including gloves, goggles, boots, protection suits and air monitors, to deal with a nuclear, biological or chemical attack.
It has set up a command center on an old tobacco farm in upstate New York. Representatives from several agencies work from there, passing along intelligence information from federal authorities to police in the smallest hamlets.
It has also worked on more mundane things, like setting up a toll-free tip line to report suspicious activity, 1 (866) SAFE-NYS (1-866-723-3697).
Under the agency's direction, more than 225 counterterrorism advisories have been issued to police agencies on topics like the recent ricin scare and the chances of attack at home after Iraq was invaded. The agency also set up a task force of local law enforcement officials that dismantled more than a half-dozen fraudulent identification mills, fulfilling one of Mr. Pataki's goals of making the agency an effective resource for law enforcement. Administration officials also said the agency was effective in lobbying Washington for increased security at Kennedy and La Guardia Airports. It agency also pushed for airport security measures that were eventually adopted, including perimeter controls and biometric recognition systems, which are keyed to distinctive body features.
Officials said the most important thing a statewide agency could accomplish was making information available and improving communication between agencies. Those officials often use the example of how one of the 19 men who hijacked four airplanes on Sept. 11 was pulled over for speeding on an interstate highway in Maryland in the days before the attack, only to be let go.
The circumstances that made that possible have not changed. ''That exact thing could happen, and the cop could write a summons and let him go,'' said James K. Kallstrom, who is Mr. Pataki's senior policy adviser for counterterrorism and is the former assistant director of the F.B.I. in charge of the New York Division.
Mr. Kallstrom, who was the first director of the agency and still is involved in day-to-day issues, said the agency was pressing Washington to set up a system to give local law enforcement officers the ability to check databases rapidly.
There is also the problem of communications during and after an attack. The state still does not have a universal wireless system that allows all the authorities to talk on one seamless radio band, security office officials said.
To help prevent forgeries, Mr. Kallstrom has also raised the issue of standards for identification, like driver's licenses and birth certificates, with Congress; the federal homeland security director, Tom Ridge; and President Bush's chief of staff, Andrew Card. He said he was frustrated that nothing had been done yet.
The agency has been more criticized, though, for what it has done -- doling out federal dollars -- than for what it has not been able to do. Some critics complain it has done a poor job communicating with local officials about what federal money is available, as well as how it is being spent.
Assemblywoman RoAnn M. Destito, an upstate Democrat, grilled security agency officials on the topic at a legislative hearing in December, asking, ''Who is prioritizing the needs of localities?''
In an Oct. 24 letter to Mr. Pataki, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton argued for sending the funds directly to local communities and first responders, suggesting that the agency was just another bureaucratic hurdle for localities to face.
In response to the criticism, Pataki administration officials for the first time released a breakdown of the federal money that has passed through the agency. According to state officials, Washington has given New York State $415 million for equipment, training and other security costs. The state has spent $197 million of its own on security-related issues.
In 2003, New York City got $125 million in direct grants from a federal program for major cities, known as Urban Area Security Grants. It also received $34.7 million out of $97 million in State Homeland Security Grants, which are block grants from the federal government to be distributed throughout the state. In 2004, the city is set to receive $47 million in direct grants and $53 million out of $104 million in homeland security grants, state officials said.
State officials said that of the 80 percent of the 2003 grant money it was required to distribute, nearly all of it had been sent out either in the form of new equipment, cash or equipment orders. Officials said there were some delays in delivering the equipment because of the heavy demand on suppliers.
The most common complaint about the money, however, has less to do with the state agency and more to do with the amounts the federal government is making available. Many critics, from the governor and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg to city and town officials, have criticized Washington for treating the money like pork-barrel spending, instead of doling it out based on actual risk. ''Secretary Ridge has said it time and again that he believes that significant additional funding should be allocated on a threat-based method,'' Mr. Pataki said. ''But Congress, and in particular the Senate, where you have two senators from each state, have been obviously more supportive of allocations based on so much to each state without regard to a threat-based analysis.''
Mr. Pataki said the agency's usefulness might never be fully recognized.
''It's virtually impossible to prove a negative, to prove that an attack would have happened but for certain steps being taken,'' Mr. Pataki said. ''My view is that we've probably accomplished a great deal, but I don't know that we'll ever know that with absolute certainty.''
