When Gene Shipman chatted with his mother at Somerset Medical Center last June, he considered her good spirits a sign of her improving health, he said.
After three days in the hospital, she was recovering from minor strokes, and she laughed and joked as she readied herself to be discharged the next day.
Yet only hours after scolding Mr. Shipman for not wearing a hat and coat, his mother, Frances Shipman, 81, died. Mr. Shipman, 61, says he now believes her death was at the hands of Charles Cullen, a Somerset nurse charged in December in the deaths of two Somerset patients.
On Monday, Mr. Shipman said he would file a civil lawsuit against the hospital and Mr. Cullen on Tuesday.
Mr. Cullen, 43, has said he killed 12 to 15 patients at Somerset and has admitted to dozens of other killings throughout his 16 years at 10 health centers in New Jersey and Pennsylvania, according to investigators. Mr. Cullen worked at Somerset from September 2002 to Oct. 31, 2003, when he was fired for lying on his initial job application.
Yesterday, Mr. Shipman said that while he was visiting his mother on June 3, 2003, a male nurse entered her room, telling Mrs. Shipman that he needed to adjust her IV.
Within an hour, Mrs. Shipman went into respiratory distress. Her death certificate lists ventricular fibrillation, or an irregular heart rhythm, as the cause of death. Her son said she did not have a history of heart problems.
There are many causes for ventricular fibrillation, including improperly administered digoxin, a heart medication that investigators believe Mr. Cullen used to kill. There is no evidence that Mrs. Shipman received digoxin, the drug found in the systems of the two Somerset patients in whose deaths Mr. Cullen has been charged. An autopsy was not performed on Mrs. Shipman's body, but her son said the family might be willing to have her body exhumed.
Kathleen Roberts, a spokeswoman for Somerset, would not comment Monday on the details of Mrs. Shipman's medical files or death.
Mr. Shipman became suspicious of his mother's death only after seeing Mr. Cullen's picture in news reports, saying he remembered him as the nurse in his mother's room.
''It all just clicked -- that was him,'' Mr. Shipman said Monday at a news conference with his lawyer.
Anthony Macri, Mr. Shipman's lawyer, said the complaint would also name five other places where Mr. Cullen worked. It would be the first such lawsuit filed against Mr. Cullen in New Jersey; in Pennsylvania, where Mr. Cullen worked at five health care facilities and has not been charged in any patient's death, at least eight families have filed either lawsuits or notices to sue.
Mrs. Shipman's death is not the only one being examined from that date. Relatives of Nicholas Senko Jr., a Somerset patient, said last December that Mr. Senko's death, also on June 3, was suspicious.
Reached at his home on Monday, Wayne Forest, the Somerset County prosecutor, said he could not recall whether Mrs. Shipman's death was one of those suspected to be a homicide. But the process of identifying victims is still in an early phase, Mr. Forest said.
''Nothing that we know at this point is for certain,'' he said.
At the time of her death, Mrs. Shipman had lived at a Green Brook nursing home for a year, her son said.
