LARRY RITTER was dying. He couldn't speak and he couldn't see, but he continued to deliver strong opinions on baseball.
On Saturday evening, in the final hours of the glory of his times, Larry was being cared for by his registered nurse, Debbie Pianin, who had convinced him that the Yankees were not so terrible.
''They extended the baseball season by a month,'' Debbie said, explaining his newfound affinity.
Now, as he lay immobile, Larry heard the news that the Yankees were about to acquire Alex Rodriguez.
''He looked at me like I was giving him an April's fool,'' Debbie said, ''but then I told him again and he broke into a smile, which he could still do. Then he raised his two thumbs. He couldn't raise his hands, but he did raise his thumbs, with a big smile.''
Thus, did the grand arbiter pass judgment on these huge doings even though, as a professor of economics, Larry was known to resent the grotesque sums of money being spent on ball players.
He had written a seminal history of baseball in the early 20th century, ''The Glory of Their Times'' (Macmillan, 1966), then he had scrupulously apportioned all the royalties to the aging players who had cooperated with him. He knew they had not made the money in a year that the A-Rods and the Jeters make in a day.
Politically, he was a lefty. In baseball economics, he was a righty. But now, in the middle of an unyielding winter, wracked by strokes at age 81, Larry seemed comfortable with the money, and the fireworks and the gossip that are sure to emanate from the Bronx.
''Larry loved the controversies, the Rickey Hendersons, the Reggie Jacksons, the Babe Ruths,'' said Evelyn Begley, a baseball fanatic who became a close friend of his.
Lawrence S. Ritter spent a huge amount of his time among baseball fanatics. Through his death Sunday morning, he has literally become part of what is perhaps a dying breed -- the buffs who care more passionately about the so-called national pastime than about football, basketball or auto racing, those oh-so in-vogue American sports.
He was a founding father of a monthly luncheon group that meets on the West Side of Manhattan for the sole purpose of talking baseball. They are throwback types, spiritually connected to farmers who sat in front of the general store a century ago and gossiped about Cobb and Matty.
There are still some of us who think baseball is important, that it cuts deep into the loyalties and rivalries of our American cities.
At this moment, baseball is once again immense. The acquisition of perhaps the best player by the richest team has touched more nerves than any personnel move ever could in those other sports.
The Yankees' batting order? What will the news media say the first time Derek Jeter can't make the play in the hole? Will A-Rod's arrival crush the spirit of Red Sox Nation?
It would be wonderful to have Larry's opinion, but at least we have the report that he seemed to grasp A-Rod's cosmic connection to Babe Ruth's history-changing peregrination to the Yankees.
''Larry once said, 'The best part of baseball is the past,' '' said Ray Robinson, author of fine baseball biographies and a member of the luncheon club.
''We looked on him as a patriarch,'' said Stan Isaacs, who used to write a sports column in Newsday appropriately titled ''Out of Left Field.''
''He was a great listener,'' said Marty Appel, publicist and friend.
Your correspondent was invited to the baseball luncheon a year ago. There was a big turnout, maybe 12 or 13, and, this being the West Side of Manhattan, a big debate ensued over whether there should be one table or two.
Larry, in a wheelchair by then, watched his pals bicker for 15 minutes over the placement of chairs. Then he spoke: ''One table.'' And that was that.
I should add that women fussed over Larry. Margarita Tice, his caretaker, missed one day of work in 16 months. His former wife Elisabeth Foote was with him last week, soothing his forehead.
Evelyn Begley invited him to lunch years ago, and he refused, politely, saying he was a recluse. She kept after him, and in the final years, she came around once a week to do his laundry and to talk about the Polo Grounds.
Debbie Pianin helped him adjust after the first stroke and was so charmed, she stayed three years. When she signed on, Larry was a former Giants fan who, for four decades, had consoled himself with the Mets.
''But Larry was frustrated with the Mets,'' Debbie said, not needing to add that Larry was not the only one. So she talked up the Yankees -- and in his final hours Larry appreciated the Yankees' audacity. The game goes on, greatly enriched by the fan who loved it so much.
Sports of The Times
