Frequent use of antibiotics has been linked to a greater risk of breast cancer, say researchers who studied thousands of American women and found that those who took the drugs most often had twice the risk of the disease.
The study uncovered a relationship between greater use of antibiotics and a heightened risk of breast cancer, but researchers sought to temper their findings by cautioning that they had only highlighted an association, not a causal link.
''This is potentially worrisome, but we don't know why this connection exists, we only have an observation,'' said Dr. John D. Potter, director of the division of public health sciences at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle and an author of the report. ''At the moment, we need to see these results replicated with more research before drawing any conclusions.''
The study, published in the latest issue of The Journal of the American Medical Association, is now the second to draw a connection between antibiotics and breast cancer.
In 2000, scientists in Finland found that women younger than 50 who had taken antibiotics for urinary tract infections also had an elevated risk for getting the disease. But the research had several limitations and left scientists with a number of questions, including whether the phenomenon could be tied to all classes of antibiotics.
In the latest study, researchers pored over the medical records of over 10,000 adult women in the state of Washington, including 2,266 with breast cancer.
As the number of antibiotic prescriptions a subject had filled went up, they found, her risk for breast cancer climbed. Those who had more than 25 prescriptions over an average of 17 years were twice as likely to get the disease. And women who filled some prescriptions but fewer than 25 had a 50 percent higher risk than those who had not used any.
The trend applied to all forms of antibiotics.
''It was a dosage-response trend: the higher the usage, the higher the risk,'' said Dr. Christine M. Velicer, a research associate at the Group Health Cooperative's Center for Health Studies and the lead author of the study. ''Something appears to be going on here that we need to study further.''
The news comes at a time when health officials at the World Health Organization and elsewhere have suggested that antibiotic use has spiraled out of control and could create dire consequences, a warning that the latest findings may help to reinforce.
Across the globe, penicillin and other antibiotics that attack bacteria are being prescribed in vain to treat viral diseases that they are useless against. That trend, some researchers say, has led to the emergence of more aggressive bacteria that can resist traditional antibiotics.
''It's well known that there is a tendency to use these drugs against the common cold and other things they're not effective for,'' Dr. Potter said. ''What we found should not be used as evidence to base medical or health policy decisions on, but it is a reminder about misusing antibiotics.''
What role the drugs play in the onset of cancer, if any, is still open to debate. Dr. Potter said that he suspected they might diminish levels of bacteria in the intestines that help protect the body from cancer. Another theory is that women who use antibiotics more often are naturally predisposed to breast cancer because they have weaker immune systems or hormonal imbalances.
At the same time, the study did rule out a number of risk factors commonly associated with the disease, like age, a family history of cancer, and contraceptive use.
One expert, Dr. Robert Morgan, a physician at the City of Hope National Cancer Center near Los Angeles, said more research needed to be done to see if the findings bear out. But in the meantime, Dr. Morgan said, it would be a boon to officials trying to persuade doctors and patients not to overuse antibiotics. ''It's going to cause physicians to be more careful about doling out prescriptions,'' he said. ''But people shouldn't read too far into this. They still need to take their antibiotics.''
