After weeks of rarely uttering the names of his chief Democratic rivals, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina bounded across this state on Monday drawing attention to them on one matter, and one matter only: trade.
''There is a difference, there is a choice for Wisconsin voters on this issue,'' Mr. Edwards told some 150 people at the South Milwaukee Community Center. ''I'm against Nafta, I was against Nafta. Governor Dean and Senator Kerry were for it.''
He repeated the line everywhere he went, in a last-ditch effort one day before the Wisconsin primary to draw a clear distinction between himself and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. Mr. Kerry voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement, signed into law by President Bill Clinton in 1993, five years before Mr. Edwards's election to the Senate. Nafta is virtually a four-letter word in Wisconsin's blue-collar quarters, where it is blamed for the loss of tens of thousands of manufacturing jobs.
Mr. Edwards raised the trade issue at Sunday night's debate in Milwaukee as well. Asked Monday why he had begun discussing the Nafta positions of Mr. Kerry and Howard Dean after weeks of barely mentioning those candidates, he said: ''I thought the right thing to do was to raise the difference at the debate, where they were both present and could respond. Now that I've done that, I think it's appropriate to make that distinction.''
Though the subject had come up repeatedly in earlier debates, an aide said Monday that Mr. Edwards had not seen an opportunity to raise the differences then. Some Democrats have complained that Mr. Edwards has failed to draw sharp contrasts with his rivals.
In any case, the senator's own record on trade agreements is somewhat mixed. He supported loosened trade restrictions with China in 2000 because, he has said, farmers and high-technology businesses in his home state stood to benefit. And though he says he campaigned against Nafta in his 1998 Senate race, he did not make it a central issue. (His opponent, Lauch Faircloth, a Republican incumbent, also opposed the agreement.)
Mr. Edwards said in an interview that his opposition was not to free trade fundamentally, just to the way it had been practiced; he wants tightened labor and environmental standards applied to the nation's trading partners. He has found the issue potent in states hit hard by the exodus of manufacturing jobs, and his advisers say he plans to highlight it as he campaigns in states like New York, Ohio and Georgia for the Super Tuesday round of primaries, on March 2.
Mr. Edwards awoke Monday to an endorsement by The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, the state's largest newspaper, but said he was unsure what effect it would have on voters, coming just the day before the primary. He did mention it, however, at every one of four stops as he crisscrossed the state, where he found generally receptive crowds of 150 to a few hundred.
Mr. Edwards said he believed he was ''ascending'' as he had at the 11th hour in Iowa, where he came in an unexpected second. Here, as there, he seems to be connecting best with rural and blue-collar voters.
''Once a fighter, always a fighter!'' Denise Haggerty, a truck driver, shouted to him in the middle of his speech in South Milwaukee. Mr. Edwards turned to her, grinning, and called back, ''Every minute of my 50 years has been spent fighting, I'll tell you that.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
