When a fire broke out in the boiler room of Harvey Needleman's six-story apartment building in Murray Hill last spring, he was treated for smoke inhalation, but otherwise escaped serious injury, his family said.
But on Sunday night, when the authorities said something apparently went wrong in the same boiler room, Mr. Needleman, 68, did not escape, and death came in the form of an invisible and odorless gas, carbon monoxide. Mr. Needleman's partner, Jacquin Polanco, 40, also died, the police said.
Two women who lived in separate apartments in the building, at 535 Third Avenue between 35th and 36th Streets, were being treated at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx for carbon monoxide poisoning. They were identified by the police as Jessica Stoeckel, 29, and Yvette Karpo, 72, and hospital officials said they remained in critical condition yesterday.
The women, like Mr. Needleman and Mr. Polanco, lived on the building's upper floors, where fire officials said carbon monoxide levels were the highest. The remaining residents were evacuated Sunday in a dramatic rescue. Around 8 p.m., firefighters, responding to an emergency call from a Con Edison technician who had detected high levels of carbon monoxide in the building, knocked down apartment doors and alerted unsuspecting residents.
Residents yesterday expressed both sadness over the death of their neighbors and anger at the property manager, who they said did nothing after being alerted several times to problems with the heating system.
''The problems really started after the fire in the boiler room in May, and they are clearly not fixing the problem,'' said Dan Henderson, 31, who lives down the hall from Mr. Needleman and Mr. Polanco. Mr. Henderson, who was staying in New Jersey on Sunday night, said the problems were so bad he filed a complaint with the city several months ago, but got no response.
Ilyse Fink, a spokeswoman for the Department of Buildings, which is investigating the accident, said her department had no record of Mr. Henderson's complaint.
Sarah Reid, a 23-year-old clothing designer, said she also complained to the management. ''They didn't put smoke detectors in my apartment, and we have been trying to get them to get them to do that for months,'' she said. ''I just want to get out of here; I want to move.''
A superintendent at the building, Richard Zaphar, refused to answer questions yesterday. Residents said a company called Pan Am Equities managed the property. No one returned calls left yesterday at a phone messaging service for the company.
United Enterprises, whose general partner is Fraydun Manocherian, is listed in property records as the owner. Mr. Manocherian founded the New York Health &amp; Racquet Club and, along with his family, owns or manages 3,000 apartments in Manhattan, according to Crain's New York Business. He did not return a phone call last night.
Since there was no heat in the building yesterday and many doors were splintered and smashed, residents were able only to collect some belongings before leaving to stay with friends and or at hotels. It was unclear when they would be able to return.
In a separate incident, 27 people in the Bronx were taken to hospitals after elevated carbon monoxide levels were detected in a building on University Avenue early yesterday morning. No one was seriously injured.
Dr. Charles Martinez, a surgeon at Jacobi who often treats victims of carbon monoxide poisoning, said that success in treating such victims largely depended on the severity of a person's condition, because neurological damage could have already occurred from lack of oxygen to the brain.
A hyperbaric chamber, which is essentially a submarine-shaped pressure chamber, is used to get oxygen back into the blood stream, he said.
''Carbon monoxide likes to attach itself to the hemoglobin at sea level,'' Dr. Martinez said. By bringing a patient to the equivalent of 66 feet below sea level, the oxygen can effectively knock off many of the carbon monoxide molecules and attach itself, Dr. Martinez said.
Jacobi is the only hospital in New York with a chamber large enough to allow doctors to work inside with several patients at one time, Dr. Martinez said, making it the main center to treat carbon monoxide poisoning. Illness from leaks are common in the cold winter months, when heating devices malfunction or are used improperly.
While Dr. Martinez did not have specifics on the number of people treated this year, he said, ''It has been a very busy month.''
Victims often do not know they are being poisoned until it is too late, the doctor said, and early symptoms, which can range from a headache to nausea to a fever, are often confused with the flu. When a sufficient amount of poison has entered a person's body, they can get cloudy in their thinking, pass out and even go into a coma, the doctor said.
Dr. Martinez said the best defense is for people to properly check all of their heating equipment, insure that car exhaust pipes and chimneys are not clogged by snow and buy carbon monoxide detectors.
