Executives of Sanofi-Synthélabo maintained on Monday that their hostile bid for Aventis would prevail, and gave no indication that they might raise their $60 billion bid as some analysts and investors expect.
''We're very confident our offer will be a success,'' Jean-François Dehecq, chairman of Sanofi, the French pharmaceutical company, told several hundred analysts, investors and journalists at presentations in both London and Paris of the company's better-than-expected earnings results.
''We don't see any reason to change it,'' Mr. Dehecq said, ''and we expect it to close in the first half of 2004.''
By late Monday, Aventis's market capitalization was 49.962 billion euros ($63.78 billion), 6 percent more than Sanofi's bid when it was made Jan. 26.
The chief executive of Aventis, Igor Landau, has been dismissive of Sanofi's offer, saying that his rival is acting out of weakness. Aventis has said that it will go to court to try to revoke regulatory approval of the merger.
Mr. Dehecq said that he found it ''strange'' that Aventis was trying to delay the deal. But Sanofi executives did not dwell on the conflict on Monday and instead devoted most of their time at the presentations to highlighting the company's sales and profit growth, and a number of promising drugs in the pipeline.
Sanofi, which only released results for the full year, earned 2.076 billion euros in 2003, an 18 percent increase over 2002. Without the negative effect of the weakening dollar, the increase would have been 36 percent, the company said.
Sales increased by 8 percent, to 8.04 billion euros in 2003. The largest increase was in the United States, where sales gained 13.1 percent, to 1.9 billion euros at current exchange rates. If 2002 exchange rates were in effect, United States sales would have been up 32.9 percent.
Five of the company's drugs in late-stage trials have shown positive results, including rimonabant, which the company is testing as a treatment for obesity and as an antismoking drug. Sanofi has 13,000 patients in seven separate rimonabant studies, and said that the drug could be on the market by the end of 2005.
Trials for dronedarone, which regulates heart rhythms, have also been encouraging, said Gérard Le Fur, who is head of research at Sanofi.
Additionally, Sanofi hopes to have a drug to treat depression in final trials by the end of the year.
The strong earnings and promising pipeline emphasized in the presentation prompted one analyst at the London presentation to ask why Sanofi would dilute its stock by buying Aventis. ''You could hire a lot of sales reps for $50 billion,'' the analyst said to Mr. Dehecq, understating the amount of Sanofi's bid.
The company needs help in development, Mr. Dehecq answered, and is not willing to enter a joint venture with another drug company and be forced to share the profits.
At the presentation in Paris, Mr. Le Fur addressed the same issue. ''We have so many positive results in late phases that we don't have enough money to support all the clinical trials we need with these great compounds,'' he said. ''That's one of the main reasons that we made this offer.''
Besides the reasons given on Monday, Sanofi has long maintained that one of the most attractive things about Aventis is the company's sales force in the United States.
Sanofi's takeover bid officially opens on Tuesday when Aventis shareholders can start to tender their shares. Sanofi executives also said that they have had no contact with the largest shareholder of Aventis, the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation. Many smaller shareholders of Aventis have said in the last week that they are awaiting a higher bid.
Aventis will file its suit against regulatory approval of the merger at the end of this week. No deal can be closed until a ruling is delivered, which could take several months.
Shares of Sanofi fell 5 euro cents, to 55.30 euros, on the Paris exchange, while Aventis rose 75 euro cents, to 62.15 euros.
