As usual, the Rangers were upset with another call that did not go their way. As usual, the Rangers lost another game.
''I don't think we can use that noncall as any kind of excuse for our results, whether it's today or the last three weeks,'' Bobby Holik said yesterday after the Rangers surrendered four consecutive goals in a 4-1 loss to the Ottawa Senators at Madison Square Garden. ''It was a very questionable call, but that is not what's losing us games.''
The play came at 7 minutes 11 seconds of the third period, when Zdeno Chara, Ottawa's 6-foot-9 defenseman, took a shot from the right point. Bryan Smolinski drove hard through the Rangers' crease with Brian Leetch riding him. Smolinski collided with goaltender Jussi Markkanen as the puck skipped into the net to give Ottawa a 2-1 lead.
''The goal that Chara scored, the guy was behind Brian,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said. ''He drives to the net and takes the goalie out. It was a seeing-eye shot, but it's still goaltender interference any way you look at it. If they don't call it, there is not a lot we can do about it. You can stand there and scream from the bench, but he isn't going to make a change.''
Markkanen complained that the Senators were in his crease for much of the game. ''There were no calls against them,'' he said sarcastically. ''So I guess they were out of the crease the whole night.''
The defeat dropped the Rangers' to 3-11-2-0 over the last 16 games. The Rangers (21-27-7-4) trail the Islanders by 11 points for the final Eastern Conference playoff berth.
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, that is the Rangers' biggest deficit in the race for the final playoff spot with 23 games to play in Sather's four seasons as the team's president and general manager.
Through 59 games last season, the Rangers were 5 points from a playoff berth. Two seasons ago, the Rangers were in eighth place. Three seasons ago, the Rangers were 6 points behind.
The Rangers have not qualified for the playoffs for six consecutive seasons, a franchise record. They have not won three consecutive games this season, and the last time they won two in a row was on Dec. 29-30.
The sellout crowd of 18,200, on a hockey stick giveaway day for children 14 and under, let its feelings be known on several occasions after the Rangers fell behind, chanting, ''Fire Sather!''
After the defeat, Sather was once again asked if he would consider stepping down as coach to concentrate on his job as general manager, with the trading deadline looming on March 9. As usual, the question angered Sather.
''Tonight is not the time to talk about it,'' Sather said. ''We practice at 12 tomorrow. If you want to discuss it with me then, you're welcome.''
SLAP SHOTS
FEDOR TYUTIN, the Rangers' 20-year-old rookie defenseman, recorded his first National Hockey League point in his second game. Tyutin was credited with the primary assist on BOBBY HOLIK's goal at 15:59 of the second period, which gave the Rangers a 1-0 lead. ''It was a pretty good feeling,'' Tyutin said. . . . MARTIN HAVLAT (on the power play, at 17:49 of the second), ZDENO CHARA (7:11 of the third), JOSH LANGFELD (7:52 of the third) and BRYAN SMOLINSKI (14:06 of the third), scored for Ottawa. The Senators outshot the Rangers, 31-15. Ottawa goalie PATRICK LALIME stopped MATTHEW BARNABY on a penalty shot at 18:49 of the third.
JAROMIR JAGR, who missed his second consecutive game with a groin injury, said he would practice today and try to play Thursday night against the Islanders at Madison Square Garden. ''It's the biggest game probably of the season,'' Jagr said. ''We are already in a big hole.''
Center ERIC LINDROS (concussion) missed his eighth consecutive game. Defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) missed his ninth consecutive game. Defenseman GREG de VRIES (flu) did not play. Left wing JAN HLAVAC was a healthy scratch. Defenseman JOEL BOUCHARD (concussion) missed his second consecutive game. MIKE DUNHAM (flu) was scratched and JASON LaBARBERA backed up JUSSI MARKKANEN. A cluster of young players from Hartford of the American Hockey League were in the lineup, including forwards CHAD WISEMAN and CORY LAROSE and defenseman LAWRENCE NYCHOLAT.
HOCKEY
