Composers from Haydn to Elliott Carter have long since proved that in chamber music four is the magic number, so it's no surprise that the string quartet repertory is an embarrassment of riches. With so much music to choose from, a quartet today can easily play it safe with programming and even with performance standards, turning in ho-hum renditions of standard works that are built to please.
Two quartets, the Takacs and the Artemis, chose the opposite route this weekend, combining fresh materials with fresh approaches to familiar music.
The Takacs opened the weekend with a fascinating program on Friday night, the first of two concerts it played in Zankel Hall. The focus was the connection between Bartok and the Hungarian folk music that famously inspired him. To recreate both musical worlds, the quartet shared the stage with the Hungarian folk ensemble Muzsikas and the vocalist Marta Sebestyen. Traditional tunes (with and without connections to Bartok) were interspersed with Bartok's own compositions, a short work by Kodaly and a few transfixing excerpts from field recordings that Bartok made of peasant musicians early in the last century.
Both ensembles gave exciting, vibrant performances, but the connections between their materials were not always quickly forthcoming. After all, Bartok's own connection to rural Hungarian music was complex, blending Romantic idealization, nationalist striving, ethnographic fascination and his own search for an artistic honesty and truthfulness, qualities he saw in organic folk cultures with their untutored expressions of ''real life'' as it is lived by a community. All of these factors formed a shifting prism through which the composer refracted the folk traditions he encountered.
Sometimes the original folk sources appeared relatively undistorted in Bartok's music, as the ensembles demonstrated with the Romanian Folk Dances and selections from the 44 Violin Duos. Elsewhere, as with the Fourth String Quartet, they were heavily encrypted within caterwauling dissonances and a thorny modernist language.
The Takacs lit into this quartet with savage intensity and vigor, making it a highlight of the evening. With traditional tunes by Muzsikas interwoven between the movements, the work emerged as a true modernist-folk hybrid, born of a progressive naturalism that seems to transcribe the composer's tumultuous inner landscape as closely as it did any rhythms of the countryside.
Bartok's pounding music was still in my ears when I caught the Artemis Quartet two days later in an enthralling concert at the Frick Collection, the second of two New York performances it gave this weekend. This young and prodigiously talented Berlin-based ensemble opened its program with Janacek's Second Quartet, ''Intimate Letters.''
Completed in 1928, the year Bartok wrote his Fourth, the work courses with the same compressed energy but channels it through a more Romantic and lyrical vein. This is not to say that the Artemis played with their hearts on their sleeves; far from it. Phrasing was concise rather than gushing, and there was a bite in their sound, a sharp edge that cut Janacek's sweetness in all the right places. In just one example the cellist Eckart Runge's devastating tremolo attack in the final movement underscored just how contemporary this music can sound.
Even Schubert's ''Death and the Maiden,'' one of the most frequently performed quartets, bristled with fresh life in the Artemis performance. Seemingly small details often made the difference, as in the second movement when it played extended portions without vibrato, bringing a striking austerity to an otherwise lush theme.
Mr. Runge's arrangement of four tangos by Astor Piazzolla was the only slight disappointment, mostly because it lacked the doleful sound of the bandoneon, the accordionlike instrument at the heart of these tunes in their original version. Still, there were plenty of expressive slides that caught the original flavor of the music. It would be interesting to hear this group play Piazzolla's ''Four, for Tango,'' a work expressly written for string quartet.
The program was unified by the quartet's daring, edge-of-the-seat playing. I would gladly sit through just about any transcription to hear a performance with this visceral energy and rich four-part imagination.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
