Derek Jeter worked out yesterday in Tampa, Fla., and he will be in the Bronx today to welcome Alex Rodriguez to the Yankees. George Steinbrenner, the team's principal owner, told Jeter to go, and Jeter was apparently happy to do so. Jeter's fixation on winning rivals that of Steinbrenner, and the arrival of Rodriguez, the consensus best player in baseball, should keep the Yankees winning for years.
Rodriguez officially became the crown jewel of Steinbrenner's glittering collection yesterday when Commissioner Bud Selig approved the trade that sent Alfonso Soriano and a player to be named to the Texas Rangers for Rodriguez and $67 million. But while Rodriguez is the most talented, the team stressed yesterday that Jeter still has the most clout.
Steinbrenner and General Manager Brian Cashman have both spoken to Jeter to assure him he will stay at shortstop, even though Rodriguez has won two Gold Gloves there and Jeter has none. On a conference call yesterday, Cashman essentially roped off the area around shortstop and put up a ''Keep Out'' sign for Rodriguez.
''I'd like to take this time, for the organization, to put this all to rest right now,'' Cashman said. ''This move would not have happened unless Alex Rodriguez moved to third base. Otherwise, we wouldn't even consider it. There is no issue, there is no 'who's the starting quarterback?' here.
''We have, arguably, the best left side of the infield in the history of baseball, and this is what it's going to be: Derek Jeter at shortstop, Alex Rodriguez at third base. And I think New York Yankees fans are going to be excited.''
Selig does not share the enthusiasm. The $67 million is by far the most money ever included in a trade, and Selig seemed chagrined to endorse the deal.
''I am very concerned about the large amount of cash consideration involved in the transaction, and the length of time over which the cash is being paid,'' he said in a statement. ''I want to make it abundantly clear to all clubs that I will not allow cash transfers of this magnitude to become the norm. However, given the unique circumstances, including the size, length and complexity of Mr. Rodriguez's contract and the quality of the talent moving in both directions, I have decided to approve the transaction.''
Of Selig, one major league official said: ''This is a killer for him. He understands that a lot of people -- the Rangers, Rodriguez and other people -- benefit from it. But what it does to the salary structure is just devastating to him, having one team $60 or $70 million higher than everybody else.''
The Yankees are assuming seven years and $112 million for Rodriguez, and Randy Levine, the team president, said that for this season, they would spend no more with Rodriguez than they had budgeted. ''It's close, on a cash basis, to neutral for us,'' Levine said.
That was a clear signal that the Yankees intend to cut third baseman Aaron Boone, who tore his anterior cruciate ligament playing basketball last month. The team would save about $4.8 million with that move, as well as the $5.4 million it owed Soriano and the $4 million Drew Henson forfeited by jumping to football. The Yankees will pay $14 million this season to Rodriguez, who is deferring $1 million.
''It's easy to scapegoat the Yankees,'' Levine said. ''It's easy to deflect away by blaming the Yankees. The fact of the matter is, we do, under Mr. Steinbrenner's leadership, take bold actions, because that's his commitment to the fans.''
In a statement, Steinbrenner hailed the move while making clear that his expectations are high.
''We are bringing to New York one of the premier players in the history of the game,'' Steinbrenner said. ''But, as I have always said, the way New Yorkers back us, we have to produce for them. The Yankees are in the toughest division in baseball and now, with the team we have assembled, we have to go out and produce on the field.''
Steinbrenner resisted the urge to needle the Boston Red Sox, who traded for Rodriguez in December before the players union rejected the deal, believing the Red Sox had reduced the value of Rodriguez's contract.
''I know Larry Lucchino's disappointed,'' Levine said, referring to the Red Sox' president, a bitter adversary of Steinbrenner's. ''We all understand that. They are a great organization, but this day is about the Yankees.''
A baseball official said Lucchino contacted several people in the commissioner's office on Saturday asking about the Yankees' deal. Lucchino has credited the Yankees for their aggressiveness in landing Rodriguez, but he has stressed that it was a deal only they could pull off.
''I don't think he's angry at the Yankees for using their treasury,'' said Charles Steinberg, the Red Sox executive vice president for public affairs. ''But you've got to describe why one deal happens and the other doesn't.''
Cashman said he floated the idea of trading for Rodriguez in a conversation with Rangers General Manager John Hart early last week about third baseman Mike Lamb. Hart resisted, but later learned that Rodriguez would be willing to move to third for the Yankees. Rodriguez had decided this with his agent, Scott Boras, who told the Rangers' owner, Tom Hicks.
The deal was always Soriano for Rodriguez, but the Yankees initially wanted to pay only $90 million of the $179 million remaining on Rodriguez's contract. Texas wanted the Yankees to pay $112 million, a gap the Yankees made up eagerly. ''Third base is a harder position to fill than second base,'' Cashman said. ''Soriano is a terrific player, and Alex is a great player. Soriano is a great player in his own right, but we found a third baseman in Alex who provides a lot more.''
Cashman could pursue a second baseman in a trade -- Baltimore's Jerry Hairston is available -- but he said there was no urgency to look beyond Miguel Cairo and Enrique Wilson.
Rodriguez, who will wear No. 13, has played 1,267 career games at shortstop and none at third base. Cashman said the former Yankee third baseman Graig Nettles would assist Rodriguez in spring training. ''I'm delighted that Alex really wanted to be a Yankee and to play side by side with our team captain, Derek Jeter, who has shown himself to be a tremendous leader both on and off the field,'' Steinbrenner said in his statement.
He also told The Associated Press that the deal ranked with the free-agent acquisition of Reggie Jackson in 1976, and said: ''Jeter is the captain. He is the leader.''
One act of leadership will come at Yankee Stadium today, when Jeter will probably smile, throw an arm around Rodriguez and say all the right things. If Jeter looks secure, that is just how the Yankees want it. Shortstop is still his.
''You go with the man who brought you to the dance, and you stick with him,'' Cashman said. ''Derek Jeter continues to get us to the dance. You don't mess with success.''
INSIDE PITCH
The Yankees are interested in signing ORLANDO HERNÁNDEZ to a minor league contract, two officials familiar with the team's plans said. The Yankees have been scouting Hernández and negotiating with him in hopes that he can be a long reliever or insurance for the rotation. Hernández pitched for the Yankees from 1998 to 2002, and missed last season with Montreal because of a shoulder injury.
BASEBALL
