Every day when he goes to practice, Josh Maravich walks into an arena named for his father.
Maravich, the youngest son of Pistol Pete Maravich, declined scholarship offers to play college basketball elsewhere in order to walk on at Louisiana State, where his father starred and his grandfather coached.
He has played in only one game this season, for less than a minute, but Josh Maravich is fulfilling a lifelong dream, with his father serving as his inspiration.
''I know that he'd be proud of me,'' said Josh, a 6-foot-3 guard who is a redshirt sophomore. ''Sometimes I hear him whispering in my ear: 'You can do it. Keep trying.' That's what motivates me to keep going.''
Even with a last name that equates to royalty in Baton Rouge, Maravich has blended seamlessly into the L.S.U. campus. He says he never thinks about the Maravich Assembly Center being named after his father and does not feel intimidated by seeing his father's retired jersey number hanging from the rafters.
''I could never do what he's doing,'' said Jaeson Maravich, Josh's older brother. ''Honestly, I told him, I'm surprised he's doing as well as he's done.''
Josh Maravich's work ethic and tough attitude have won him the respect of his teammates.
''When you go outside, you see his dad's name on the building, but you really don't see any cockiness,'' L.S.U. guard Antonio Hudson said. ''He's just like one of us.''
Initially, L.S.U. Coach John Brady did not like the idea of Maravich walking on. Too much pressure, he assumed, for such a menial role. But after driving to the Maravich home in Covington, La., and outlining his position in excruciating detail, Brady relented.
''You can make some enemies if you don't win enough games,'' Brady said, ''but you can certainly make some if you don't let Pete Maravich's son on your team.''
Maravich occasionally hears from hecklers during road games in the Southeastern Conference, and he has emerged as a crowd favorite with chants of, ''We want Josh!'' during lopsided home games. Other than that, Maravich said, his famous surname rarely comes up.
''I'm just treated like a normal player,'' he said. ''I wouldn't have it any other way. I don't want any special treatment.''
Brady said that despite his early skepticism, the arrangement has worked out well.
''I'm glad he's on the team and he's an important part of our team,'' Brady said. ''Our players have grown to like him a lot and respect him.''
But Brady does admit having second thoughts.
''I feel bad sometimes Pete Maravich's son is a walk-on,'' Brady said. ''I feel guilty.''
BASKETBALL
