The comparisons will come up as long as Dale Earnhardt Jr. is a driver in Nascar's Nextel Cup series. With nicknames -- Junior and Little E -- that always defer to his father, even if affectionately, it is inevitable that he will spend his career trying to live up to his father's accomplishments.
At least now, Earnhardt no longer has to try to match his father's success in the Daytona 500. He won the race Sunday at Daytona International Speedway, six years to the day after his father captured his first and only Daytona 500 and three years after he was killed in a last-lap crash in the race.
To top off the weekend, Earnhardt captured the Hershey's Kisses 300 Busch Series race, which began Saturday and was delayed by rain until Monday. That is three victories in five days for Earnhardt, who also took first in a Gatorade 125 qualifying race Thursday.
Along the way, the Earnhardts became the third father and son in Nascar to each win a Daytona 500. Richard Petty won seven times; his father, Lee, won once. Bobby and Davey Allison were also victors here.
Few victories at this track were as universally celebrated as those of the Earnhardts. Dale Earnhardt Sr. needed 20 chances before he was able to shake his remarkably bad luck in the 500; that is why his 1998 victory was so emotional. When he died on this track in 2001, the expectations in some ways shifted to the son, then a second-year driver in Winston Cup -- now Nextel Cup.
Earnhardt has been embraced by many fans of his father. So when Earnhardt pulled past Tony Stewart on Lap 181 and cruised to victory Sunday, the crowd roared.
In the postrace celebration along the start/finish line on the track, Earnhardt pumped his fist and blew a kiss to the fans before driving to victory lane.
''I just wanted to shout at the fans, wave at them, hear what they had to say,'' Earnhardt said.
Perhaps the sounds echoed those his father heard here. Earnhardt has nine victories at Daytona, a career unto itself for some drivers. But lest he start to feel accomplished, Earnhardt can always be reminded that his father had 34 victories here, still a record.
Still, Earnhardt is starting to believe he is the driver his father once was.
''There's days when I feel like I am as good as he was,'' Earnhardt said Sunday. ''But, you know, then you're reminded by something that reminds you of what he did that you will never be able to do.
''There's times on the racetrack where I get real confident and feel like I -- he couldn't have done it no better than that right there. But it ain't long before I figure I was wrong. I mean, he was pretty tough. Even if you thought you were better than him, he just had a way of proving you wrong at anything.
''But it's just been so long since I raced against him or watched him race or watched him drive, I guess you kind of forget how good he was.''
The record book is an easy reference. Earnhardt Sr. won the Winston Cup points championship seven times, tied by only Richard Petty. No other driver has come close to that success.
Earnhardt Jr. has never won the points title; his first real run at it came last season, when he finished third behind the champion, Matt Kenseth, and the runner-up, Jimmie Johnson.
But Earnhardt is ahead in the Nextel Cup points race heading into next weekend's stop in Rockingham, N.C.
''I'm leading the points the first time in my career, so that's pretty cool,'' he said. ''I think the championship's the big goal.
''I don't know how that sounds, but it's good to get this out of the way and put this aside so, yeah, championship time. Now we can just focus.''
Perhaps he can hold up his end, and the Earnhardts will become the third father-son duo to win points championships in Nascar's elite series. Lee and Richard Petty, and Ned and Dale Jarrett, are the only others to accomplish the feat.
For Little E, it is a chase that is just beginning. And one that may never end.
AUTO RACING
