An explosion on Monday in the corner of a crowded playground of an elementary school for boys in northern Baghdad killed at least one child and wounded at least three. The American military said the explosion had been caused by a homemade bomb, but a member of the Baghdad police bomb squad said the explosion, apparently the first incident at a school, had been an accident.
The American military said the explosion had killed two children and had wounded three others.
When the Iraqi police arrived at the school, the Asmaa elementary school, they discovered a second unexploded bomb, or what the military called an ''improvised explosive device,'' near the site of the blast, the military said, adding that the police called in an Army bomb squad, which successfully defused it.
But a member of the Baghdad police bomb squad said the blast took place when an old grenade buried in some trash exploded as the trash was being incinerated. He said the second bomb was far from the school, near a hospital. The Iraqi police have said one child was killed, not two, and four wounded.
The explosion took place at about 2 p.m., when the children were in the yard for recess, said Zuhair Saleh, who was sitting in the garden of his relatives' home across the street. He and other men scaled the low wall of the school to help the small group of children near the corner where the blast occurred, among them his 7-year-old nephew Mustafa Muhammad Saleh. Mustafa was wounded in the chest and died on the way to the hospital, his uncle said.
Two American soldiers were killed on Monday in separate attacks. One was killed when a roadside bomb went off near the town of Baquba, about 30 miles northeast of Baghdad. The second soldier was killed and another was wounded when an explosive erupted in central Baghdad on Monday morning.
On Sunday, the military reported that three American civilians had been wounded and one had been killed when their Iraqi taxi was ambushed on the drive from Hilla, in the south, to Baghdad. The Americans were part of a religious group, the military said, without providing further details. Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, deputy chief of operations, said at a news conference on Monday that there have been an average of 17 engagements a day between American soldiers and insurgents during the past week, down from about 22 to 24 the previous week.
Commenting on the Saturday attack by insurgents on a police station in the volatile town of Falluja that left at least 25 dead, General Kimmitt contradicted initial reports that foreigners, including Lebanese and Iranians, were involved in the assault. He said it appeared that all the attackers wounded or killed in Falluja were Iraqis.
He said Iraqis being questioned regarding the attack included the mayor of Falluja, who had submitted his resignation a few days before the assault, The Associated Press said.
The explosion on Monday was at a school in the mostly Shiite working-class Jawadin quarter of Baghdad. But even if it was caused by a bomb, it remains unclear whether it might represent a tactical shift by insurgents to strike a deeper chord of fear among Iraqis by attacking what should be the safest havens and the most helpless victims. Since last summer, rumors have periodically spread through Baghdad that schools would be the targets of bombers, but there have been no previous such attacks.
Ghassan Talal Saleh, a relative of a child killed in the explosion, said that schools, including Asmaa elementary school, had received letters recently threatening an attack, but that members of his family had not taken the threats seriously. The report of threatening letters could not be independently verified.
Jeffrey B. White, who served with the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency for almost 35 years as a specialist on the Middle East and is now an associate with the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, responded to the initial report of a bomb, saying, ''On the face of it, it looks like a terrorist wing rather than remnants of the old regime or Arab nationalists.''
Dr. Samer Rasmi Abdul-Amir, the senior doctor at Muhammad Bakr Hakim Hospital, where three wounded children were taken, said two children were in stable condition and one was in serious condition. The boys were said by hospital staff members to be 6 or 7.
''People may be fearful now of sending their children back to school,'' Dr. Rasmi said.
On a night when Baghdad was noisy with weddings before the quiet month of Muharram, the men in Mustafa's family gathered in one room of his house to mourn and the women in another. Mustafa's mother, Qahera Mehdi Saleh, sat quietly on a carpet with her back to the wall, surrounded by her family, as toddlers buzzed around. Ms. Saleh's eyes were swollen with grief. When her son's name was mentioned, she rocked gently and began to weep soundlessly.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: BAGHDAD
