HIGHLIGHTS
LONDON: BRITISH ACADEMY AWARDS -- ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' was named the year's best film on Sunday in London at the Baftas (British Academy of Film and Television Arts), the British equivalent of the Academy Awards, Reuters reported. But Peter Jackson, who directed the ''Lord of the Rings'' trilogy, was beaten out for the best director accolade by Peter Weir, who was at the helm of ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World.'' The two films each won four prizes. Bill Murray and Scarlett Johansson were named best actor and actress for their work in ''Lost in Translation''; she had also been nominated for ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.'' Bill Nighy, who played the uninhibited aging rock star in ''Love, Actually,'' took the prize for best supporting actor, and Renée Zellweger was named best supporting actress for her portrayal of the tough-minded mountain girl in ''Cold Mountain.''
PRAGUE: LIBESKIND PROJECT -- The architect Daniel Libeskind, left, who created the master plan for the World Trade Center site and designed the Jewish Museum in Berlin, has agreed to design a Salvador Dalí museum in Prague, the Czech capital, an official said yesterday. According to The Associated Press, Mr. Libeskind is to return to Prague on May 11, the 100th anniversary of the birth of Dalí, to unveil a model of his design. Miro Smolak, the principal organizer of the project, said Mr. Libeskind had accepted an offer to design the $15.7 million museum after seeing its future site in downtown Prague on Sunday. The museum, which could be completed as early as 2007, is to display 1,000 to 1,500 examples of Dalí's work on loan from collections in Spain, France and Germany.
MUSIC: EMI VS. DANGER MOUSE -- EMI, which releases the Beatles recordings, is serving cease and desist orders on the D.J. Danger Mouse and record stores that stock his ''Grey Album,'' a remix that draws on the rapper Jay-Z's ''Black Album'' and beats sampled from the Beatles' 1968 classic known as the White Album, the BBC reported. Danger Mouse, whose real name is Brian Burton, said that he was complying. ''He's not going to produce anymore, sell anymore or distribute anymore, which is what they're asking of him,'' a spokesman said. ''He's done that in an effort to avoid any legal proceedings. But the album's very much out there.'' Danger Mouse is ''just happy for people to burn it, bootleg it or post it on the Internet,'' the spokesman said. ''Consequently, people are doing it.''
HONORS FOR OZAWA -- Seiji Ozawa, left, music director laureate of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and music director of the Vienna State Opera, will be awarded an honorary doctorate by the Sorbonne in Paris on March 29, Agence France-Presse reported. The university said the honor was intended ''to pay homage to one of the most eminent performers of our time, who notably has conducted the greatest masterpieces of French music, from Berlioz to Messiaen.''
FILM: TARANTINO TO CANNES -- The director Quentin Tarantino, whose films include ''Reservoir Dogs,'' ''Pulp Fiction'' and the two-part ''Kill Bill,'' has been named president of the jury at the Cannes International Film Festival, which is to open a 12-day run on the French Riviera on May 12, Agence France-Presse reported. ''For a filmmaker and film lover, there's no greater honor than to be on the jury of the Cannes Film Festival,'' said Mr. Tarantino, who won its top prize, the Golden Palm, 10 years ago for ''Pulp Fiction.''
FOOTNOTES
The American choreographer William Forsythe, who has led the Frankfurt Ballet since 1984, has been awarded Germany's top dance prize for his role in revitalizing ballet and modern dance, The Associated Press reported. In a ceremony in Essen, Klaus Zehelein, the president of Germany's Theater Association, commended Mr. Forsythe for ''extraordinary service to the artistic world of dance.'' After a protracted dispute with the cash-strapped city of Frankfurt, Mr. Forsythe is ending his contract with the Frankfurt Ballet later this year but will continue to work in Germany with a smaller, independent troupe supported by Frankfurt and Dresden. . . . Beginning tonight Nancy Opel, a Tony nominee for ''Urinetown,'' will replace Barbara Barrie in the role of Yente the matchmaker in the revival of ''Fiddler on the Roof'' scheduled to open at the Minskoff Theater on Feb. 26. . . . Michelle Clark, the United States publisher of ArtReview, has announced the appointment of Daniel Kunitz as the United States editor of the international monthly magazine.
