While most Americans were celebrating Presidents' Day yesterday, a very different holiday was being honored in Princeton, N.J. George F. Kennan, who formulated the policy of ''containment'' of the Soviet Union during the early cold war, turned 100. Surrounded by his wife and four children the frail Mr. Kennan -- diplomat, historian and sometimes Cassandra -- had reached a birthday he never imagined.
''The last thing he ever expected was to live so long,'' said his biographer, John Lewis Gaddis, a professor of history and political science at Yale. ''As a young man he was often sick. During his freshman year at Princeton he had scarlet fever and was forced to drop out. He never felt himself to be healthy. Ulcers were a constant problem.''
Though pleased at Mr. Kennan's longevity, Mr. Gaddis also finds himself stymied. In 1982 he agreed not to publish his biography of Mr. Kennan while the diplomat was alive.
Mr. Gaddis first met Mr. Kennan in 1974 at the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, when Mr. Gaddis, teaching at Ohio University, was considered a rising star in the field of the history of American diplomacy, having already published ''The United States and the Origins of the Cold War, 1941-1947.''
Mr. Kennan had joined the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton after quitting the diplomatic service in 1953. In 1977 Mr. Gaddis interviewed him for an essay for Foreign Affairs, on the 30th anniversary of Mr. Kennan's famous ''Sources of Soviet Conduct'' analysis, known in countless history books as the Mr. X article, since Mr. Kennan remained anonymous at the time.
But their relationship jelled in 1982 when Mr. Gaddis published ''Strategies of Containment,'' judging Mr. Kennan to be the pivotal foreign policy analyst in post-1945 America. ''He wrote me a couple of generous letters about that book,'' Mr. Gaddis recalled. ''He basically said that I properly understood his strategic thinking.''
Mr. Gaddis asked Mr. Kennan if anybody was writing his biography; the response was self-deprecating: ''No. It never occurred to me that anyone would want to.''
An admirer of Ronald Steel's biography, ''Walter Lippmann and the American Century'' (1980), Mr. Gaddis struck a deal with Mr. Kennan modeled on the one Mr. Steel had arranged with Lippmann: he would be his authorized biographer, have access to all of his papers, but publish his book only after his subject had died.
''The agreement was made in 1982,'' Mr. Gaddis recalled. ''He was 78 years old. Neither of us envisioned he would be around in 2004. In fact I was thinking the other day about Boswell's relationship with Samuel Johnson, which went on for 20 years. It's hard to believe, but this one has gone on longer.''
Mr. Gaddis is not complaining. His friendship with Mr. Kennan has deepened, and his subject's historical prominence continues to rise. Besides regular access to Mr. Kennan, Mr. Gaddis has had the rare privilege of reading all of his unpublished diaries, which he says are ''classic American literature,'' an eloquent successor to John Quincy Adams's voluminous effort a century earlier.
Born in Milwaukee on Feb. 16, 1904, Mr. Kennan began his diaries at the age of 11. There are intriguing boyish passages about school curriculum, Wisconsin weather, close friends and the thrill of watching President Woodrow Wilson wave his top hat in a parade. While not systematically kept, the diaries cover nearly 90 years of American life.
''What's exciting is how much unpublished material they contain,'' Mr. Gaddis said. ''He writes about such things as his undergraduate years at Princeton and trips sailing up the Norwegian coast. They're very personal. He undertook a sustained effort at self-criticism and self-analysis.''
Some of Mr. Kennan's manuscripts, as well as photographs and personal belongings, are on display in ''The Life and Times of George F. Kennan'' at the Firestone Library at Princeton University. By far the most compelling artifact is his famous ''Long Telegram'' from February 1946, laid out in a display case nearly 20 feet long.
The Long Telegram, Mr. Kennan's effort to explain Soviet behavior and goals, has become a symbol of the days when career Foreign Service officers had a direct impact on American policy. Mr. Kennan was chargé d'affaires (deputy to Ambassador Averell Harriman) in the American Embassy in Moscow when he sent the 8,000-word telegram on Washington's birthday, 1946.
After months of brooding over the inability of the State Department to understand the profound threat the Soviet Union presented, Mr. Kennan was moved by a routine inquiry from the Treasury Department to give Washington his analysis of the nature and ambitions of the Soviet government. ''Suddenly, my opinion was being asked,'' Mr. Kennan wrote in his ''Memoirs 1925-1950'' (1967). ''Now, by God, they would have it.''
The Long Telegram provided, in the clipped style of a cable, a persuasive synthesis of elements in the psychology of the Soviet leaders. ''At the bottom of Kremlin's neurotic view of world affairs,'' Mr. Kennan wrote, ''is traditional and instinctive Russian sense of insecurity'' caused primarily by countless foreign invasions across the defenseless plains separating Russia from Europe.
This insecurity had since 1917 been married to Marxist dogma, giving rise to a state of mind that was now beyond change by any agreement or arrangement with outside powers, Kennan wrote. The Kremlin leaders -- Stalin in particular -- were now compelled by a combination of their fears and dreams to work ''in patient but deadly struggle for total destruction of rival power.'' Coexistence, in the sense of live and let live, was impossible, Mr. Kennan warned. By 1952 his string of perceptive white papers had led him to an appointment as ambassador to Moscow.
Over half a century later the Long Telegram remains perceptive. But it is not wholly prophetic. Mr. Kennan's presentation of Stalin as a fanatical revolutionary rather than a shrewd calculator of power is overdrawn, and his emphasis on Marxist ideology as a motivating force, as opposed to considerations of security and national purpose, is at odds with his later positions.
Still, the Long Telegram is a reliable window into Mr. Kennan's personal frustration at Washington. And this telegraphic essay hit official Washington like a lightning bolt that illuminated the landscape.
Mr. Kennan did not always get it right. In the mid-1990's he sharply opposed enlarging NATO to include Poland, the Czech Republic and Hungary, Eastern European countries that had won back their independence when the Soviet Union collapsed. He warned of a new cold war. But his fears proved unfounded.
''All of us who aspired to careers in the Foreign Service still look to Kennan as a role model,'' said Richard Gardner, a former United States ambassador to Italy and Spain. ''Just look at the Long Telegram. How many ambassadors today could write such a document?'' Today, Mr. Gardner complained, ''foreign policy is run out of the White House.''
On Friday Secretary of State Colin L. Powell will speak at a Princeton symposium on Mr. Kennan's long career; Mr. Gaddis will give the closing remarks.
