''I feel very vagina-friendly,'' says Anthony Craver, the jolly sheriff of Ukiah, Calif. In 2002 Eve Ensler's ''Vagina Monologues'' was staged in Ukiah as part of an 800-city effort to raise money to stop violence against women and girls.
Mr. Craver's daffy statement may be an appropriate response to Ms. Ensler's jocular, occasionally infantilizing approach to vibrators, orgasms and giggly words. But it stands in stark contrast to many less fanciful reflections on sexist violence to be heard tonight on ''Until the Violence Stops,'' a rousing film documenting the consequences of Ms. Ensler's infectious brand of activism.
''The Vagina Monologues'' is a collection of soliloquies inspired by transcripts of interviews with women about their anatomy. Whatever you think about the unsinkable play's labored personification of genitalia -- ''my vagina is angry,'' etc. -- ''Until the Violence Stops'' demonstrates its almost magical efficacy, both as a catharsis and a goad to action.
The documentary was shot in the Philippines, Kenya, South Dakota and other places where women congregated two years ago to create agitprop spectacles, including productions of ''The Vagina Monologues.'' Ms. Ensler has named these coordinated, yearly efforts V-Day, although the designated day seems in fact to be the months of February and March.
Many of the 2002 V-Day participants had endured brutal assaults, including rape and incest, along with the cruel corollary of those crimes: the implied imperative to silence. Publicly testifying, although out of court, is assumed to be a key component of pre-empting future assaults on women.
While the choked-up testimony on display in ''Until the Violence Stops'' is affecting, it is politically inconsequential. The stories, rendered in a vague, almost private language that defies scrutiny, don't add up to a coherent call to arms.
A fearsome mandate for political action is made plain elsewhere in the documentary, however. In the Philippines, where women were conscripted as ''comfort women'' and routinely raped by Japanese soldiers during World War II, victims continue to seek arbitration and restitution. (In December 2000 private Japanese and international organizations convened a war tribunal that found Emperor Hirohito ''guilty of responsibility for rape and sexual slavery.'')
In South Dakota on a Lakota reservation a man admits to having savored in his adolescence the prospect of torturing women; he believes that his community cultivates this kind of terrorism. Lakota women recount episodes of near-fatal violence against them. Several of those who speak say that social service organizations overlook specific assaults and rapes, attending instead to systemic problems like poverty. Such crimes need to be investigated and prosecuted.
Finally, in Kenya an activist named Agnes Pareyio has started a countrywide effort to deter women from submitting to female genital cutting. With money raised by the V-Day performances and related projects, Ms. Pareyio founded the V-Day Safe House, a refuge for girls seeking to escape their families and mandatory clitoridectomies.
In a matter-of-fact demonstration on a wooden model of an inverted pelvis, Ms. Pareyio gives a chillingly clinical account of the varieties of carving still in practice. Her work inspiring girls to defy these harrowing rituals, and caring for them when they do, deserves financial support.
Throughout the film Ms. Ensler, who tends to batter her favorite forbidden word into senselessness, avoids another word: feminism. Perhaps that's by design. It now fails to inspire; vagina, maybe, is more exciting. What to make of that? How about nothing? Successful political action, as ''Until the Violence Stops'' shows, does not demand a perfected ideology or a classy vocabulary. What it requires, above all, is gimmicks and money.
TELEVISION REVIEW
