The air in this town crackles with the tension of a courtroom waiting for a verdict.
A United Nations statement on the feasibility of holding elections before the June 30 transfer of power in Iraq is expected this week. And nowhere is the news awaited more anxiously than here, the heart of Iraq's Shiite population and home to the influential Muslim cleric pushing for elections in place of the caucus-style system favored by the Americans.
Men slapping down backgammon chips in tea houses are talking about it. So is the boy selling steaming bowls of chickpeas from a dented metal cart. The hope of early elections -- and the troubles that could be unleashed if self-rule is postponed -- has monopolized conversation here, said Hussein al-Zamily, an official of the Dawa political party.
''The worries are increasing,'' Mr. Zamily said. ''If the U.N. goes our way, there will be peace. If they don't, it will be harder for the religious leaders to maintain control.''
L. Paul Bremer, the top American adviser in Iraq, said Monday that he expected that the United Nations would issue its opinion this week on whether conditions in Iraq would permit organizing elections before June 30, when the Bush administration wants to turn over sovereignty.
Under the American plan, local leaders would select members of an assembly, which would then form an interim government. National elections would be held by the end of next year. Shiite leaders say the fairest way to build democracy would be with direct elections this year. Other groups, like Sunnis and Kurds, fear that such elections would favor the Shiites, who are a majority in Iraq.
The United Nations special envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, who traveled to Iraq last week, was in Dubai on Monday and was to return to New York on Wednesday to meet with Secretary General Kofi Annan on the election issue, diplomats at the United Nations said.
But the Shiites are not simply waiting. Amid the green Shiite flags and blue-domed mosques, a furious discussion is taking place. Though Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Iraq's most powerful Shiite cleric, has urged followers to refrain from action until the United Nations reaches its decision, many Shiite leaders are beginning to air alternative ways of creating a government.
One would be to shrink the Iraq Governing Council, whose 25 members were selected by the American-led occupation authorities.
''If we can't have elections right away, a smaller Governing Council might be better because it could be more tightly focused on the precise issue of elections,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, a Dawa spokesman. ''We like the idea of giving authority to the G. C. because of the continuity.''
On the other hand, some council members say they want to expand the ruling group. At a meeting in Baghdad on Monday, council members said they would work out a plan this month regarding the form of the transitional government.
On another issue, some members have said they want Islam to be the sole source of legislation, as opposed to a ''source of inspiration,'' as the draft constitution envisions now. But Mr. Bremer, during a visit to Karbala on Monday, indicated that he would veto any attempt to give Islam such a primary role.
Iraq's pattern of violence is seen by many as a major obstacle to nationwide elections, but many Shiite leaders blame the Americans for that.
''It is careless for the Americans to have so little troops here and now they make them smaller,'' said Kadem al-Salihy, a spokesman for the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a Shiite group. ''If we can improve security ourselves, we will be able to have elections faster.''
Initially, Shiites were encouraged by Mr. Brahimi, who said after meeting Ayatollah Sistani last week, ''We are with him on this 100 percent because elections are the best means to enable any people to set up a state that serves their interest.''
But later, a spokesman for Mr. Brahimi said the ayatollah's demands for nationwide balloting would be too difficult to pull off this spring. ''The time between now and June is very short, and that makes it unlikely that you can put mechanisms in place,'' said the spokesman, Ahmad Fawzi.
Jassim Muhammad, who was selling boiled chickpeas outside a mosque here, said: ''It will be a mess if they wait too long. Everybody is talking about the elections. The energy is building.''
Mr. Zamily, the Dawa official, said that if American officials were not careful, ''they will reverse all the good things they have done.''
''Right now, children in Najaf wave to soldiers,'' he said. ''We don't want them to start throwing stones.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: POLITICS
