Tomorrow is an official international ''fixture'' day and more than 20 friendly soccer matches will be played around the world. For American fans, the main event will be in Amsterdam, where the United States will play the Netherlands in its second match of the year (live on ESPN2 at 2:30 p.m.).
''These games have a value for us as we get closer to qualifying games,'' Bruce Arena, the United States national team manager, said in a telephone interview before leaving for Europe. ''Is the result important? No. What is important is that we get in a competitive game and get to evaluate our players. Since the last World Cup, the entire team, including European-based players, has rarely been together.''
Qualifying matches for the 2006 World Cup in Germany start for the United States in June (against either Grenada or Guyana), and Arena has taken a 22-man squad -- evenly split between players from overseas clubs and Major League Soccer clubs -- to the Netherlands.
The United States is also scheduled to play Haiti (March 13 in Miami) and Poland twice (March 31 in Plock and July 11 probably in Chicago or East Rutherford, N.J.). United States officials have said the national team will also play on April 28 (possibly against one of the nations bidding to play host to the 2010 World Cup) and on May 26.
Arena has chosen five players -- Tim Howard, Kerry Zavagnin, Jonny Walker, Cory Gibbs and Conor Casey -- who have made fewer than 10 appearances for the national team. Howard, Walker and Kasey Keller are the three goalkeepers this time around at a position where Arena has many to choose from.
''I have talked to several domestic keepers and told them that right now, I think we have three goalkeepers who are clearly ahead of everyone else,'' Arena said, referring to Howard, Keller and Brad Friedel. ''But in 2006, maybe things change. A couple will be 35 or 36 years old. That's not just the case at goalkeeper. Players like Cobi Jones and Earnie Stewart could help us in qualifying but might not be around at the end. I still believe they can play, and I want them in the mix.
''Right now, I wouldn't say that Tim Howard is at the top of the list in goal. We can win with all three. Kasey and Brad have an edge with experience. If you ask 10 people, you would get 10 different responses. It's a bit of a crapshoot, but the nice part is that I probably can't make a mistake.''
Late last week, the Dutch team's manager, Dick Advocaat, added strikers Ruud van Nistelrooy, Roy Makaay, Marc Overmars and Rafael van der Vaart to his roster for the match. The Netherlands, which did not qualify for the 2002 World Cup, is preparing for this summer's European Championships in Portugal.
REAL MADRID  Two-Game U.S. Tour Is Planned
Real Madrid, the top Spanish club, will be paid about $4 million to play two games in the United States this summer, a trip that will be promoted by Soccer United Marketing, an arm of M.L.S., said someone involved in promoting international team tours in the United States.
Real -- the team of Ronaldo, Luis Figo, Zinedine Zidane and David Beckham -- is in first place in the Spanish league. The club will probably play the Mexican national team, which is also promoted by Soccer United Marketing, in Los Angeles and the M.L.S. All-Star team on July 24, probably on the East Coast.
Although he did not address the details in an e-mail message, M.L.S. Commissioner Don Garber wrote that ''it's way too early to say with Real.''
2010 WORLD CUP  Morocco and South Africa in Running
Now that the Cup of Nations tournament is over, the next big date for Africa is May 15, when the 24-member executive committee of FIFA, soccer's world governing body, will vote on which African nation will play host to the 2010 World Cup. Morocco, runner-up to Tunisia on Saturday, is believed to be neck and neck with South Africa. Tunisia, Egypt and Libya are considered out of the running.
Morocco has the public support of two of the nine European committee members -- Michel Platini of France and Angel Villar Lloma of Spain -- but South Africa is perhaps the sentimental favorite because it missed out on playing host to the 2006 tournament by one controversial vote and because of Nelson Mandela's worldwide appeal.
Three members of the committee are from the Concacaf region -- Chuck Blazer of the United States, Jack Warner of Trinidad and Tobago and Isaac David Sasso Sasso of Costa Rica -- and it is no coincidence that Trinidad and Tobago played international matches last year in Morocco and South Africa, and will play games in Libya and Egypt. Costa Rica, too, has played in South Africa. The three Concacaf votes remain up for grabs. Alan Rothenberg, a former president of the United States Soccer Federation, is a consultant to Morocco's bid committee.
Corner Kicks
MANCHESTER UNITED -- The club's two largest shareholders -- the American Malcolm Glazer and the Irish racehorse owners John Magnier and J. P. McManus (through their Cubic Expression Company) -- increased their holdings last week. Glazer, who owns the N.F.L.'s Tampa Bay Buccaneers, increased his stake to 16.31 percent. Magnier and McManus own 28.89 percent of the club. United is a publicly traded company. There has been speculation in England that Glazer will make a takeover bid, but do not be surprised if Glazer sells his shares and makes a tidy sum.
A NEW TOY -- Mark Noonan, the executive vice president for marketing at M.L.S., will leave his job at the end of March to join LCI Toys.
INTEREST ABROAD -- Midfielder Danny Szetela, a member of the United States under-17 team who grew up in Clifton, N.J., and holds United States and Polish passports, is soon expected to sign with Manchester City.
FRANCE -- Three weeks after his transfer from Fulham to Manchester United, Louis Saha will make his first international appearance tomorrow in France's friendly against Belgium.
ASTON VILLA -- Omar Herrera, a native of Colombia who lives and works in New York, spent Valentine's Day weekend at Villa Park in Birmingham, England, where he proposed to his girlfriend, Alexis Aguero. Herrera, a fan of Aston Villa and its Colombian striker Juan Pablo Angel, won the all-expenses-paid trip in a contest on the Villa Web site.
SOCCER REPORT
