Howard Dean vowed on Monday to continue his bid for the presidency, even after his campaign chairman defected and he appeared headed for a defeat in Wisconsin. But with some Dean supporters warning that he could not survive another loss, Senators John Kerry and John Edwards began contemplating the contours of a two-man race starting Wednesday.
The three main Democratic presidential candidates raced across Wisconsin -- their charter jets crossing wings on runways in remote stretches of this state -- but the main question was less about what would happen on Tuesday, when Wisconsin holds a primary that Dr. Dean said he must win, and more about what would happen on Wednesday.
With a series of polls showing Mr. Kerry in position to roll up another victory here, Mr. Edwards declared that he would not quit the race and said he was now looking forward to what he said would be a two-way contest with Mr. Kerry going into a heavy schedule of primaries in early March.
''We are going on,'' Mr. Edwards said in an interview, asserting that his biggest obstacle has been a fast-paced primary calendar that has not given him time to catch up with Mr. Kerry. ''In every single state, we have been rising on election day, every single one. It's just a time issue.''
Mr. Kerry prepared for a trip on Wednesday to Ohio, followed by what his campaign said would be a coast-to-coast tour of other states that vote on March 2. He spent most of Monday focusing on President Bush, as if the primaries were over and the general election had begun.
''I've never seen a bigger say-one-thing-do-another administration than this crowd in Washington,'' Mr. Kerry said to one of several huge crowds he encountered, this one in Wausau. ''George Bush, you know, he's already started the attack ads. I welcome it, folks.''
Dr. Dean was preparing to return to his home in Burlington, Vt., to plan what shape his campaign might take now as he absorbed the loss of his campaign chairman, Steven Grossman, to the Kerry campaign and the prospect that other of his senior aides would leave as soon as the votes were counted here on Tuesday.
Throughout the day, he veered between defiance -- when a crowd in Madison chanted, ''We want Dean,'' he responded, ''Well if you vote for him, you'll have him'' -- and doubt about what his future held for him should he lose again on Wednesday.
''I still have some hope of being the nominee,'' Dr. Dean said at one point, as he encountered repeated questions from reporters about whether he could survive the vote in Wisconsin. At another point he said: ''We're just going to have to see how we do, but, I'll have plenty to say after Wisconsin depending on whether we win or lose.''
''Let me remind you all that I have more delegates than everyone else in this race except John Kerry,'' Dr. Dean told reporters, an edge of anger in his voice. ''So I think the campaign obituaries that some of you have been writing are a little misplaced. ''
''John Edwards said the other day this is a two-person race,'' he said. ''I would agree. It's a two-person race between me and John Kerry. ''
Still, Dr. Dean sounded at times as if a burden was being lifted from his shoulders. He avoided the harsh criticism of Mr. Kerry that he had raised proudly the week before, instead praising both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards as ''fine people.'' He refused to answer a routine question about whether he would have authorized the use of nuclear weapons were he in the shoes of Harry S. Truman, his favorite president, explaining, ''I just don't feel like it.''
High-level aides in the campaign said they expect Dr. Dean to keep his name on the ballot -- part of his reluctance to quit, some say, was hearing that it would be erased if he conceded. The aides also said they think Dr. Dean will use his e-mail list of supporters to raise money for other Democrats.
Staff members expect to soon lose their paychecks, and think Dr. Dean himself will probably significantly cut back his public schedule. But aides, even while describing him as veering back and forth about whether to press on, said that they could not see how he could continue to be a serious candidate should he lose Wisconsin by a big margin.
''I know what all of us think he ought to do,'' one senior aide said. ''But he needs to decide whether he should do it first, and when and how. Maybe it's Wednesday, maybe it's Thursday, maybe it's Friday, maybe it's not for two more weeks. Anybody who says they do know is lying to you. He's going to get there eventually, but I don't know when.''
Mr. Edwards vowed on Monday that should he find himself in a two-person race with Mr. Kerry, he would draw distinctions with the Massachusetts senator on issues of substance. As an example, he again raised Mr. Kerry's support for the North American Free Trade Agreement, an issue he challenged Mr. Kerry on in South Carolina and again at a debate here on Sunday night.
Aides said he would raise Mr. Kerry's Nafta votes in contests across the Rust Belt and in the South, arguing that the treaty had produced an exodus of jobs from the United States.
''There is a choice for Wisconsin voters: I'm against Nafta, I was against Nafta,'' said Mr. Edwards, who was not in the Senate when the treaty was approved. ''Governor Dean and Senator Kerry were for it.''
Mr. Kerry, questioned about his support for Nafta by a voter at one town hall meeting, did not back away from his vote for it, but said he would as president appoint a commission to make changes in it.
''This administration has not stood up and fought for the rights of the American worker,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I'm not going to throw Nafta out completely: I'm going to fix it.''
And he said it was a mistake to blame the nation's economic problems on liberalized trade agreements. ''President Bush's recovery has been almost as bad as his recession,'' he said.
Mr. Edwards's aides said that their shot against Mr. Kerry would be clearer if Dr. Dean did drop out or was effectively marginalized by the result on Wednesday. But Mr. Edwards' communications director, David Ginsberg, said Mr. Edwards would still be able to compete effectively even if Dr. Dean stuck around.
''The Edwards message is getting through and it's not dependent on who else is in the race,'' he said.
In an interview, Mr. Edwards said that he believed the quick campaign schedule -- specifically designed by Democratic leaders to produce an early nominee -- had the effect of creating momentum for candidates who win Iowa and New Hampshire that was very difficult to stop once the race expanded out across the country.
''There is not a lot of time for people to make a choice,'' he said. ''It's not the kind of time we had in Iowa, New Hampshire and South Carolina for people to see us and say that's who I'm for, which is what I want to see happen.''
Mr. Edwards said he would campaign in every state that votes March 2, but said he would focus particularly on New York, Georgia and Ohio, where he argued that his message about manufacturing job losses would resonate. He stopped short of saying he would make an all-out effort in California, which has by far the highest number of delegates at stake, 370. With the cost of air travel and television time, it is also by far the most expensive state in which to campaign.
Mr. Kerry has avoided any criticism of Dr. Dean, with an eye toward rounding up his supporters if and when Dr. Dean drops out. Aboard his plane on Monday, Mr. Kerry reported that he and Dr. Dean had a ''very nice conversation'' on Sunday night.
''He was very warm,'' Mr. Kerry said.
Dr. Dean encountered a number of reminders throughout what some of his own aides said could prove to be, for all intents and purposes, the final day of his candidacy as he traveled through Wisconsin.
At the rally in La Crosse, Dr. Dean was not introduced, as candidates typically are, as ''the next president of the United States,'' but as ''a man who can bring real change to this country.''
''Whatever happens tomorrow, we are going on,'' Dr. Dean told the half-empty room, where Green Bay Packers insignia outnumbered Dean logos on T-shirts. Mentioning environmental change, universal health insurance and job creation, he said, ''we're going to keep that going until we get the reforms we want.''
In answer to a question from the crowd, Dr. Dean said that after the year he has had, he is reluctant to disband the organizations that had grown up around his candidacy.
''This whole campaign is about empowering people -- it is not from a top-down campaign that tells you what to do, it is you telling us what to do,'' he said. ''I'm never going to be able to deliver 700,000 people to whoever the nominee is, and I wouldn't want that power. The one thing I'm going to ask everyone to do is in some way make sure George Bush doesn't get re-elected president of the United States.''
It was unclear to even Dr. Dean's aides what he might do should he decide to stay in the race. He might keep his name or the ballot, but go back to Vermont, and turn out for the occasional trip or event.
He is likely, aides said, to use his extensive fund-raising apparatus to help other candidates, which would be a way to continue influencing elections and maintaining some political clout.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE BATTLEGROUND
