A game-tying goal and stubborn penalty-killing in the third period Monday shook the Islanders out of their malaise against the Los Angeles Kings. Then came a bigger jolt.
As Trent Hunter kept his head turned to watch his slap shot be blocked by goalie Cristobal Huet, the Kings' Brad Norton drove into him, his right knee catching Hunter's.
Hunter, a contender for rookie of the year and the Islanders' leader in goals with 22, went down with 11 minutes 20 seconds left and was assisted to the trainer's room. Key injuries had already tested the team's resilience, and now the Islanders' season appeared to have taken another big blow.
But Hunter was back 7:57 later and took a power-play shift to hearty applause from the matinee crowd of 15,369 at Nassau Coliseum. The Islanders did not add a flourish to Hunter's return by scoring, but they earned a 1-1 tie that was a reminder of how fragile their playoff run could be. ''It was pretty scary when it happened,'' said Hunter, who felt soreness afterward but was assured there was no ligament damage.
Earlier, Hunter assisted on Arron Asham's tying goal, Hunter's fourth point in three games. After 45 minutes of postgame therapy, Hunter had not seen the replay of Norton's hit, but Norton had.
''I didn't stick it out,'' Norton said of his leg, ''but I did get him in the knee. It just happened so fast, but I would never intentionally do something like that.''
The Islanders (27-21-8-2) moved into a tie with Montreal for seventh place in the Eastern Conference and are 4 points ahead of ninth-place Buffalo. Riding a four-game unbeaten streak (1-0-3), they play host to Pittsburgh on Wednesday.
The Islanders outshot the Kings, 8-1, in overtime but could not squeeze one by Huet (36 saves). Rick DiPietro stopped 29 shots for the Islanders.
The Kings scored 1:30 into the second period when Trent Klatt scooped a high rebound off DiPietro in midair and shoveled it above DiPietro for a 1-0 lead.
''Those are tough to corral,'' DiPietro said. ''It landed flat on his stick and no one had time to react.''
The easy back-and-forth seemed to lull the Islanders into a stupor that lasted into the third period, until Asham's goal on a short slap shot 50 seconds in. The Islanders were quickly deflated again when high-sticking calls on Adrian Aucoin and Michael Peca six seconds apart put them two men down with 17:04 left.
But the Islanders summoned their lost vigor to kill the penalty, helping them secure at least a point for the 10th time in 11 games.
''That second period cost us, but we'll take it right now,'' Asham said.
Like the Islanders, who have been without right wing Mark Parrish (ankle) and center Aleksei Yashin (wrist) for the last 19 games, the Kings (22-16-14-7) have overcome several key injuries to remain in the playoff hunt. Los Angeles has lost more man games to injury than any other team this season, and one of its stars, Ziggy Palffy, the former Islander, had season-ending shoulder surgery last month.
But the Kings gave the Islanders all they could handle. It took near misfortune, the hit on Hunter, to snap the Islanders out of it. The team harps on veteran leadership, but Hunter has been its most consistent player.
''Obviously, it's good to see guys come back after leaving the ice like that,'' Islanders defenseman Kenny Jonsson said.
SLAP SHOTS
MARK PARRISH, out since he twisted his ankle Jan. 1, said he would not return on Wednesday, as had been speculated. He said he could not comment further.
HOCKEY
