It was a few minutes before 5 on a recent night and the deadline was approaching for the nightly news of the Russian state. The anchor of Vesti, Mikhail Antonov, still without makeup, his hair tousled, had to decide whether to trim the report on protests in Latvia or a train wreck in Chicago.
It was out of the question to trim what almost always tops the news, whether interesting or not. ''If there is no obvious breaking news, we start with the president,'' said Mr. Antonov, whose program appears on the state channel Rossiya, or Russia.
Such is the state of state television in Russia today. More than a dozen years after the collapse of the Soviet Union, what Russians see, especially on the news, remains subject to the only rating system that counts: the Kremlin's.
One result has been abundant and invariably flattering portrayals of President Vladimir V. Putin that more and more are drawing unfavorable comparisons to Soviet broadcasts and prompting warnings that the state's control over the airwaves has become one of the most significant obstacles to a democratic society.
''It's all propaganda,'' said Irina M. Khakamada, one of six candidates challenging Mr. Putin in the presidential election on March 14 and struggling to break into the only medium that reaches across Russia's vast expanses. There is no overt censorship, as there was in Soviet times, officials and executives say, but increasingly, it seems, there does not have to be.
On Russia's two largest channels, both government owned, and even on those with a lesser degree of state control, there is an uncritical deference to the nation's elected leader that would be unthinkable in Europe or the United States.
In the weeks before parliamentary elections last December, news programs featured overwhelmingly positive coverage of the political party loyal to Mr. Putin, United Russia. International observers cited media bias when they criticized the vote. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell raised the issue in a commentary in the Russian newspaper Izvestia.
In the Vesti studio on that recent night, as the ''intro'' faded, Mr. Antonov, freshly made over in a state-of-the-art studio, opened the broadcast with not one but two reports on Mr. Putin's day: a meeting with the central bank chairman and another with Italy's foreign minister.
Mr. Putin's remarks appeared not in sound bites, but in banquets -- uncut and unquestioned by the anchor, Mr. Putin's opponents or anyone else. On Vesti and on Vremya, the news program of the state's First Channel, it is almost always the same.
''It's not our job to discuss and draw judgments about the actions of our president,'' said Mr. Antonov, a seasoned journalist and, he acknowledges, an ardent believer in Mr. Putin.
The Kremlin's dominance of the airwaves in post-Soviet Russia is not new. It began, executives and experts said, when President Boris N. Yeltsin rallied state and private networks alike to the cause of his precarious re-election in 1996. There is little disagreement, though, that its control has increased under Mr. Putin.
All of the national networks are now owned by the state or controlled by state corporations, including the once feisty and critical NTV, which was taken over in 2001 by Gazprom, the state gas monopoly.
Vladimir V. Grigoryev, deputy minister of the Ministry of Press, Broadcasting and Mass Media Affairs, said in an interview that the state's role reflected the country's chaotic transition in the last decade. He said the government planned to privatize one of its two channels, probably Rossiya. Gazprom is also reported to be considering selling off its media holdings, including NTV.
''It's like a pendulum,'' he said. ''Once you had irresponsible businessmen manipulating the media. Then it went the other way, with the state in control. There should be a balance.''
For now, though, Rossiya and First Channel effectively serve as information agencies for the Kremlin, at whose pleasure their directors serve. First Channel's governing board includes Mr. Putin's press secretary, Aleksei Gromov.
While newspapers, Internet sites and the radio station Ekho Moskvy enjoy degrees of independence and skepticism, television remains the primary source of news for a vast majority of Russia. The 20 highest-rated news programs in Russia all appear on three networks answerable directly or indirectly to the Kremlin.
''If I were not loyal to Mr. Putin, I would not work here,'' said Vladimir M. Kulistikov, the general director of Vesti.
Officials and executives insisted that the Kremlin did not script the news, though Mr. Putin's aides and occasionally Mr. Putin himself meet with news directors to discuss media strategy.
But others said the Kremlin wielded its influence in subtle and not so subtle ways. Boris Jordan, the American financier who ran NTV until he was fired a year ago, said the Kremlin never tried to dictate coverage before the fact, but often complained afterward.
After the siege of a Moscow theater in October 2002 by Chechen guerrillas, he said he had faced pressure to fire the anchor of a freewheeling talk show that featured relatives of the hostages pleading with the authorities not to storm the building. His own dismissal came soon afterward, in January 2003.
At Vesti, journalists see themselves as professionals whose job is to gather and package the news of the nation and the world in five broadcasts a day -- even though the product hews closely to Mr. Putin's vision.
Vesti's national news division has 600 employees across Russia and in bureaus overseas from Jerusalem to Washington. The images its cameramen collect routinely appear on European and American networks.
With Mr. Putin's re-election campaign under way, his rivals are already raising alarms about what is already shaping up as a repeat of parliamentary coverage last fall.
Mr. Kulistikov insisted that Vesti's political coverage was neutral. He noted that candidates would all receive free air time -- one hour over the next month -- and could take part in debates carried on the state networks.
Mr. Putin declined to take part, though, and declined his hour of free time. But when he officially opened his campaign last Thursday with a 29-minute speech, Vesti broke into its regular program to carry it live and repeated it through the night.
''Today, Vladimir Putin comes into every home on all television channels on various newscasts,'' Nikolai M. Kharitonov, the Communist Party's candidate, said on Ekho Moskvy that night. ''I don't have such an opportunity.''
On Friday, the chairman of the election commission suggested that perhaps the state channels had overdone coverage of Mr. Putin's speech. Mr. Kulistikov said the president's dominance on the news simply reflected his position and his popularity.
At the same time, he said certain topics remained off limits, citing any criticism that in his view would undermine the nation's unity, like calls for peace talks with secessionists in Chechnya.
Mr. Kulistikov also dismissed some of Mr. Putin's most outspoken critics as people whose views did not deserve airing because they undermined what he called ''the higher magistrates elected by the people.''
''We will cover their statements, of course, but it will be in accordance with my views of what is and what is not acceptable on state television,'' he said. ''If they don't like me, they can sue me.''
