The No.2 executive at the Chrysler division of DaimlerChrysler has been tapped to take over its Mercedes division, people close to the company said yesterday.
The executive, Wolfgang Bernhard, who is the chief operating officer of Chrysler, has been proposed for the position by DaimlerChrysler's management board, which also proposed elevating Thomas W. LaSorda, Chrysler's executive vice president for manufacturing, to succeed Mr. Bernhard, these people said. Mr. LaSorda, a Canadian, would be the highest ranking non-German executive at Chrysler.
The promotions must still be approved by DaimlerChrysler's supervisory board, which functions like an American board of directors and is meeting Wednesday and Thursday in Germany. The management board, which is under the supervisory board, includes what would be the equivalent of the top operating executives of an American company.
The developments were reported by the German news media over the weekend, though Mr. Bernhard's move had been rumored for months.
Dieter Zetsche, Chrysler's chief executive, and Mr. Bernhard, his top deputy, were dispatched to take over the ailing Chrysler division from its American managers in late 2000. Analysts tend to view both men as talented but up against a considerable challenge that they have not yet conquered.
All three of Chrysler's brands, Chrysler, Dodge and Jeep, lost market share last year, according to the Autodata Corporation. And for more than two years, Chrysler, General Motors and the Ford Motor Company have been locked in a price war that has propped up sales but sapped profitability.
Mr. Zetsche and Mr. Bernhard, however, have said that a new wave of products coming out this year will help the division right itself. Many of Chrysler's new vehicles share parts with Mercedes models and have a distinctive look. One particularly important vehicle the company will sell this year is a sedan, the Chrysler 300C, with an imposing grille.
Mr. Bernhard, 43, is an engineer and former Mercedes executive with a zest for fast cars; he previously ran Mercedes' performance division, AMG, and at a recent press event the company played a lighthearted videotape of Mr. Bernhard drag racing against a top Nascar driver and always winning.
Mr. Bernhard would succeed Jürgen Hubbert, 63, who plans to retire.
Mr. LaSorda, 49, was hired by Chrysler in 2000 after a long career at G.M. He is a top manufacturing expert who was a leader in G.M.'s efforts to emulate Toyota's manufacturing system. He also has experience as an executive in Germany, having run a plant in Eisenach, in the old East Germany, that makes vehicles for Opel, a European division of G.M.
The 1998 combination of DaimlerBenz and Chrysler -- and the nationalities of Chrysler's top executives -- has been the subject of renewed attention lately because of a lawsuit brought against DaimlerChrysler by Kirk Kerkorian, the billionaire casino mogul.
Mr. Kerkorian, who was Chrysler's largest shareholder before the merger, contends that the deal was portrayed as a ''merger of equals'' when it was actually an acquisition. Part of his case pointed to the fact that only one former Chrysler executive remains on the company's 11-member management board.
Jürgen Schrempp, DaimlerChrysler's chief executive, has testified twice at the trial in Delaware, which ended last week. A ruling from the judge is not expected anytime soon.
