It was a 500-foot steel giant, and the last bit of earthly matter to touch the Apollo rocket ships as they left our planet to fly to the Moon. Thirty-five years later, the historic launching tower is in danger of being sold as scrap metal.
Last Thursday was the deadline set by the Environmental Protection Agency for NASA to comply with current ecological standards. The original antirust, lead-based paint used to protect the tower is posing a contamination threat to the soil and the water table.
Called the Launch Umbilical Tower, it was used by engineers and technicians to gain access to the 363-foot Saturn rockets via nine retractable bridges. These swing arms carried fueling lines and electrical and data cables to the rocket; the top one served as the astronauts' walkway to the Apollo spacecraft.
But in 1984 the tower was cut to pieces and left at the mercy of the humid, salty Florida air. The pieces sit rusting in a restricted area of the Kennedy Space Center that looks like a junkyard. Weeds and subtropical vegetation have grown around and inside the tower's red sections. A fence surrounds the lot to deter vandals and souvenir seekers.
News of the tower's impending destruction stunned Ross B. Tierney, a wealthy 29-year-old space buff from England who founded the Space Restoration Society in October to save the tower.
Mr. Tierney estimates the cost of restoring the tower at $40 million, and he is trying to raise private financing for the effort. He has started a Web site, www.savethelut.org, to rally support.
A NASA contractor has already brought in equipment to dismantle and decontaminate the tower's red segments before they head for the blast furnace. The demolition, which is to take about six months, would consist of separating the individual components and then blasting the paint off with high-pressure water jets. Before proceeding, every segment must be completely enclosed to prevent the wastewater from causing the very type of damage the E.P.A. and NASA are trying to avoid.
Decontamination alone is expected to cost $2 million, said Burton R. Summerfield, chief of the division of safety, health and the environment at the space center. He added that the price might be higher if the area must be dredged and additional cleanup work done.
Still, he said, the tower must be dismantled. ''It has stayed here long enough,'' Mr. Summerfield said, as he stood just outside the storage area. ''It's very responsible at this point, after the 20 years that it has been here, to move forward.''
The tower's lead-based coating, combined with other chemicals and the presence of asbestos, got E.P.A.'s attention and put NASA at risk of paying hefty fines in case it did not conform.
''At this point, the issue is not about historical preservation; it's about environmental compliance,'' Mr. Summerfield said.
But Norris C. Gray, a veteran of the space program who in 1950 took part in the first launching from Cape Canaveral -- that of a captured German V-2 rocket, for ballistic missile research -- said saving the tower could help the American space program in the future.
''They ought to take and preserve that thing and do something with it because it's the younger people that need it,'' said Mr. Gray, who is 83. ''We need young people coming into our space industry real bad. We don't have enough of them. Anything like that would help us.''
Mr. Tierney says NASA should give his group time to raise enough money to begin the restoration. ''The tower has been left there for 21 years,'' he said. ''Leaving it there for another month to allow us to do this isn't really going to make a lot of a difference.
''We have likened this particular launch tower to the dock from which the Santa Maria sailed on Columbus's historic voyage to find the New World. This really was to go to a new world.''
