TWO technology giants, I.B.M. and Microsoft, are reassigning accounts with spending estimated at more than $500 million in decisions that underline the increasing importance of marketing communications outside the realm of traditional advertising.
The accounts being awarded by I.B.M. and Microsoft to agencies owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies and the WPP Group cover assignments unrelated to producing television commercials, print advertisements or billboards. Rather, the work is primarily centered on what is known as customer relationship management -- that is, efforts to strengthen the loyalties of current customers that can range from offers of free merchandise to rewards for frequent buyers to invitations for sponsored events.
In tough economic times especially, marketers consider it more efficient and effective to try persuading customers who have bought before to buy more, instead of wooing new customers.
''They say it's 80 or 90 percent easier to sell to a customer than to acquire another one,'' said John Kahan, general manager for corporate customer relationship management at the Microsoft Corporation in Redmond, Wash.
''It really comes down to focusing on improving customer satisfaction,'' he added, ''and what makes customers happy is relevant, consistent, useful communications from companies'' with which they do business.
To that end, Microsoft is consolidating what Mr. Kahan described as ''the vast majority'' of its customer relationship marketing assignments, for divisions including home entertainment, servers, software and its MSN Internet service. Mr. Kahan said the assignments were being divided, roughly evenly, between MRM Partners Worldwide in New York, part of the McCann-Erickson World Group division of Interpublic, and agencies that operate under the umbrella of the Young &amp; Rubicam Brands at WPP. Those Y.&amp;R. agencies include Banner in London; KnowledgeBase Marketing in Richardson, Tex.; Sicola Martin in Austin, Tex.; and Wunderman in New York.
MRM and Wunderman are among agencies that have worked previously for Microsoft, Mr. Kahan said, along with ''thousands'' of smaller agencies.
''When you step back and see so many firms doing business on your behalf,'' he added, ''delivering consistent, relevant messages with the highest privacy and security is not possible.''
The consolidation -- one of the largest ever involving customer relationship management assignments -- involves an estimated $400 million to $500 million of Microsoft's annual spending for those tasks. The work will include direct marketing and other mailings, brochures and interactive communications like Web sites.
''Whenever you have a global company like Microsoft taking such a significant step toward improving relationships with its customers, it's a powerful testament to customer relationship management,'' said Pamela Maphis Larrick, chief executive at MRM, ''and will be a real indication to a lot of other companies how important it is.'' A sibling of MRM, McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising, handles the creation of traditional advertising for Microsoft, and a sibling of Y.&amp;R. Brands, Landor Associates, handles corporate and brand identity assignments for Microsoft.
In a memorandum to employees, Ann Fudge, chairwoman and chief executive at Y.&amp;R., described the addition of the Microsoft duties as ''a spectacular global assignment'' for Y.&amp;R. Brands.
But to expand its relationship with Microsoft, Y.&amp;R. had to bid farewell to I.B.M., which has used Wunderman as the worldwide direct marketing agency for its personal computer, global services and software units. To resolve the conflict that would be caused by putting I.B.M. and Microsoft under one roof, the I.B.M. assignments, with spending estimated at $50 million to $100 million, are being transferred to a WPP sibling, OgilvyOne in New York, which already handles direct marketing tasks for the I.B.M. server and solutions groups.
Shifting the I.B.M. work to OgilvyOne from Wunderman was a ''tough choice,'' Ms. Fudge wrote in her memo, softened by the decision of I.B.M. executives ''to consolidate their business within our larger WPP family.'' Matt Ross, worldwide general manager for I.B.M. Brand Services at OgilvyOne in New York, called the I.B.M. consolidation at his agency a gratifying endorsement of ''the positive impact this partnership has had.''
An I.B.M. spokesman in Armonk, N.Y., Brian Doyle, called the switch consistent with ''our global advertising consolidation'' at Ogilvy divisions, which has been taking place for more than a decade, as well as in keeping with ''our client conflict guidelines'' that address ''having an agency handling sensitive duties for us also doing work for our competitors.'' An OgilvyOne sibling, Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide, has created traditional advertising for I.B.M. since 1994.
As to the chicken-and-egg aspects of which came first, I.B.M. learning of Microsoft's arrival at Wunderman or I.B.M.'s desire to further consolidate assignments at Ogilvy, Mr. Doyle said, ''both happened simultaneously.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
