Betting that consumer banking will remain a fast-growing business, even after several years of expansion, the North Fork Bancorporation said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire the GreenPoint Financial Corporation for $6.3 billion.
North Fork, based in Melville, N.Y., plans to issue 1.0514 shares of North Fork common stock for each GreenPoint share, valuing GreenPoint shares at $46 based on North Fork's closing price on Friday.
The combined institution will have more than $50 billion in assets, $30 billion in deposits and more than 340 branches, the companies said yesterday, making it one of the larger consumer banks based in the New York area.
''There is no question the consumer model works,'' the chief executive of North Fork, John A. Kanas, said in an interview yesterday.
He said that his bank was eager to acquire GreenPoint, which is based on Park Avenue in Manhattan, because of the ''scarcity value'' of banking deposits in the region, and added that he expected that more banks and savings and loans in the area would become takeover targets in the months ahead.
Already, the New York banking market has attracted plenty of interest from buyers. Local banks that have been taken over include the European American Bank, which Citigroup acquired in 2001, and Dime Bancorp, purchased by Washington Mutual in 2002.
Last October, New York Community Bancorp completed its purchase of Roslyn Bancorp for $1.6 billion, and less than a month later, Independence Community Bank Corporation of Brooklyn agreed to buy Staten Island Bancorp for $1.5 billion.
North Fork has traditionally focused on small business customers, while GreenPoint has been oriented more toward consumers, Mr. Kanas said yesterday.
GreenPoint has been so successful at attracting individuals' savings, with deposit growth of 25 percent last year, that the old GreenPoint branches will continue, for the most part, to operate under that brand name, Mr. Kanas said.
Analysts have been anticipating for some time that deposit growth will slow, as a recovering economy leads consumers and small businesses to put their money elsewhere.
''Banks will no longer have the wind at their backs'' in gathering deposits, said Steven Wharton, an analyst at Loomis, Sayles &amp; Company.
Mr. Kanas acknowledged that deposit growth would slow eventually, but said he had seen no signs of it yet.
''I'm not sure the deposit drain people are anticipating is imminent,'' he said.
Mr. Kanas, 57, will remain chief executive of the combined company and GreenPoint's chief executive, Thomas S. Johnson, 63, will become a director.
Bharat B. Bhatt, currently president and chief operating officer of GreenPoint, will be joining the senior management team of North Fork as senior executive vice president and will also become a director.
North Fork was advised on the purchase by Sandler O'Neill &amp; Partners and the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher and Flom.
GreenPoint was represented by Lehman Brothers and Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods, and the law firm of Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz.
