President Bush on Monday used one of his favorite campaign formats, a ''conversation'' with employees of a small manufacturing company, to take one of his most direct shots yet at Democrats seeking to roll back part of his tax plan.
Mr. Bush turned a visit to a half-century-old maker of aluminum-encased windows, NuAir Manufacturing, to argue that the tax cuts he championed were not only creating new jobs but also spurring new capital spending. As has become its habit, the White House said the meeting with a few hundred workers at the plant was an ''economic policy event,'' even though the conversation has become indistinguishable from Mr. Bush's campaign appearances. Taxpayers, rather than the Bush campaign, pay for such events, a perk of incumbency that President Bill Clinton often used in his 1996 re-election race.
The format of Monday's event is now a staple of Mr. Bush's campaign: The president sits on a small stage on a manufacturing floor, surrounded by a mix of products and workers, and listens pensively as the owner of the business and a few carefully selected workers tell their stories. At NuAir, in an industrial neighborhood near Tampa's airport, Connie Horner, who inherited the family-run business from her father, told Mr. Bush that an upturn in business had enabled her to hire 40 or so workers.
''Actually, sir, we attribute that to the economic leadership of your administration,'' Ms. Horner said, as Mr. Bush beamed.
''Thank you for the credit,'' the president said. ''I'll take it anytime.
Some of her workers, many of whom are paid according to the number of windows they install, said later that they suspected the company's rebound had more to do with the Florida housing boom than tax policy. Nonetheless, the workers who attended seemed impressed by Mr. Bush's call for making permanent the child tax credit, the reduction in inheritance taxes and other elements of the two tax-cut bills he has signed.
Mr. Bush said nothing of the long-term cost of making those cuts permanent. Neither the White House nor many in Congress want to dwell on additions to a deficit projected to hit $500 billion this year. But the workers here seemed unconcerned about deficit numbers.
''We're going to have deficits forever anyway,'' said Chad H. Smith, a maintenance worker at the factory. ''My wife is pregnant, so the child credit is really important to us.''
Mr. Smith said he was a registered Democrat but had already made up his mind to vote for Mr. Bush for reasons having nothing to do with the economy.
''I liked the way he handled the war,'' he said. ''I think Kerry would have pussyfooted around,'' he said of the man widely assumed to be Mr. Bush's opponent in November, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
In another signal that the campaign is fast becoming a two-man race, Mr. Kerry's campaign arranged for Senator Bob Graham, a Florida Democrat who was a candidate for the nomination until he dropped out last year, to call reporters and respond to Mr. Bush.
Mr. Graham, who is retiring from the Senate, said that he was glad Mr. Bush went to the Daytona 500 race on Sunday to talk to ''the fully employed drivers and pit crews'' but said that ''if he had spent more time'' in Daytona ''he might have seen some who are suffering because of his policies.''
Mr. Graham said that in the Tampa area, 19,000 jobs had been lost since Mr. Bush took office. (It is nearly impossible, with current statistics, to determine how many of those workers have since found other jobs.) And while Mr. Bush talked about making tax cuts permanent and restricting what he called ''junk and frivolous lawsuits'' against doctors, Mr. Graham cited new Labor Department rules that limit the ability of some workers to claim overtime pay. And he called attention to what he called the administration's ''various incentives that positively encourage the outsourcing of jobs overseas.''
So far, Mr. Bush has been unwilling to mention Mr. Kerry's name in public. Instead, he refers to ''some in Washington'' who would roll back his tax cuts, portraying that as an increase -- rather than the expiration of a temporary cut, which is what Congress passed and what he signed. But if Howard Dean drops out of the race soon, Mr. Bush may abandon lobbing overhead shots, White House aides say, just as Mr. Kerry has been directing his critiques at Mr. Bush.
The conversations are geared toward small businesses; to go to a large ones these days might be to engage in a discussion of downsizing.
Russell Ashley, a window installer who applauded Mr. Bush, noted on his way out that ''there are a lot of people who work here and just didn't come today,'' out of distaste for Mr. Bush, he guessed. But Mr. Ashley predicted that Florida in 2004 would be different from Florida four years ago.
''This time, it's hard to see who's going to beat Bush,'' he concluded.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT  Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 17 about a visit by President Bush to a manufacturing plant in Tampa, Fla., to promote his economic policies misstated the number of employees that the plant owner said she was now able to hire because of an upturn that she attributed to the president's policies. She is hiring 10 workers, with the possibility of advertising five to seven other positions. (Forty was her estimate of the jobs she might create if the economy continued to improve.)
