Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly concluded yesterday that the fatal shooting of a car-theft suspect by officers in the Bronx on Sunday, moments after the man had wrested a gun from another officer and shot him in the abdomen, was justified, the Police Department said in a statement.
The police identified the dead man as Thomas Cipolla, 28, of Shoreham, N.Y. Law enforcement officials said Mr. Cipolla had been arrested nine times since 1996, mostly on charges of criminal possession of stolen property -- a crime for which he was sentenced in 1999 to more than three years in state prison -- and twice for resisting arrest.
Mr. Cipolla was released from prison in December, according to state records.
In Shoreham, on Long Island, Mr. Cipolla's family refused to talk to reporters gathered outside the small two-story house on North Country Road where, according to the police, he lived with his parents.
After being briefed yesterday, Mr. Kelly concluded that the shooting, as well as one on Saturday in which the police said a gunman was wounded in the Bronx, had been justified, the department's chief spokesman, Deputy Commissioner Paul J. Browne, said in a brief statement.
The officer wounded in the shooting on Sunday, Gilbert Noa, 35, an eight-year department veteran, was in stable condition yesterday at Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx.
The shot fired by Mr. Cipolla tore off the tip of the little finger on Officer Noa's right hand and lodged in his abdomen, the police said.
The shooting occurred after Mr. Cipolla crashed a stolen car on East Tremont Avenue and 177th Street in the Bronx and ran, officials said.
Moments later, he was confronted by Officer Noa and his partner, Officer Leonardo Ortiz. The three men struggled, falling to the ground, Commissioner Kelly said at a news conference on Sunday. Mr. Cipolla grabbed Officer Noa's gun and fired, the police said.
Four other officers arrived as Mr. Cipolla stood over both Officer Noa and his partner, appearing ready to fire a second time, Mr. Kelly said.
As Mr. Cipolla backed away and pointed his weapon at the other officers, they fired six shots, the authorities said.
Ellen S. Borakove, a spokeswoman for the medical examiner's office, said one bullet struck Mr. Cipolla in the upper left back, penetrating his aorta and killing him.
The shooting will be reviewed by the office of District Attorney Robert Johnson of the Bronx and the department's Firearms Discharge Review Board, officials said.
The shooting on Sunday and Mr. Kelly's conclusion that it was justified comes three weeks after another officer fatally shot an unarmed 19-year-old on a Brooklyn housing project rooftop.
In that case, Mr. Kelly, speaking roughly 12 hours after the shooting, said a preliminary investigation indicated that the shooting had not been justified, prompting an outcry from the police union, the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association.
The union later called for the commissioner to resign.
