IF the average salary can climb to $2.4 million from $51,500, if the minimum salary can rise to $300,000 from $19,000, and if the heftiest contract can escalate to $252 million from $3.35 million, it's not incongruous that the amount of money allowed in a player trade should soar to $67 million from $400,000.
That's what has happened in baseball in the past quarter of a century or so. Paul Lindblad, meet Alex Rodriguez.
Commissioner Bud Selig approved the Yankees' acquisition of Rodriguez from the Texas Rangers yesterday, meaning he will allow the Rangers to pay $67 million of the remaining $179 million of Rodriguez's salary.
''I am very concerned about the large amount of cash consideration involved in the transaction,'' Selig said in a statement. He went on to warn clubs that he would ''not allow cash transfers of this magnitude to become the norm.''
Several years ago, Selig established a $1 million limit on cash in deals, a limit he has felt compelled to waive in an increasing number of cases.
Bowie Kuhn was the first commissioner to set a maximum. He did it in 1977, 27 years ago this week, when the Oakland Athletics sold Lindblad, a relief pitcher, to the Texas Rangers for $400,000.
The sum was considered large at the time, and it did not please Kuhn.
The previous summer, Kuhn vetoed the Athletics' sale of Vida Blue to the Yankees and Joe Rudi and Rollie Fingers to the Boston Red Sox for a total of $3.5 million.
Kuhn believed Charles O. Finley, the Oakland owner, who would call Kuhn the ''village idiot,'' was stripping his roster for cash and not replacing the players.
In blocking the sale of Blue, Rudi and Fingers, Kuhn did not say what amount of money he would allow in a deal, but when Finley sold Lindblad for $400,000, Kuhn notified all clubs that that figure would stand as the maximum.
The figure seems quaint in the face of the Rangers' $67 million contribution to the Yankees' send-this-boy-to-camp -- their camp -- plan.
But Selig views this type of deal pragmatically, and he understood that the Rangers needed to get out from under the economic weight of the Rodriguez contract, for the sake of the team and for the sake of its struggling owner, Tom Hicks.
Hicks, of course, created his own problem when he met Rodriguez three years ago and fell hard for him. He had to have this young man on his team, he concluded, and offered him $100 million more than anyone else had or would.
No fool, Rodriguez recognized an offer he couldn't refuse and convinced himself that the last-place Rangers would rise again. Rodriguez, as it turns out, is a better producer of runs than he is a producer of proper projections.
By the start of the off-season, Rodriguez was telling anyone who would listen that he had to escape the Rangers.
He even told Selig in November when they met at Sammy Sosa's birthday party in the Dominican Republic.
Selig evidently had that conversation in mind, as well as the Rangers' need to gain some flexibility with their payroll, when he made his decision yesterday.
For those Red Sox fans who believe that baseball and its union are conspiring against their team, they should know that Selig was prepared to approve Rodriguez's trade to the Red Sox earlier in the winter had the teams worked out a satisfactory deal.
In the past few years, Selig has approved trades that included more than $1 million in cash.
In November 2002, he waived the maximum to enable Mike Hampton to go to Atlanta from Colorado by way of Florida.
The $36.5 million in that transaction was the record high before the Rangers and the Yankees produced their deal.
In the Hampton trade, the Marlins agreed to pay the Braves $30 million, and the Rockies agreed to pay the Marlins $6.5 million.
Before that deal, the most money in a trade was the $6 million the Toronto Blue Jays paid the Yankees to take Raul Mondesi off their hands. The money was to pay nearly half of Mondesi's $13 million salary last season.
But when the Yankees traded Mondesi to Arizona last season, they agreed to send $4 million with him.
When the Yankees obtained Chuck Knoblauch from Minnesota in 1998, the Twins included $3 million in the package.
Around the same time, the Yankees traded Kenny Rogers and gave Oakland $5 million to offset Rogers's salary.
Sometimes, a club pays almost the entire salary of a player it trades. When the Mets traded shortstop Rey Ordóñez to Tampa Bay before last season, they gave the Devil Rays $4.25 million of his $6.25 million salary.
Just this November, the woebegone Devil Rays did even better when they obtained Tino Martinez from St. Louis.
Martinez has a $7.5 million salary for the coming season, and the Cardinals agreed to pay $7 million of that amount.
In their euphoria at acquiring Rodriguez and having to pay him an average of only $16 million a year, the Yankees might want to consider making another payment, one Selig would not have to approve.
This would not have happened if Aaron Boone had not wrecked his knee playing basketball. He, not Rodriguez, would be the Yankees' third baseman.
So instead of releasing Boone from his contract because he violated its terms by playing basketball and paying him only 30 days' pay, $942,623, keep him and pay him the entire salary of $5.75 million. Call it a finder's fee.
On Baseball
