A cascade of debuts at New York City Ballet has recalled how often George Balanchine looked back to the 19th-century classical ballets in which he grew up in St. Petersburg shortly before and after the Russian Revolution. On Saturday night at the New York State Theater, there were two lively newcomers in the ''Coppélia'' he and Alexandra Danilova staged in 1974.
Joaquin De Luz, the virtuoso who moved from American Ballet Theater last summer, was near perfection as Frantz, adding an extra dimension to the dancing through his power and fine acting. Megan Fairchild, a 19-year-old who joined the corps two years ago and who was promoted to soloist on Saturday, displayed the reasons for her meteoric rise: her Swanilda had a deceptive, fragile charm combined with ultra clarity and aplomb in technique.
Graced by Rouben Ter-Arutunian's fetching décor, this ''Coppélia'' owes less to the original 1870 version by Arthur St.-Léon than to Marius Petipa's 1884 restaging. One of the differences is seen in the character dances that are less balleticized than in other versions. Balanchine remembered the Polish mazurka and Hungarian czardas from the Maryinsky Ballet in Russia and staged them in a folk manner.
Ms. Fairchild took some time to warm up the audience, but by the end of her solo in Act I and her spirited mime in Act II she was ready for her triumph in the wedding pas de deux of Act III. She needs only to project more in certain leaps.
Projection is never a problem for Mr. De Luz, and in City Ballet he no longer pushes too hard, as he did in Ballet Theater: he is an electrifying classical dancer. As Coppelius, Adam Hendrickson is a persuasive and humane doll maker. Richard Fletcher was the guest conductor.
Other debuts that should be noted came earlier in the season from Nikolaj Hübbe as an ardent Harlequin and Yvonne Borree, a Colombine who bloomed like a night flower in ''Harlequinade,'' Balanchine's version of a Petipa ballet. Amanda Edge was a strong, piquant new Pierrette.
Since Balanchine choreographed ''Jewels'' in 1967, it is something of a stretch to fit it into a season that celebrates his heritage. Yet this three-act plotless masterpiece is essentially a retrospective of his aesthetic. Newcomers to their roles on Saturday afternoon included Savannah Lowery, a young corps member in the second ballerina role of the ''Rubies'' section. She was secure and more luscious than most. Mr. Hübbe and Miranda Weese, who was exceptionally assertive and witty, were the principals. ''Emeralds,'' the first section, went smoothly with Robert Tewsley, new as a romantic lead with Rachel Rutherford, and Pascale van Kipnis was the new second ballerina, always right in her phrasing. Antonio Carmena was outstanding in the new trio with Ms. Edge and Carrie Lee Riggins.
Igor Zelensky, a guest from the Kirov, canceled his performances in the ''Diamonds'' section because of injury. Maria Kowroski, much improved, and Philip Neal led this section.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
