Before the Democratic presidential race was in full swing, the Annenberg Public Policy Center, which tracks political commercials, was worried about having enough staff members to keep up with misleading advertising.
''The question was, would we be able to scramble fast enough to cover all the claims,'' said Kathleen Hall Jamieson, director of the center, which is part of the University of Pennsylvania.
So the center hired an investigative journalist, Brooks Jackson, formerly of CNN, to work on the project. But it turns out Mr. Jackson is like the sheriff of a crime-free town.
So far, this primary season has been like none other in a generation, with the fewest and tamest televised attack advertisements in at least three decades, political scholars and strategists said.
This relatively tranquil environment will surely change soon, as the campaign moves on to the general election. But even as Howard Dean, Vermont's former governor, and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina continue to fight for their political lives in the Wisconsin primary on Tuesday, neither has reverted to the long-honored tradition of ''going negative'' to drag down the front-runner.
This situation has elated the Democratic Party, whose likely nominee, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, is emerging from a normally bruising process with few scrapes and scratches.
Far less thrilled are Republicans, who had hoped that the Democrats would have done more of the work for them in roughing up the nominee before the general election. It was the Republicans who lobbed the first full assault on Mr. Kerry, in an Internet advertisement last week.
But there is also good news for Republicans, President Bush's campaign aides say.
''Nobody really bothered to attack him,'' Terry Holt, the Bush campaign's press secretary, said of Mr. Kerry. ''So he comes out of the primary without having answered the most basic questions regarding his readiness to be president, his clarity of philosophy. Those could be a problem down the line.''
Mr. Holt said the Republican line of attack would include a definition of Mr. Kerry as ''a liberal Massachusetts senator with a very lightweight record of accomplishment'' -- an assessment Mr. Kerry's campaign says it plans to refute with questions about the economy and national security.
Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic National Committee chairman, said the party was not the least bit concerned that Mr. Kerry had not faced a trial by television fire.
''I don't think having our potential nominee go through a gantlet of negative ads that the Republicans could use against us later is at all beneficial,'' Mr. McAuliffe said. ''I'd much rather have a unified party with money in the bank.''
Commenting on the relative peace in the advertising war, he marveled, ''It's a different environment than we've seen in a long time.''
The last time that presidential historians can remember a political advertising climate being this tame was 1976. Then, said Darrell West, a political science professor at Brown University, few politicians considered it wise to engage in rough and tumble politics so soon after the Watergate scandal.
This time around, political analysts say, there is no single reason behind the relative timidity of the candidates' advertisements.
Many Democratic strategists say a new election rule requiring candidates to appear in their own commercials has made the production of a harsh attack advertisement the equivalent of holding a live grenade. Others have pointed to a multicandidate field that could offer alternatives to voters driven away from both the man being attacked and the attacker. Then there is a party unity argument: Democrats are so eager to rid the White House of President Bush that they will not tolerate assaults from within the party with such powerful weapons as television commercials.
Yet similar factors have not affected political advertising before. For instance, party loyalty did not stop John McCain and George W. Bush from attacking each other early in the 2000 primary and caucus season. In one advertisement for Mr. Bush, an announcer asserted that Mr. McCain's campaign was ''crawling with lobbyists.'' Mr. McCain, in turn, appeared in one of his attack spots to say ''Governor Bush's campaign is getting desperate, with a negative ad about me.'' In what was perhaps the lowest blow a Republican could level, he added, ''His ad twists the truth like Clinton.''
And the crowded primary field did not stop Bill Clinton, who won the nomination, from trading similarly sharp commercial barbs in 1992 with Paul E. Tsongas, Jerry Brown and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa. In one radio spot for Mr. Clinton, then the governor of Arkansas, an announcer questioned Mr. Brown's commitment to abortion rights (it was quickly taken off of the air).
Mr. McAuliffe says that this election cycle is different. Democrats are still so angry about Al Gore's loss to Mr. Bush in 2000 and the Iraq war that they simply will not stand for intramural squabbling, he said.
The chairman is one of many Democrats who subscribe to the theory that voters in Iowa punished Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt for an exchange of confrontational advertisements shortly before the caucuses there. It was one of only a few such exchanges this campaign season, and it had none of the vitriol of campaigns past. Still, Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt were expected to finish in first and second place in Iowa before the advertising war. But it was Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, neither of whom ran negative advertisements, who finished first and second there.
''Voters said, 'We want someone who is electable,' '' Mr. McAuliffe said, ''therefore tell us how you're going to beat George Bush, and if you went negative you paid a price.''
Several strategists have said in interviews that the Gephardt-Dean exchange brought home the dangers of producing attack advertisements in a crowded field.
''As we've already seen, negative advertising in a multicandidate field is fraught with difficulty,'' said Steve McMahon, a media strategist for Dr. Dean. Attacking Mr. Kerry now would be as likely to help Mr. Edwards as to help Dr. Dean, who has staked the future of his campaign on the Wisconsin primary.
Mr. Edwards's advisers say they are not about to produce attack advertisements against Mr. Kerry when their candidate has so often boasted of his ''positive vision for America.''
And while Democratic strategists acknowledge that there is something to be said for surviving a hard-hitting advertising campaign in the primary season, they say it is better to not face one at all.
''In a tough primary the rule is, 'If it doesn't kill you, it will make you stronger for the general,' '' Mr. McMahon said. ''Of course, there's always the risk that it does kill you.
''So given the choice, one usually would not prefer a tough primary.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
