A week after a stirring double-overtime victory over then-No. 5 Pittsburgh, which appeared to push Seton Hall toward a bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament, the Pirates' postseason fate is no longer quite so clear.
On Monday night, they let an 8-point second-half lead get away and lost, 67-63, to Boston College at Continental Arena.
Seton Hall (16-7, 6-5 Big East) has lost two in a row since beating Pitt. The defeat was another reminder that the Pirates' biggest problem is inconsistency. They followed a terrific team effort in the Pittsburgh game with a 71-68 defeat at Notre Dame. Against Boston College, they failed to beat a team that was banged up and coming off a loss at home against Providence.
''We're in a bit of a slump,'' said Seton Hall forward Marcus Toney-El. ''It happens to most teams. The great teams either don't get into slumps or they dig down deep and get out of them. We've got five games left to get out of this.''
The Pirates had problems with Boston College's bulky forward, Craig Smith, who had 21 points and 8 rebounds and played 39 minutes. Smith started for Boston College (17-8, 6-6 Big East) after missing the final 4 minutes 37 seconds of Saturday's loss to Providence with a lower back injury.
He was considered questionable for Monday night's game.
''I'm just beat up,'' said the 6-foot-7, 265-pound Smith. ''I didn't know how many minutes I could play; I was just going to test things out. After the Providence game, I was really hurting. I didn't know what to think. I could barely walk.''
Andre Sweet led Seton Hall with 15 points. Andre Barrett had 13 points, but just 3 in the second half when he missed all five of his field goal attempts.
Seton Hall seemed on its way to a victory when John Allen hit a short bank shot with 14 minutes 51 seconds remaining to increase the Pirates' lead to 44-36. The Pirates had led at halftime, 36-32, after shooting 60.9 percent from the field.
But with Smith dominating inside, Boston College fought back. When Nate Doornekamp hit a 3-pointer, just his fifth this season, with 9:04 left, the Eagles had a 51-50 lead. The Pirates couldn't maintain any momentum the rest of the way, and their defense couldn't stop Boston College.
''We didn't defend,'' Barrett said. ''With us, that's the key. When we win, we defend. When we lose, we don't.''
When the game was on the line in the final five minutes, the Pirates looked nothing like the team that battled so hard in the Pittsburgh victory.
''Sometimes success is harder to handle than failure or struggles,'' Coach Louis Orr said after meeting with his team for 35 minutes after the game. ''When you get into the position we were in, you've got to be mature enough to handle it. Somewhere along the line, we lost our priorities. We got away from who we are.''
Like Barrett, Orr said that the Pirates didn't show the type of defensive intensity that has been a Seton Hall hallmark, and he said that was the reason the game got away.
But a poor offensive effort in the second half also played a part. The Pirates shot just 32.1 percent.
Boston College has beaten Seton Hall twice this season. The Pirates fell, 72-63, at Boston College on Jan. 17, when Smith had 26 points and 9 rebounds. The Eagles won their next game, defeating North Carolina State in overtime, but lost three in a row after that.
The loss to Providence dropped the Eagles to a sub-.500 record in the Big East, but the victory over Seton Hall may have bolstered Boston College's hopes of an N.C.A.A. tournament bid.
Seton Hall will seek to regroup Saturday when it is host to Villanova, which has lost two in a row and is 13-10.
''Thank God there are other games,'' Orr said. ''Whatever issues we have, there are other teams out there dealing with the same issues. We ain't talking about nothing new under the sun. We just got to, collectively and individually, get back to work.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
