The board of the Walt Disney Company said Monday that it had unanimously rejected the $54 billion unsolicited stock offer from the Comcast Corporation because it was too low.
The bid was spurned, according to a statement, because the stock offer is currently worth $3.60 less than the market price of a share of Disney's stock.
The board also reaffirmed its confidence in Disney's chief executive, Michael D. Eisner, saying that it expected the company's current structure and strategy to enhance shareholder value. Mr. Eisner has been under siege from several fronts lately, including disgruntled former board members, corporate partners, restless shareholders and, now, Comcast.
Disney's directors were presented with the results of an in-depth review by investment bankers and lawyers hired by Disney after Comcast announced that it was interested in acquiring the company. It was expected that the board would reject the bid, although few analysts and investors predicted the company would do so this quickly.
''We are committed to creating shareholder value now and in the future and will carefully consider any legitimate proposal that would accomplish that objective,'' the board said. Further, ''the interests of Disney shareholders, which represent the fundamental priority of the board, would not be served by accepting any acquisition proposal that does not reflect fully Disney's intrinsic value and earnings prospects.''
Several analysts say that Disney, which closed Friday at $26.92, could be worth as much as $35 to $38 a share if it were sold today. But any offer Disney's board considers will not be based solely on a dollar amount, but also whether that amount is made up of stock, cash or both.
Comcast responded to the spurned offer, saying, the proposal ''reflects a full and generous valuation based upon Disney's prospects and performance over a long period of time'' and represents a significant premium during much of the last three years.
And just because the board has said no does not mean that Comcast will simply go away. According to several people close to Comcast, the cable operator has explored filing a shareholder consent action with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Such a move would enable Comcast to seek the consent of shareholders to replace some or all of Disney's directors and with their own more friendly candidates.
Comcast is a Disney shareholder and if it proceeds with such an action it will have 60 days to solicit investors -- once it announces a record date -- in the hope of winning a majority vote. While an aggressive tactic, it has been used before in other testy situations.
Last year, Mesa Air Group announced that it wanted to acquire Atlantic Coast Airlines in a stock swap valued at $512 million. When Mesa was not welcomed, it sought to replace several directors with its own candidates. In that case Mesa abandoned its bid in December because Atlantic had protections against such a move.
If Comcast does proceed with such an action it will be the second time in recent months that Disney's board members have been targets alongside Mr. Eisner, the company's chief executive. Two former board members, Roy E. Disney, the nephew of the company's co-founder, and Stanley P.Gold, have been campaigning in recent weeks to get investors to withhold votes for Mr. Eisner and three other board members at the annual meeting on March 3 in Philadelphia.
The short-term goal is to get 35 percent of Disney's shareholders to withhold their votes. If that happens, under a proposal being reviewed by the Securities and Exchange Commission, Disney could be forced to include alternate board candidates suggested by major shareholders next year. While investors and analysts say it is unlikely that so many shareholders will withhold their votes, a smaller number could still show palpable investor discontent with Mr. Eisner.
Disney's board has undertaken major changes in the last few months to ensure that its board is independent, including reducing its size and adding directors. But Mr. Eisner, rightly or wrongly, is still criticized for being surrounded by board members considered very much on his side. George J. Mitchell, the presiding director and former senator, has taken a leading role in defending Disney and Mr. Eisner, in particular, and is playing a pivotal role in the board's governance.
