David Paymer is not a movie star, and he is the first to say so. As a character actor, he plays the sidekick, the lawyer, the dry cleaner, the presidential aide, the put-upon brother. ''You spend a lot of time waiting,'' Mr. Paymer said.
He is once again waiting, in this case for a decision by ABC about the future of his acclaimed new series, ''Line of Fire.'' The show, in which he starred as a chilling and brutal crime boss, not only earned him the best reviews of his career but also made producers and executives aware that Mr. Paymer, sometimes a nebbish on screen, can play against type.
''When Rod Lurie, who created the show, said, 'I got this great part for you,' I said, 'O.K., what is it, the accountant or the lawyer?' '' Mr. Paymer, 49, recalled, over coffee at a restaurant near his Santa Monica home. ''He said, 'Mob boss,' and I said, 'Excuse me, this is David Paymer you're talking to.' ''
''Line of Fire'' centers on a mesmerizing, half-Irish, half-Jewish crime syndicate leader named Jonah Malloy in Richmond, Va., who is pitted against a disparate group of F.B.I. agents, several with compelling personal stories.
Certainly the series has been influenced by HBO's ''Sopranos'' and ''Wire,'' and Fox's ''24.'' Thirteen episodes were filmed. The first nine were seen on Tuesdays at 10 p.m., a time slot that has been taken over by ''NYPD Blue.'' The four left will be shown soon in an unspecified slot. ABC will decide in May -- when networks announce their schedules for next season -- whether the series will be picked up.
ABC executives said that the favorable reviews made ''Line of Fire'' a strong possibility for renewal, but that there was no guarantee. The series was in a tough time slot, and with an average audience of 7.4 million it ranked third behind NBC's ''Law and Order: Special Victims Unit'' (12.6 million viewers) and CBS's ''Judging Amy'' (10.8 million).
The role of Malloy is the star turn of Mr. Paymer's career, but he said he could not worry too much about the show's future. ''I'm not like a kid out of the box,'' he said. ''It's not my series. I'm not sweating bullets over it.'' But then he said, ''I do love the show.''
While he waits to hear, he is directing an episode of ''Everwood,'' which stars a friend, Treat Williams. It is his debut as a series director. (He directed a short film, ''Candor City Hospital,'' for Showtime).
He is set to appear in ''Synergy,'' a film directed by Paul and Chris Weitz, starring Dennis Quaid as a man who is laid off. Mr. Paymer plays -- what else? -- a colleague who also loses his job.
In contrast to major movie stars, Mr. Paymer not only earns far less but also has far fewer options.
Like most actors, even relatively successful ones, he is always concerned that the phone will stop ringing and that job prospects will shrink.
''There's always a lot of self-doubt,'' said Mr. Paymer, who grew up in Oceanside, on Long Island, and began to act while attending the University of Michigan. ''There were fallow periods. At certain points in my life -- when I turned 30 and then 35, and when I turned 40 -- where you're saying, 'Well, how long can I do this at this level?' ''
In 1982, Mr. Paymer recalled, when he and several other cast members were fired while making the pilot of ''St. Elsewhere,'' he decided to go to graduate school and study psychology. He attended Pepperdine University for about half of a semester.
''That was a heartbreak,'' he said. ''I was at an age -- I think I was 27 -- where I really did question, 'Am I right for this?' Not even if I'm talented enough.'' But, he said, ''I just had to keep plugging away at acting.''
His first professional acting job came shortly after he graduated from Michigan, in 1975. He went to an open casting call in New York for the musical ''Grease,'' and was hired to play Sonny in the national touring company and then on Broadway. He stayed with ''Grease'' for two and a half years.
''At that time if you could carry a tune and you were in your early 20's, you'd be in 'Grease,' '' he said. ''Richard Gere was doing it, and Patrick Swayze and Treat Williams and Peter Gallagher, and it goes on and on.'' (Mr. Paymer said his father, Marvin Paymer, who died last year, a composer and a pianist who wrote books on music, instilled him with a love of it.).
After ''Grease'' Mr. Paymer was cast in his first Hollywood feature, ''The In-Laws.'' He became a busy character actor, often taking small parts in television shows like ''Taxi,'' ''Lou Grant,'' ''Cheers,'' ''Murphy Brown'' and ''L.A. Law.'' There were also films like ''No Way Out,'' ''Searching for Bobby Fischer'' and ''City Slickers.''
His breakthrough came in ''Mr. Saturday Night,'' in which Billy Crystal played an angry and self-destructive comedian, and Mr. Paymer played his brother and manager, who was often the brunt of his attacks. It earned him an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor in 1992 and led to working with directors like Robert Redford for ''Quiz Show,'' Steven Spielberg for ''Amistad'' and Oliver Stone for ''Nixon,'' as well as films like ''The American President'' and ''The Hurricane.''
Mr. Paymer was often type-cast as the nice guy, but there were exceptions. He played Ron Ziegler, the White House press secretary, in ''Nixon,'' a devious game show producer in ''Quiz Show,'' a heroin addict in ''Payback'' and a crooked dry cleaner in ''Get Shorty.''
Rod Lurie, the creator and executive producer of ''Line of Fire,'' said he wanted to cast the role of crime boss as far from Tony Soprano as possible. ''I wanted to go more into the world of, say, Meyer Lansky, the intellectual mobster,'' he said. ''But one who could get his hands dirty. David brought this chilly intellectualism to the role. As an actor he's extremely real. He never overplays his hand.''
Reviews have generally been positive. Alessandra Stanley, in The New York Times, wrote that the series was ''intelligently written, suspenseful and provides enough ambiguous characters on both sides of the law to hold viewers' attention.'' Variety cited Mr. Paymer's ''towering, complex performance.''
Mr. Paymer and his wife, Liz Georges, an actress, have two daughters, Emily, 9, and Julia, 4. He said the life of an actor was of course insecure and, with some exceptions, stamped by one rejection after another.
''I think I've gotten a thicker skin about it than when I was younger,'' he said. ''I've got a family now. It can't just be about my career. And I know the vicissitudes of the business don't have a lot to do with David Paymer. I try not to take things personally.
''But sometimes I look at actors in their roles, and I say, 'why didn't I get that?' But then I imagine a lot of actors are looking at me and saying exactly the same thing.''
Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  A profile of the actor David Paymer in The Arts on Tuesday misstated a credit for the film ''Synergy,'' in which he is to appear. Chris Weitz is a co-producer, not a co-director. The profile also misstated the fate of the character played by Dennis Quaid. He is demoted, not laid off.
