Tunneling Nanotubes
Nanotechnology is the buzzword of the moment in science. Hardly a week goes by without the announcement that a laboratory has developed a new nano-this or nano-that.
It's useful to remember, though, that nature was nano before nano was cool. The latest evidence for this comes from researchers who have discovered that some cells create nanotubes to connect with others.
The researchers, from the University of Heidelberg in Germany and other European institutions, observed what they called tunneling nanotubes among embryonic human kidney cells and normal rat kidney cells.
The structures were 50 to 200 nanometers in diameter (at the upper end, about one 100-thousandths of an inch) and up to several cell diameters in length. Time-lapse videos show that the tubes form in several minutes when a slender protrusion from one cell contacts another cell.
The researchers used compounds fused with green fluorescent protein, which is easy to trace. They found that membrane vesicles -- small compartments used for storage, transport or digestion -- and other subcellular structures made their way from one cell to another through the tubes. By contrast, the tubes appeared to inhibit the transfer of small molecules. The findings were published in Science.
Cells communicate in a number of ways. Gap junctions, for instance, are even smaller and shorter channels between cells that allow ions and small molecules to cross. In plants, small strands of cytoplasm known as plasmodesmata allow molecular transfers. The researchers say their nanotubes appear to be another form of cell communication.
Stronger Nanobundles
Those cellular nanotubes consist of membrane material and are fairly fragile; mechanical stress or even fixing the cells for study could break them apart. In the laboratory, nanotubes are usually made of carbon, and they are much stronger: their combination of high strength and high stiffness is what makes them so attractive as materials.
The problem with carbon nanotubes is what happens when a bunch of them are bundled together to make a fiber. There are only weak forces to link one to another, so the tubes tend to slip and slide, making for a rather limp fiber.
Now, a research team from Switzerland, France and Britain has reported success in strengthening bundles made from single-walled carbon nanotubes. Their technique, described in the journal Nature Materials, involves irradiating the bundles with an electron beam.
The researchers found that irradiation formed cross-links between adjacent tubes in a bundle. A normal nanotube is a highly ordered structure, with the carbon atoms arranged just so. But the electron beam knocks a few of these out of their regular places, and the researchers say it is these atoms -- as well as carbon-oxygen groups created during purification of the tubes -- that are involved in the cross-linking.
The researchers found that an electron beam of moderate energy made for the stronger bundles. Too much energy, they discovered, damages individual tubes so much that the fiber breaks down into an amorphous mass.
Unprotected Protection
Governments can designate ecologically important land for protection, but that doesn't necessarily mean it will be protected. Indonesian Borneo, or Kalimantan, is a case in point, according to research led by Dr. Lisa M. Curran of the Yale forestry school, who found that the acreage of protected forests there declined by 56 percent from 1985 to 2001.
The results, reported in Science, used satellite data and field research to document changes in Kalimantan, where the timber industry provides wood for international markets. About 11,000 square miles of the forests have been destroyed. Other forested areas are increasingly isolated -- bad news for the vast diversity of plants and animals there.
Observatory
