At first glance, the crystal looks like diamond, said Dr. Omar M. Yaghi, a professor of chemistry at the University of Michigan.
But the crystal, colorless, is light. A cube of the material one inch on a side weighs about a twentieth of an ounce. To the eye, it looks solid, but a microscope would reveal a Swiss cheese of microscopic holes. The molecules in the crystal stack so loosely that that 95 percent of the volume is nothing, empty space.
That is why Dr. Yaghi said, ''We think it's going to be very useful.''
A crystal that is mostly empty is useful for storing stuff -- hydrogen, in particular.
The compound is prosaically named Metal-Organic Framework No. 177, MOF-177 for short. Following in the steps of MOF-1 through MOF-176, it or one of its successors could become the fuel tank of the future.
One hurdle in the envisioned switch to a ''hydrogen economy,'' displacing fossil fuels, is that hydrogen, a gas at room temperatures, is bulky. Now, fitting a reasonable amount of hydrogen into a regular-size fuel tank requires that the hydrogen be squeezed to very high pressures, creating a potential hazard in a collision, or cooled to very cold temperatures, considered impractical and inefficient. (The fuel would have to be chilled even when the car was parked.)
Instead, Dr. Yaghi envisions the ephemeral crystals acting as hydrogen sponges, storing the gas at room temperatures under less pressure. Like a sponge, the surface area surrounding the holes is huge. If a one-inch cube of MOF-177 could be disassembled, unfolded and laid out, it would cover 38,000 square feet, or about two-thirds of a football field.
Hydrogen and other molecules bind to the surfaces. Creating a crystal with more surface area enables more molecules to fit inside. ''Then you can pack these molecules onto a surface without having to apply a lot of pressure,'' Dr. Yaghi said.
Dr. Yaghi and colleagues at the University of Michigan and Arizona State University report their findings in the Feb. 5 issue of the journal Nature.
MOF-177 looks like a construct of Tinker Toys; a zinc oxide molecule acts as a central connecting spoke with stiff carbon-based rods radiating outward. ''My interest was in building structures from molecular building blocks,'' Dr. Yaghi said.
The spokes and rods form a snowflakelike, three-dimensional lattice with plenty of empty space. Because the molecules are stiff, the crystal does not collapse like a balloon when air is sucked out of it.
In the Nature paper, the scientists showed that they could fill a MOF-177 crystal with nitrogen and soccer-ball-shaped carbon molecules known as buckyballs. They showed 1.3 ounces of nitrogen could fit into a one ounce MOF-177 crystal. ''That went in quite easily,'' said Dr. Adam J. Matzger, a professor of chemistry at the University of Michigan and another author of the Nature paper.
They also showed that even large molecules like those that used as colorful dyes could slide into the holes, tinting the clear crystal red, orange and green.
Researchers led by Dr. Yaghi reported last year in the journal Science that an earlier compound, MOF-5, could absorb hydrogen concentrations of 1 percent by weight at room temperature and a pressure 20 times atmospheric pressure. MOF-177 has about 50 percent more surface area and Dr. Yaghi believes that sticking large molecules in the voids will further increase the surface area and the capacity.
''They're interesting; they're innovative,'' said Dr. Michael D. Ward, director of the Materials Research Science and Engineering Center at the University of Minnesota. ''It remains to be seen if they're integrated into a hydrogen economy.''
The Department of Energy estimates that practical hydrogen storage will require concentrations of at least 6.5 percent.
