Fewer Are Flying On Short Routes
It's no secret that ever since the summer of 2000, when the air traffic system backed up and thousands of flights were delayed, growing numbers of business travelers have been getting into cars or trains, instead of boarding airplanes, for trips of 300 miles of less.
Data from the Federal Aviation Administration show that trend continued through the end of 2003, and may have even accelerated into trips of nearly 500 miles, for which flights dropped significantly in December over December 2002.
Travelers typically cite a variety of reasons for the avoiding airplanes on short hops, among them the so-called security hassle at the airport and the fact that more often than not, shorter airplane trips are flown in cramped regional jets that have scant legroom, scarce overhead storage and no first-class seats for upgrades.
Partly to address a perceived market for small, efficient jets offering a little more cabin space and bigger passenger loads than typical regional jets, Embraer of Brazil rolled out the first of its Embraer 190 models last week at its main plant in Brazil. The 190, with two seats on either side of the aisle, has a capacity of 100 passengers at a 32-inch seat pitch or 108 passengers configured with seats at the 31-inch pitch typically found on smaller regional jets, which usually carry 70 or fewer passengers.
The biggest customer so far for the Embraer 190, which is scheduled for delivery starting in summer 2005, is JetBlue Airways, which has ordered 100 of them.
This Limousine Is Really Long
And for those whose car-travel ambitions include first-class service, California Coach Builders has just the thing: its new CrewZer, a 270-inch long (that's 22 1/2 feet) luxury stretch limousine that the company describes as a ''party on wheels.'' The CrewZer, which will be marketed to livery and limousine companies, will be introduced this weekend at the Limousine and Chauffer Transportation Show in Las Vegas. It has dual 65-gallon fuel tanks and comes equipped with four 15-inch LCD monitors (a 42-inch plasma screen is optional), DVD and VCR players, laser and strobe-light and smoke-machine effects. The biggest 20-seat stretch limos are usually only 220 inches long, said Ward Thomas, a company spokesman. ''This is huge,'' he said. The base price is $125,000.
The British Are Coming
Despite all those flights recently canceled for security reasons, the British are evidently coming. Almost three-quarters of British business travelers say they expect to travel to the United States in the next six months, according to a survey by Accenture, the worldwide consulting and management company. That's up from 33 percent who said the same thing in the last survey, in May.
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
