It might seem, from the headlines, that Connecticut has stumbled into an endless bog of government corruption. Gov. John G. Rowland is facing an impeachment inquiry after admitting last month that he lied about free work done on his private cottage by state employees. Prosecutors are said to be zeroing in on other officials, and in the past year alone, two big-city mayors have been convicted of federal crimes.
But residents of the state can take comfort: Connecticut is only the 31st most corrupt state in the union, at least according to one ranking.
That statistic comes from a survey released by Corporate Crime Reporter, a Washington-based newsletter. The survey ranks all 50 states by the number of public corruption convictions over the last decade per 100,000 residents.
By that standard, Connecticut comes out a relatively healthy 2.16. It is in better shape than its neighbors New York and New Jersey, which rated 10th and 16th respectively.
''Thank God for small favors,'' said John Pavia, a law professor at Quinnipiac School of Law. The news, he said, might even provide a new state tourism slogan: ''Not as Corrupt as You Think.''
A call to the state's Tourism Council to test out that phrase was not returned last night.
At the same time, Mr. Pavia sheepishly pointed out that the survey runs from 1993 through 2002, and therefore does not include two of the most recent high-profile convictions. Last year, Bridgeport's mayor, Joseph P. Ganim, was convicted on a raft of corruption charges, and Philip A. Giordano, the former mayor of Waterbury, was convicted of sex crimes against children and admitted on the stand to taking bribes. In March, Mr. Rowland's former chief of staff admitted to taking bribes from a state contractor.
Those cases have helped earn the ''land of steady habits'' a few unwelcome new nicknames, including Corrupticut.
In fact, despite its respectable ranking, Connecticut receives a long verbal spanking on the Corporate Crime Reporter's web site.
''Connecticut, for example, has a strong economy and an educated citizenry,'' writes Russell Mokhiber, the report's author, in a statement posted on the group's web site. ''But its political economy has historically been weak, with little public debate about the level of corruption around it until federal prosecutors at the U.S. Attorney's office in Hartford decided to force the issue out into the open.''
There were no such moralizing paragraphs on the site about Mississippi, which the survey rated the most corrupt state in the union (7.48 in numerical terns). The least corrupt, incidentally, is Nebraska, at 0.52.
The survey's bald numbers may be a little unfair to states that have mounted especially vigorous efforts to root out corruption and racked up more convictions as a result.
''There is the suggestion that because a state ranks high on the list, not enough is being done, when that is not necessarily true,'' Mr. Pavia said.
And of course, there are Democrats who say that Connecticut might rate better if not for its current Republican governor, whose administration has been accused of numerous ethical lapses since he was first elected in 1994.
''I sincerely believe that the Rowland administration is an exception,'' said George C. Jepsen, the chairman of the Democratic State Committee. ''He markedly changed the ethical tone when he came in.''
