Katerina Papastathis was furious. The restaurant where she worked as a waitress was not paying her a cent in wages, making her rely solely on tips.
She knew that her employer, the Elias Corner Restaurant for Fish in Queens, was violating minimum wage laws, so she filed a complaint with the New York State Department of Labor. Five months passed, and she heard nothing.
So she contacted the state attorney general, Eliot L. Spitzer.
Soon, his office subpoenaed the restaurant's records. It had investigators try to interview workers at Elias Corner. And when the restaurant's owner began pressuring workers to sign affidavits saying they were being paid the minimum wage, Mr. Spitzer subpoenaed the workers to testify under oath that, in fact, they were not being paid. Last June, he announced that Elias Corner had agreed to pay $460,000 for minimum-wage violations.
Ms. Papastathis, an immigrant from Greece, could not be happier: ''It's so beautiful, what he did.''
Mr. Spitzer has made huge headlines for his fights on behalf of Wall Street investors. But he has also been battling for a less visible, less clamorous group: New York's low-wage workers. Last month, Mr. Spitzer announced that the Gristede's supermarket chain would pay $3.2 million to hundreds of African immigrants who often received $2 an hour delivering its groceries, far less than the $5.15 minimum wage.
He stunned a Long Island construction contractor -- and other employers who use day laborers -- by having him arrested at his home in front of reporters after accusing him of not paying four immigrant day laborers a month's wages.
After he charged three Korean greengrocers with paying Mexican immigrants just $3 an hour for their 80-hour work weeks, Mr. Spitzer persuaded 200 others to agree to pay the minimum wage and overtime and to inspections by outside monitors.
''We went to different unions and different public officials for help, but when we went to Eliot Spitzer, we encountered our best ally,'' said Jerry Dominguez, an official from Casa de Mexico, an advocacy group, who took up the cause of greengrocer workers. ''He's doing a lot for workers, more than some union leaders are.''
Mr. Spitzer admits a warm spot for these enforcement efforts. ''They're my favorite cases,'' he said in an interview last week. ''People say, 'The Wall Street cases must be your favorite cases,' because they generate great interest, given there are 100 million investors who feel touched by the mutual fund piece of what you're doing. But the greatest need, I thought, was to help low-wage workers who are least able to protect themselves.''
The attorney general's labor bureau, created in its current form in the early 1980's, spent its first 15 years mainly handling modest cases referred by the state Labor Department and defending lawsuits brought against the state. Patricia Smith, the chief of the labor bureau, said it was only in the past few years that the department had been flexing its muscles, bringing 89 of its own cases in 2003, up from 10 a decade earlier.
Ms. Smith, who began working in the office in 1987, said that Mr. Spitzer had urged the nine-lawyer labor bureau to take the offensive.
''It's the first time that we actually had a mandate to do labor cases on our own,'' she said. ''Eliot told us to think about what can be done to help working people and to try to do it.''
As a Democratic politician and prosecutor, Mr. Spitzer can bring attention-grabbing cases, as he weighs whether to run for governor. And there are undeniable political benefits to his fight for workers. Chinese-American and Hispanic-American groups have hailed him, and so has organized labor. Denis Hughes, president of the New York State A.F.L.-C.I.O., said, ''He has redefined what attorney generals do -- not only in our state but throughout the country -- in enforcing worker rights.''
Mr. Spitzer denied that there was any political calculation to his efforts. Most of the immigrant workers his office helps, he was quick to note, do not even vote.
''I usually face this question with the Wall Street cases: 'You just did this for the political upside,''' he said. ''If I helped an old lady across the street, they'd say I'm doing it for political benefit. Every one of these labor cases has been a lightning rod.''
When Mr. Spitzer went to bat for day laborers, some suburbanites asked why he was defending a group they viewed as a blight on their community. When he accused Korean greengrocers of violating wage laws, they accused him of discrimination.
But Mr. Spitzer has been adept at winning over some of his targets. In his tense dealings with the Korean greengrocers, he agreed to drop his threat to sue for millions of dollars in back pay so long as they agreed to a new code of conduct.
Samuel Ahne, a lawyer for the Korean-American Association of Greater New York, praised Mr. Spitzer for not putting greengrocers out of business. ''He's been eager to work with the employer,'' he said.
But there are business executives who view Mr. Spitzer's tactics as unfair. ''He's too aggressive,'' said John A. Catsimatidis, chairman of Gristede's. ''When you're negotiating with the government and they tell you, 'We'll give you six months if you plead to this, but if you go to trial, you'll get 20 years,' everybody ends up pleading.''
Ismail Ngendakumana, a Gristede's deliveryman who is from Burundi, welcomed Mr. Spitzer's help, saying many coworkers would use their back pay -- some will receive more than $20,000 -- to go to college or bring their families to America.
''A lot of workers are very happy,'' said Mr. Ngendakumana, who often earned $175 a week, including tips, working 70-hour weeks. ''I knew one day we would have justice.''
Mr. Catsimatidis insisted that Gristede's did nothing wrong with its deliverymen; he said a subcontractor was responsible. And he said that Mr. Spitzer strong-armed Gristede's into paying the $3.2 million.
''The people he's helping are illegal aliens,'' Mr. Catsimatidis said. ''They haven't paid a dollar to the I.R.S. in their lives.''
Mr. Spitzer said he was obliged to help illegal immigrant workers. ''On workers rights, New York State law does not distinguish between illegal immigrants and anybody else,'' he said. ''We cannot permit employers who break the law to eat away at the rights of all workers by hiring illegal workers and paying them subminimum wages and getting an unfair competitive advantage.''
Several of New York's top Republicans declined to comment on the attorney general's efforts to help immigrant workers. Republicans nationwide are seeking to woo Hispanic voters, evidenced by President Bush's recent proposal to grant three-year visas to some illegal immigrant workers.
One industry group that might have been expected to criticize Mr. Spitzer, the New York State Restaurant Association, welcomed his work. Rick Sampson, the group's chief executive, said: ''He's going into some places that aren't paying overtime or the minimum wage. Those places give the whole industry a black eye.''
Some labor advocates voice surprise that Mr. Spitzer, the son of a wealthy real estate developer, has taken up the cause of immigrant workers. But he says he has not forgotten where he comes from.
''My grandparents were immigrants,'' he said. ''My Dad grew up on Avenue B and Fourth Street in a walkup apartment without hot water. My father was a printer - he had a little printing press in the basement of their tenement. He did a lot of printing for synagogues. There is not a long lineage of enormous comfort in my family.''
Mr. Spitzer has used muscular tactics to get low-wage employers to pay attention.
Three years ago, his office won the first criminal conviction of a sweatshop owner in a decade -- the employer had forced Chinese immigrants to work 100-hour weeks and had not paid them for months. His office won the first felony conviction of a restaurant, Jade Palace, in Sunset Park for violating overtime laws.
Xue Xian Lin, a Jade Palace worker, said she was coerced into working 70 hours a week without overtime. ''The state attorney general helped not just me,'' she said, ''but many other workers, because so many other employers saw what happened and now won't break the law.''
The attorney general's office sometimes protects higher-wage workers, too. It went after TSI Broadband, an Internet company, getting it to pay $250,000 in back wages. It had persuaded 52 employees to work for several weeks without pay until a new contract came through, but that contract -- and the promised pay-- never materialized.
Rangel Lucero worked for a kosher food factory in Williamsburg, Tuv Taam, often receiving just $300 for his 80-hour weeks. He said he was delighted when Mr. Spitzer announced last October that Tuv Taam had agreed to pay $1 million for minimum wage and overtime violations.
''We were really surprised,'' Mr. Lucero said. ''We never imagined they would pressure the company so strongly.''
