When a breathless Castle McLaughlin called last week to say she had found ''the necklace,'' Gaylord Torrence knew exactly what she was referring to: the so-called grizzly bear claw necklace, acquired by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark during their fabled exploration of the American West.
The item had been donated to the Peabody Museum at Harvard University, where Ms. McLaughlin is the associate curator of Native American ethnography, but had been missing since the museum first cataloged it in 1899.
''It's like finding a Vermeer in the attic,'' said Mr. Torrence, curator of Native American art at the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City.
Of all the Indian objects Lewis and Clark collected during their trip, from 1804-6, only six others remain that can be traced definitively to the explorers: three raven belt ornaments, two basketry whalers' hats and one quilled otter bag. All six are in the collection of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology here.
''It's the perfect Lewis and Clark artifact,'' said Ms. McLaughlin, who began searching for the necklace seven years ago and had come to assume that it was lost. ''It references everything: the natural world, the Indian people, the interaction between Lewis and Clark and the natural world and Indian people.''
Word of the discovery is just getting out.
''I'm not aware of anything like this being discovered in the last 100 years,'' said David Borlaug, president of the Lewis and Clark Fort Mandan Foundation in North Dakota. ''These things just don't come up.''
The story of the necklace is an epic in its own right. It begins with the killing of several bears by one or more Indian warriors, and it ends with the accidental discovery of the necklace in a box in a storage room in the Peabody Museum's South Pacific collection on Dec. 17. (While the 38 claws in the necklace are probably from grizzlies, Ms. McLaughlin said, it is possible that they are from brown bears, and an expert will have to make the final determination.)
In between, the necklace, which was probably given to Lewis and Clark by an Indian chief as part of what Ms. McLaughlin called a diplomatic exchange of gifts, changed hands several times.
Seven years ago, Ms. McLaughlin began a review of what was known as the Peabody's Lewis and Clark collection -- including North American Indian pipes, robes, dresses, hats -- in an effort to establish which objects could be definitively traced to the expedition. The museum's archives held a yellowed label indicating that the necklace existed, but no one at the Peabody could find it.
In the early 19th century, the necklace was at the Peale Museum in Philadelphia, part of a collection of Lewis and Clark artifacts donated by Thomas Jefferson, who dispatched the explorers on their journey West, and by Lewis and Clark themselves. When the Peale Museum closed in 1848, the Lewis and Clark objects , including the bear claw necklace, were acquired by a Massachusetts businessman, Moses Kimball, for his Boston museum, according to Pamela Gerardi, a spokeswoman for the Peabody Museum.
In 1899, a severe fire closed the Boston Museum, and the Kimball family decided to donate 1,400 objects to the Peabody Museum. Those objects included the bear claw necklace, and its label from the Peale Museum identifying it as an artifact from the Lewis and Clark expedition. But at the last minute, Ms. McLaughlin said, ''the family decided to keep the necklace, probably because it was such a cool thing.''
According to the museum's records, Ms. McLaughlin said, in the mid-20th century, museum staff members corresponded with members of the Kimball family in an attempt to find out where the bear claw necklace was. But the Kimball descendants said they did not have the necklace and did not know where it was. ''I just figured it was gone,'' Ms. McLaughlin said. ''Hundreds of objects are gone. It was disappointing.''
But it was not gone, just misidentified as a whale bone necklace and put with other South Seas artifacts. Apparently, unbeknownst to the rest of family, a Kimball family heir had turned it over to the museum in 1941.
The two assistants who found the necklace recognized the claws as bearlike, and since bears are not generally associated with the South Seas, they realized it had ended up in the wrong storage room.
Ms. McLaughlin described her first glimpse of the necklace last week as ''a eureka moment.''
''These bear claw necklaces were precious things, generally worn by warriors who had killed those bears to fulfill a dream or mission of becoming an ally of the bears or achieving the power of bears,'' Ms. McLaughlin said. ''They were not everyday things.''
The necklace's 38 claws, each about three inches long, are attached with rawhide thongs to a fur foundation, which Ms. McLaughlin says might be weasel. The claws were originally covered with a red pigment, most of it now worn away.The necklace, found just weeks after the Peabody opened its new exhibit on the Lewis and Clark Indian artifacts, is expected to be displayed in the spring.
Correction:  January 26, 2004, Monday  An article on Wednesday about the discovery of a lost bear-claw necklace from the Lewis and Clark expedition at the Peabody Museum at Harvard referred imprecisely to the effort to determine the origin of the claws. It involves determining the species of bear, not whether they are from grizzlies or brown bears, which are the same species.
