Jason Kidd is returning to San Antonio on Wednesday, and he cannot even be sure that one of his favorite restaurants, Rosario's Mexican Cafe, will embrace him anymore.
The reception for Kidd is sure to be much different from the last time he was in town. In July, he was treated to a free-agent recruiting bonanza, led by Spurs Coach Gregg Popovich, and chauffeured by the league's most valuable player, Tim Duncan.
Kidd spurned the Spurs and re-signed with the Nets for six years and $103 million. When Kidd is introduced at the SBC Center, he will probably hear exactly what San Antonio thought of his decision.
''I don't know and I don't really care,'' Kidd said. ''Once I made my decision, that was it. You can always sit back and say, 'What if?' but that won't help anything. I was happy with the decision I made. Why would I get booed? They've still got a pretty good team, and San Antonio is a great city.''
His teammates do not have such fond memories of the place. The Nets' last trip to San Antonio was their season-ending loss in Game 6 of the N.B.A. finals. The teams have struggled somewhat so far this season, but the Spurs beat the Nets handily in the first meeting, 85-71 on Nov. 12. After the game, Coach Byron Scott said his team ''played scared.''
Although the Nets have stumbled repeatedly this season, they can only imagine how far they would have fallen without Kidd. Last summer, while the Spurs envisioned Kidd-to-Duncan lob plays, the Nets scrambled to keep the face of their franchise in the fold.
''There were times and moments when I was very unsure,'' Scott said. ''Everybody was concerned. Just like everyone else in the organization, I was worried he might be gone.''
Kidd said he also considered signing with Dallas, where he started his N.B.A. career.
Griffin Appeals Decision
Eddie Griffin, the forward who signed with the Nets after he was released by the Houston Rockets, was found guilty Tuesday in Houston on a misdemeanor charge of drug possession.
Griffin's lawyer, Rusty Hardin, said he filed an appeal. While the appeal is pending, Griffin may be able to avoid a possible suspension by the National Basketball Association as a result of the case.
The maximum sentence Griffin could receive is 180 days in jail, but he will probably be fined and placed on probation.
The police said they found a bag of marijuana in Griffin's car in April after he was stopped for speeding.
Griffin will be sentenced Feb. 13 in Houston, during the N.B.A. All-Star Game break; he is due back in court that day for a felony assault hearing, which was rescheduled Tuesday. In the felony case, Griffin is accused of punching his former girlfriend in October and firing a gun in her direction.
Griffin is eligible to come off the injured list when he rejoins the Nets Wednesday in San Antonio, but according to Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, he will probably not be ready for ''a couple more weeks.''
Harris Is Hurting
The Nets could be shopping for a shooter -- again.
Byron Scott indicated Tuesday that if Lucious Harris continued to struggle, he might have to take him out of the rotation. Harris has been bothered by a back injury since training camp and is now playing on sore ankles. His production has nearly been cut in half, to 5.4 points a game this season from 10.3 last season.
''Lu has been hurting, boy -- it's one of those years for him,'' Scott said. ''He's been bothered by an assortment of injuries. You're always trying to find ways to get him to be more successful out there. I haven't lost confidence in him, but if it continues to go this way, I'll have to sit down and talk to him and maybe go in a different direction.''
Usually the most upbeat player on the team, Harris is spending most of his time in the trainer's room these days. Scott is giving Harris some time off during practices, but perhaps he will need to sit him for a few games before the All-Star Game break.
The Nets have been thrilled with the marksmanship of their starting shooting guard, Kerry Kittles, but they do not have many options after that. So far, the Nets have not appeared willing to rely on Brandon Armstrong or Tamar Slay for extended stretches, so they might have to look elsewhere if Harris cannot heal in a hurry.
Mourning on Their Minds
The Dallas Mavericks held Organ Donor Awareness Night on Tuesday, partly in honor of Alonzo Mourning. The Nets beat out Dallas in signing him over the summer, but Mourning ended his comeback in November and had a kidney transplant last month.
Mourning's recovery is on schedule, but Jason Kidd said he would discourage Mourning from trying to make a comeback because of the risks to his health.
PRO BASKETBALL: NETS NOTEBOOK
