It is not in dispute that while driving home alone on a June evening after officiating at a confirmation Mass Bishop Thomas J. O'Brien struck and killed a carpenter and drove away without stopping.
On that point, the defense and the prosecution in the trial of the former bishop, which began here on Tuesday, agree. Where they differ is whether Bishop O'Brien, who resigned as leader of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Phoenix after his arrest last year, knew that he had hit someone and left him to die.
From the perspective of Anthony Novitsky, a prosecutor trying the case in Maricopa County Superior Court, it should have been obvious that what shattered the bishop's windshield on June 14 was a large man -- 6 feet tall and 250 pounds -- and not, as Bishop O'Brien said he surmised when the police questioned him later, a dog or a tossed rock.
The impact, Mr. Novitsky told the jury in his opening statement, ''must have sounded like a thunderclap.''
Listening to him in the front row of the courtroom were relatives of the carpenter, Jim L. Reed, 43, who, Mr. Novitsky said, was thrown onto the hood of the car and into the windshield with such force that body tissue and fibers from his shirt were embedded in the broken glass. The roof of the beige 2003 Buick Park Avenue was spattered with blood.
Mr. Novitsky said Mr. Reed was run over and dragged almost 70 feet by a second car, which has not been found.
A lawyer for Bishop O'Brien, Tom Henze, rejected any conclusion that the bishop knew what he had struck and insisted that in the darkness he had not seen Mr. Reed before, during or after the impact.
''He simply did not know,'' Mr. Henze said. ''It was a tragedy that cost one person his life and forever altered the life of another.''
The 68-year-old former bishop, wearing the priest's collar, sat at the defense table impassive, almost expressionless, occasionally murmuring to another defense lawyer, Melissa R. Berren.
Two weeks before the accident, Bishop O'Brien had narrowly escaped prosecution for concealing instances of child molesting by priests in the diocese. By publicly admitting his role in the cover-up, which included moving accused priests to other parishes where they continued working with children, the bishop was granted immunity from charges of obstruction of justice.
Mr. Reed, who was not using a crosswalk, might have been confused and unable to perceive danger, Mr. Henze said. The lawyer, peering over his reading glasses, told the jury that although he did not want to disparage the victim, Mr. Reed was intoxicated and, as such, partly responsible for the accident. He might have been confused and unable to perceive danger, Mr. Henze said.
''All contributed to the fateful impact,'' Mr. Henze concluded. ''Whatever happened out there happened very, very quickly.''
Bishop O'Brien, who had led the diocese since November 1981 and is thought to be the highest-ranking Catholic in the United States to go on trial on felony charges, faces up to 45 months in prison if convicted of leaving the scene of a fatal accident.
Mr. Henze said his client was oblivious ''that a person came into contact with his vehicle.'' After the accident, he said, the bishop went home, inspected the damage to his car and ''ate some pizza and watched some television.''
In his description, Mr. Novitsky, the prosecutor, said the bishop ''sped away from the scene,'' passing a vehicle that was carrying Herbert D. Yazzie and Emmie Adson and their toddler. The couple, Mr. Novitsky said in a preview of their testimony, saw Mr. Reed's body ''flying through the air'' and noted the Buick's license plate number.
The prosecutor said Mr. Reed ''undoubtedly made a few mistakes in his life,'' the last one his assumption that he would be able to cross Glendale Avenue safely.
Mr. Novitsky then recounted the bishop's activities the next day, a Sunday, including officiating at another Mass and having dinner at his sister's home in North Scottsdale. He did not apparently mention the accident to anyone, Mr. Novitsky said, nor did he contact the police. He remained mostly silent on the accident even after his top aide, Msgr. Dale J. Fushek, called to tell him that a detective had asked to speak with him about an accident in which a man had been killed.
''Something hit my window,'' the bishop acknowledged to his aide.
''I will handle it,'' he continued, Mr. Novitsky recounted, but failed to return two follow-up calls from Monsignor Fushek. The next morning, June 16, when four police officers and a lieutenant went to the bishop's house, he did not answer the door, Mr. Novitsky said, and instead peered at them from behind a blind. Finally, the bishop's personal assistant, Doris Knowles, arrived and let herself in. Mr. Novitsky said she told the bishop that the police wanted to speak with him, to which he responded, ''Why are they here?''
That morning, the prosecutor said, the bishop called a secretary at the diocese to find someone to replace a windshield.
