At 33 years old, the 6-foot-6 Todd Martin has grown very accustomed to reaching down to shake hands at the net. But tennis has changed, and his second-round match at the Australian Open was the first in Martin's lengthy career that he was the Lilliputian.
Ivo Karlovic, all 6 feet 10 inches of him, is the tallest man in the history of Grand Slam tennis, and he is more than a novelty, as Lleyton Hewitt found out at Wimbledon last year, when Karlovic shocked him in the first round.
In the opening round here Monday, Karlovic eliminated another seeded player: No. 21 Mardy Fish. There were no service breaks in that match, which Karlovic won in straight sets, taking command in all three tie breakers. And there were no service breaks on Wednesday, either.
''His serve is ridiculous,'' Martin said, shaking his gray-haired head. ''Listen, he's 6-10. He serves from a tree. He serves hard, but he is so accurate, it's outstanding.''
Thanks to Martin, he is also out of the tournament because this time the smaller man won all the tie breakers, 7-6 (4), 7-6 (4), 7-6 (7).
''You know Todd; you can never count him out,'' Martin's coach, Jose Higueras, said.
The surprise is that Martin is competing at a high level at all. After reaching the fourth round at the United States Open last summer, he skipped the last three months of the season to spend time with his wife, Amy, and infant son, Jackson Dale. Although he had been close to retirement in the early summer, his success at the Open helped him decide to continue for at least one more season, with Higueras as his full-time chaperone.
''He's obviously a good player and a good friend,'' Higueras said. ''Hopefully, we'll have a good year and then, after that, he can do whatever he wants.''
Martin's preparation for this season was curtailed by a herniated disk in his back. Instead of practicing intensively with Higueras in the off-season, he started late and withdrew from his first scheduled event in Adelaide.
When he finally did make it to the Southern Hemisphere, he lost in the first round in Auckland, New Zealand, and he looked as if he was on his way out in the first round here, too, as he lost the first two sets the against the French veteran Anthony Dupuis on Monday. But for the ninth time in his career, Martin rallied from two sets down, saving a match point in the fourth set along the way. Although that match drew heavily on his reserves, his match with Karlovic was more mentally than physically draining.
Karlovic, who finished with 33 aces, served and volleyed after nearly every serve. And though they played for nearly three hours, neither man could convert any of his three break points.
But Martin played the critical points just a shade better, and now he is back in the third round of the Open. He is not the only 33-year-old American to be there. Fourth-seeded Andre Agassi, the defending champion, had a much smoother ride into the third round with a 6-0, 6-2, 6-4 victory over the 18-year-old Tomas Berdych.
In his postmatch news conference, Agassi made an eloquent plea on behalf of men's tennis, which has been rocked in recent months by a series of positive drug tests, some of which were suspected to be the result of contaminated supplements. The situation has left some players afraid to ingest even multivitamins and made Agassi think long and hard about using lotion for a skin irritation on his hand.
''I had to fill out three pages of forms and get them faxed and sent and confirmed that it was O.K. for me to put cream on my hand,'' he said. ''And that's the tough part about it. That's the reality of the tennis player's life. You know, that's how we're tested.''
He added: ''I don't want to see this level of scrutiny exist in the reality of our lives and then on the other hand hear the integrity of our sport being questioned. You know, those two things, they are not compatible.''
Though it has been a difficult stretch for the men's game, Wednesday was a fine day for American men of all ages. Andy Roddick, seeded first in a Grand Slam event for the first time, was impressive in his 6-2, 6-2, 6-3 demolition of the Czech veteran Bohdan Ulihrach, one of the seven players whose positive test for metabolites of the steroid nandrolone was thrown out by the ATP last July.
Roddick will face Taylor Dent in the third round. Dent, seeded 27th, rallied to defeat Juan Ignacio Chela of Argentina, 3-6, 6-4, 4-6, 7-6 (4), 7-5, on Wednesday, then let out a scream of delight.
James Blake also reached the third round by defeating Nicolas Lapentti of Ecuador, 6-3, 7-6 (4), 2-6, 6-1.
On Tuesday night, second-seeded Kim Clijsters of Belgium, who was on crutches earlier this month after injuring her left ankle, allayed concerns about her form by defeating Marlene Weingartner of Germany in straight sets in the first round.
TENNIS
