A former aide to Gov. John G. Rowland filed a complaint Tuesday against the director of the State Ethics Commission, saying that the director tried to embarrass him by divulging his research on the financial records of leading Democrats.
Last week some legislators criticized the former aide, David Boomer, after it became public that he had visited the commission's office to review the records of Democratic lawmakers who were calling for an impeachment inquiry of the governor, a Republican.
Mr. Boomer said he had nothing to be ashamed of, but wrote to the commission Tuesday to call for an investigation of its executive director, Alan Plofsky. ''I believe individuals should be able to go to the Ethics Commission without fearing that Mr. Plofsky will disclose that,'' Mr. Boomer said.
In his complaint, he said he believed Mr. Plofsky had disclosed the research to a reporter at The Hartford Courant ''for the purpose of trying to discredit my work and/or damage my reputation.'' Mr. Boomer said he was considering filing a similar complaint with the state Freedom of Information Commission.
Reached by phone Tuesday, Mr. Plofsky called the complaint ''probably the most frivolous action taken against me in my long career,'' but added that the commission would consider it at its next meeting. He said the Courant's reporter had called him to ask about Mr. Boomer's visit to the Ethics Commission, and he had simply confirmed what the reporter already knew.
Mr. Boomer also announced Tuesday that he was voluntarily terminating his contract with the state Republican Party, which would have ended in March. Although he has denied it, some of Mr. Boomer's critics have said they believe the state Republican Party was directing him to dig up potentially damaging information on Democrats. Ending the contract, Mr. Boomer said, will allow him to continue doing the research for Mr. Rowland without involving the party.
Before Mr. Boomer's research efforts were made public, the governor and his staff had made clear that standards invoked during an impeachment process might be used against lawmakers as well. Some Democrats said they left meetings with the governor feeling they had received a veiled threat.
Also on Tuesday, Senate President Kevin B. Sullivan, a Democrat, criticized both Mr. Boomer and state Republican Party officials, saying they were ''interfering'' with the Ethics Commission. He cited a hearing on Friday that led to a victory for the governor: the commission barred Mr. Plofsky from discussing the state law on public officials receiving gifts.
Mr. Plofsky had previously distributed a draft opinion on the law, which relates to Mr. Rowland's acceptance of free work on his private cottage in Litchfield.
