Picking up where it left off last spring as the hottest show on television, the Fox network's ''American Idol'' got off to a roaring ratings start on Monday night.
The opening episode of the show's third edition pulled in more than 28 million viewers, the preliminary national ratings from Nielsen Media Research said. That eclipsed the total for the opening episode last January, which attracted 26.5 million viewers.
More important to Fox, which like all the other networks except CBS emphasizes the ratings for viewers aged 18 to 49, the premiere of the latest ''American Idol'' scored a 12.5 rating among that group. (Each rating point equals 1.29 million viewers in that group.)
That was the second-best number for any entertainment show on television this season, beaten only by last week's episode of ''Friends'' on NBC. In terms of total viewers, ''American Idol'' was the fourth most-watched entertainment show of the season, topped by three episodes of the hit CBS drama ''C.S.I.''
Final national ratings will not be available until today. But the numbers for ''American Idol'' are expected to increase because the show was extra long, running 8 minutes past the hour.
Fox did that to set up the best possible lead-in to the show that followed, the premiere of ''My Big, Fat, Obnoxious Fiancé.'' Eight minutes of ''Idol'' counted in the rating for that show in the preliminary ratings but will count for ''Idol'' in the final ratings.
Fox got a huge initial reception for that show as well. ''Fiancé'' reached more than 21 million viewers and averaged a 9.9 rating in the 18 to 49 group. But there was some slippage from ''Idol.'' By the time it ended, ''Fiancé'' had fallen to an 8.9 rating, a steep drop from the more than 13 rating that ''Idol'' scored in its last half hour.
Fox executives expect ''Fiancé'' to level off at a much lower figure starting next week, when it will not have ''Idol'' driving viewers into it. Still, Fox is doing its best to help the show. Somehow Fox discovered a ''lost episode'' of its other reality hit ''The Simple Life,'' a remarkable find considering that Fox had already expanded that show to 10 episodes from 7 and will use that on Monday at 8 to lead into ''Fiancé.''
The showing Monday night for ''Idol'' also sets up one of the big showdowns of the television season tonight. The second episode of ''Idol'' was on last night, and Fox will have a third episode at 8 p.m. tonight competing with the third episode of NBC's new reality hit, ''The Apprentice,'' which has been moved off Thursday night for the first time.
