Gone was the outsider's tirade, the pitched condemnation of right-wing Republicans and ''Washington Democrats'' afraid to vote against them. Gone, too, were the finger thrust and the scowl of outrage.
''Those of you who came here intending to be lifted to your feet by a lot of red-meat rhetoric are going to be a little disappointed,'' a subdued Howard Dean told several hundred people at a hotel ballroom here on the morning after his weak third-place showing in the Iowa caucuses. ''I want to give the kind of speech I gave in Vermont for so many years, a speech about policy.''
But Dr. Dean did not offer any new initiatives, or many new thoughts about the old ones. Instead, only hours after delivering a growling and defiant Iowa concession speech that delighted opponents and puzzled even some of his supporters, he wound through a softened version of his stump speech.
After suffering the first defeat of his political career, a crushing 20-point loss to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, Dr. Dean was clearly trying to regain his footing in a drastically reshaped Democratic presidential race just a week before the New Hampshire primary.
Now he must contend here not only with Senator Kerry but also with Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who finished a strong second in Iowa, and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who did not compete in Iowa but has been steadily gaining support in New Hampshire.
''We spent a long time as the supposed front-runner, and we paid the price that front-runners pay,'' Dr. Dean said at a news conference Tuesday, the playfulness he had shown in chats over the weekend replaced with unanimated responses. ''And now we have to regroup, and it's a pleasure to come to New Hampshire not as the front-runner.''
''We want to win here, we need to win here,'' he added. ''All we're going to do is work. We aim to win every single contest that we go into, and New Hampshire is not an exception. Were going to work and work and work.''
Later, at a campus rally in Concord, a startled Dr. Dean called for security as a tussle erupted over a young man carrying a Confederate flag. Similar protests have disrupted several Dean events at colleges in New Hampshire since the controversy over the candidate's promise to appeal to Southerners who fly that flag, but this was the first that almost brought violence.
When another protester raised another Confederate flag, Dr. Dean, voice cracking, began singing, ''O say can you see?'' Pointing at the large American flag hanging in the gymnasium, he led the less-than-capacity crowd in the national anthem, and exhorted those present to vote next Tuesday in order to protect the free-speech rights he said the protesters were threatening.
While the candidate himself said he had not had a chance to consider what had gone wrong in Iowa, or how to avoid repeating the mistakes this week, senior campaign aides huddled at their headquarters here searching for a second act. They were stuck in a kind of Goldilocks syndrome, aware that Monday night's shouting by Dr. Dean was too hot, and Tuesday morning's rebound too cold. But they were still somewhat divided about what to do.
One top strategist said the campaign would put all its energy into a do-or-die New Hampshire push, while another said that instead of yanking staff members from 17 other primary states, Dr. Dean would use his flush treasury to force the other candidates to compete on several fronts at once.
After weeks of public statements about the strength of Dr. Dean's field organization in Iowa, aides based in Burlington, Vt., immediately -- though quietly -- began complaining about the Iowa operation, saying it had been impressive in size but not strategy. The aides said they were counting on their even more highly regarded organization here -- there were 1,000 house parties across the state just last week -- as well as Dr. Dean's familiarity to voters in this state neighboring his own Vermont.
''They underestimated Dean once before; we can only hope they'll make the same mistake again,'' said Steve McMahon, Dr. Dean's media consultant and senior adviser.
''While we were taking hits from everybody, they were appropriating our message,'' Mr. McMahon added. ''The message of change won in Iowa, but it was taken away from us. The question now is what kind of change do they want.''
Indeed, after sustained ovations welcoming him here, Dr. Dean began what he called his own State of the Union speech Tuesday morning by explaining that he entered the presidential race two years ago to highlight his chief concerns: balanced budgets, health care and children's programs. But, he said, he soon ''realized the Democratic Party wasn't standing up to George Bush.''
''The campaign's changed a lot,'' Dr. Dean said. ''Other Democrats are standing up, speaking their piece, criticizing the president. Some are having a little trouble explaining their voting records, but they're doing the best they can. And that's a good thing, and I welcome that.''
Dr. Dean barely mentioned his opposition to the Iraq war, a critical factor in his insurgency but one that apparently did not translate into votes in Iowa. His new pitch was based instead on his executive experience as a governor and his standing up for unpopular positions.
Asked later at the news conference about his unusually ferocious speech the night before, Dr. Dean said he had been focused on thanking the rowdy crowd of true believers, not expanding his appeal to the people watching on television.
''Last night there were 3,500 people there who had worked for weeks in Iowa,'' he said, ''and I thought I owed them the reason they came to the campaign, which was passion.''
But the approach may have backfired: many of the faithful who post to the campaign's Web log questioned whether the wheels were coming off.
''Let's get our candidate under control!'' wrote Jesse from NH.
''The tone of Governor Dean has become more combative to me, and less inspiring,'' posted T in Austin, Tex.
Steven Romero, a 25-year-old from Baton Rouge who had been backing Dr. Dean since the summer and logging on to his site daily, said in a telephone interview that Monday night's speech had sent him searching for another candidate.
''They always said Dean can't be stopped unless he stops himself,'' Mr. Romero said. ''He killed his own candidacy.''
But Dean aides said the campaign remained very much alive, and pointed to historical examples of candidates who captured their party's nomination without winning either Iowa or New Hampshire. They looked forward to a debate on Thursday night, when, for the first time in months, artillery will most likely be aimed at someone else's lectern.
And while they canceled plans for a day without campaigning Wednesday, hastily arranging a morning event, Dr. Dean still plans to head home to Vermont at midday, honoring a commitment to attend his 17-year-old son's hockey game.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
