The developer of a new asthma treatment who was ousted a year ago from the research company he founded has admitted killing his wife in the garage of their million-dollar house and then trying to make it look as if she had died in an auto accident, the police said on Tuesday. He pleaded not guilty in Superior Court in Mercer County.
The man, Jonathan Wesley Nyce, a former professor of pharmacology and chief executive of EpiGenesis Pharmaceuticals, told the police after he was arrested on Sunday that he had slammed his wife's face to the ground several times ''until he heard a thud that 'made me sick,''' according to a complaint filed in court on Tuesday. He put his wife, Michelle Rivera Nyce, 34, in her car, drove it into a nearby creek and left her body behind the wheel, the police said.
Mr. Nyce, 53, was charged with murder and is being held in the Mercer County jail in $2 million cash bail.
The former pharmaceutical entrepreneur has asked to be represented by a public defender, but to do that he will have to show that he cannot afford his own lawyer. He will make another court appearance Wednesday morning, probably by video, for a reconsideration of his bail, the Mercer County prosecutor's office said.
He and his wife, who was 34, had three children, ages 5, 10 and 12, who are staying with a family member in Pennsylvania, said Chief Michael Chipowsky of the Hopewell Police Department. Mr. Nyce's father, who has the same name, lives in Pennsylvania, the chief said.
The couple moved to New Jersey from Greenville, N.C., about four years ago, investigators said. They put their house on the market at $1.6 million three months ago, the police said.
The police have not decided what they believe the motive for the attack was, but they are considering several possibilities, including a theory that it was prompted by financial problems. ''We're looking at the financials, but we're not locked in to that as a motive,'' Chief Chipowsky said in an interview. An article in The Times of Trenton reported a theory that Mr. Nyce feared that his wife was having an affair and attributed its report to the chief, but Mr. Chipowsky would not repeat that theory Tuesday.
The chief did confirm that neighbors told investigators that the couple seemed to be in love, and that no friction between them was evident. The few neighbors who answered their doors on Tuesday refused to discuss the case.
Mr. Nyce has not worked since March, when he left EpiGenesis, the company which he had helped build, and which is developing an asthma drug. The drug is intended to reduce swelling and airway blockage in asthmatic lungs without the side effects of prolonged steroid use.
In 1999, he and EpiGenesis Pharmaceuticals received an award for advanced medical research by the New Jersey Commission on Science and Technology, state records show.
According to news reports at the time, the company was rapidly spending its research capital without producing a drug ready for federal approvals testing, and in March last year a group of investors forced Mr. Nyce out of the company.
Joanne Leonard, the company's chief financial officer, said Tuesday that the company would not comment on the circumstances of Mr. Nyce's departure or on the murder investigation.
''I can confirm that he left in March 2003 and that we have had no contact with him since then,'' Ms. Leonard said, ''and that's why I really can't comment on the matter.''
Mrs. Nyce was last seen in public after she left her job as a beauty consultant at Macy's in the Quaker Bridge Mall on Thursday afternoon, the police said. Her husband did not report her missing. Her
body was found on Friday morning by a Public Service Electric &amp; Gas Company crew behind the wheel of her 1997 Toyota Land Cruiser in 10 inches of water in Jacobs Creek, about a mile from their house, the police chief said.
The police chief said that Mrs. Nyce's head and face had been badly injured but that the damage to the car seemed slight, so investigators quickly concluded that the death had not been caused by an accident.
The police spent Friday and Saturday searching the Nyce home in a development of large and expensive houses, most of them built in the last 10 years.
On Sunday they arrested Mr. Nyce, and he gave the account paraphrased in the court complaint, the police chief said. The attack occurred in the family garage, investigators said.
The court complaint said Mr. Nyce pulled his wife out of the driver's seat of her car and repeatedly threw her to the ground.
Mr. Nyce then drove the car down their street and off into the creek, where he left it with his wife's lifeless body behind the wheel, Chief Chipowsky said.
The couple met in Hawaii in 1990 when Mr. Nyce was there on business, the chief said, and they were married the following year.
Hopewell Township is an old village outside Trenton that has become home to many wealthy newcomers in the past few decades. Chief Chipowsky said the only other murder in the township in 15 years involved a 1993 domestic dispute in which a man killed a woman and himself.
