An audit released on Tuesday by the Nassau County comptroller describes administrative chaos and wasteful spending in the county's economic development agencies, including $944 for a hotel suite that went unused.
The audit also cited $10,000 spent without bidding for used furniture, which cost an additional $24,143 to ship. The lot included one couch, 4 love seats, 18 desks and credenzas, 102 filing cabinets and 256 chairs -- all for a staff of six. The audit called the purchase ''far in excess of that needed.''
The findings are the latest in the unfolding scandal involving the agencies that Deputy County Executive Peter Sylver headed for nearly two years. He resigned last month under fire for dubious charges on a credit card that was obtained in violation of procedures, officials said.
The disclosures pose the first major stumble for County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi, who had won widespread praise for the progress made on his promises to solve Nassau's fiscal crisis and clean up patronage, waste and corruption.
Trying to seize the initiative last month, Mr. Suozzi, who appointed Mr. Sylver and oversaw an expansion of the economic agencies, announced his own preliminary findings, blamed himself for not having imposed stricter controls and promised ''a series of sweeping reforms.'' County Comptroller Howard S. Weitzman, whose staff conducted the audit, referred some findings to the county district attorney for further investigation. Mr. Weitzman will be the first of 27 scheduled witnesses to speak Wednesday at a public hearing on the issue held by the County Legislature.
The comptroller's audit is the latest in a series of reports on the troubled economic development agencies. The Legislative Budget Review Office, the county commissioner of investigation, the deputy county executive for finance and a hired accounting firm have conducted their own reviews.
Some irregularities, like the $119,000 for golf, charities and staff parties, date back to 2000 and 2001, when Thomas S. Gulotta, a Republican, was still county executive. But most of the items cited occurred under the administration of Mr. Suozzi, a Democrat.
On Tuesday Mr. Suozzi welcomed the various inquiries and vowed that whatever problems arise, ''we will fix them.'' To enforce high standards, he designated one of his deputies, Helena Williams, as the county's first chief compliance officer.
The Republicans, who lost control of the Legislature and executive's office because of fiscal mismanagement under Mr. Gulotta, have been having a field day with the latest turn of events.
''We have this total misuse of federal and county taxpayer dollars to create almost a shadow government to hire people, pay for expenses, go on trips and buy furniture, all circumventing county procedures,'' said Edward Ward, a spokesman for the Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter Schmitt. ''Even the comptroller didn't know about this till we found out. They were running their own shop.''
The Republicans are especially critical of the legal work done for the economic development agencies by Crowe, Deegan, Dickson, &amp; Benrubi, a law firm in Mr. Suozzi's hometown, Glen Cove, that has close personal and political ties to him, including large campaign donations.
The audit said that Crowe, Deegan, billed $707,000 and was hired ''without any competitive procurement process'' although ''county rules generally require at least three firms be considered.''
The audit found other cases of purchases without bidding, and some agencies had no purchasing procedures. The agencies often commingled expenses and even employees, the report said. Accounting records were often faulty, and three agencies ''kept no accounting records at all.''
Revenue was not always deposited promptly, according to the audit. Fees were not always recorded, and one fee was charged without authorization. Meals were charged without documenting their business purpose, the report said, and consultants were hired and used with little oversight.
Attendance records were often wrong or missing, the auditors said. One employee worked three days a week but was paid for five. When the comptroller tried to recoup the overpayment, the worker was given a 67 percent retroactive raise to make up the difference.
It said the agencies paid excessive amounts to lease cars: 11 Ford Tauruses for $518 a month each and Mr. Sylver's Crown Victoria for $725.
In one case that was referred to the district attorney, the audit found that without the required approval of the county treasurer, one agency opened a bank account on which Mr. Sylver could sign checks. The application prepared by the staff falsely stated that the agency was a corporation and that its board of directors had approved the application. In fact, the agency had no board. Another case involved a similar application for a business loan and credit card account.
As previously disclosed, nearly $7,000 was spent for a digital plasma television for Mr. Suozzi's conference room, and Mr. Sylver spent $3,462 to attend a London conference on criminal justice that the audit said '' had little apparent connection'' to his county duties. The cost included $820 for his wife and an additional three-day stay.
Mr. Sylver, who has since reimbursed the London expense and some other disputed credit card charges, did not respond to a message seeking comment.
