After a seemingly endless run of false starts, retail development is picking up momentum in downtown Stamford.
Target, after first expressing interest in the area more than five years ago, finally broke ground on a 164,0000-square-foot store on Broad Street last May. In September, another large discount retailer, Burlington Coat Factory, began renovating the old Caldor building that is also on Broad Street. And in October, local officials announced that Wal-Mart was coming to the 4.2-acre parcel of land at the corner of Greyrock Place and Tresser Boulevard. Known locally as the ''hole in the ground,'' it has been vacant for about 20 years.
The 15-block area that makes up downtown Stamford now seems to be attractive to big-box retailers, a mood far different from that eight years ago. That was when zoning changes were made to the area -- to force large retailers to go downtown, rather than taking space closer to Interstate 95, especially on the side of the highway away from downtown.
''You have to let things percolate a bit, which is what happened here, but we think that all the new space that is coming to our area is very exciting,'' said Sandra Goldstein, executive director for the Stamford Downtown Special Services District, a business improvement group.
Although certain retailers like Safavieh Rugs and Home are continuing to take on more space downtown, some local real estate executives suspect that most smaller retailers will wait until stores like Target and Wal-Mart have actually opened.
Still, some brokers who represent smaller tenants say that interest has picked up notably since ground was broken for Target's store. ''We've seen a considerable increase in activity,'' said Penny P. Wickey, president of Harbor Commercial Real Estate, a Southport, Conn., brokerage company.
Ms. Wickey said that her company is representing five tenants who are negotiating for space of up to 6,500 square feet in the downtown area. Several of them, she said, are pursuing opportunities on the ground floor of Target's development project, where 16,000 square feet of space are expected to come to market soon.
But Ms. Wickey says she has also noticed considerable interest lately in another downtown development project, also called Greyrock Place, which she is representing. The 280,000-square-foot, multi-use project has been proposed for the corner of Broad Street and Greyrock, across the street from Macy's department store. While plans for Greyrock Place still need approval by Stamford's zoning authorities, it is now scheduled to offer about 70,000 square feet of retail space on its first two floors.
Wal-Mart also still needs to go through Stamford's approval process before proceeding with its plans. But according to Richard Baker, president of National Realty and Development in Purchase, N.Y., a longstanding developer for Wal-Mart, it has already signed commitments, though not actual leases, for 300,000 square feet of space at Stamford Place, a project his company is developing with Milstein Brothers Capital Partners of New York. It is projected to open in 2006.
Mr. Baker said that about 35 floors, with 550 apartments and 450,000 square feet of retail space, are envisioned at Stamford Place. In a departure from its usual stores, current plans call for Wal-Mart to open a 150,000-square-foot Sam's Club warehouse store in the basement of the building, while the seventh floor will house a 150,000-square-foot Wal-Mart, Mr. Baker said. In between, he said, there are to be four floors of other stores and two of parking.
Burlington Coat Factory is also planning a different kind of store in Stamford. According to Robert Grapski, Burlington's vice president for real estate, the 120,000-square-foot store will be both more lavish than a typical outlet and about 40,000 square feet larger. ''We're spending a lot of money on this,'' he said. ''It's going to be a trophy piece.''
Norman Lotstein, vice president of the Pyramid Real Estate Group in Stamford, said that rents for retail space in downtown Stamford five years ago were typically in the mid-to-low $20 range a square foot annually. By contrast, he said, they are now $27 to $33 a square foot.
As for the appropriate mixture of retailers in the area, some local officials and real estate executives continue to have a long wish list. Ms. Goldstein would like to see boutiques on Bedford Street, but she would particularly welcome the arrival of a specialty food retailer like Fresh Fields, Wild Oats or Trader Joe's.
She is encouraged, though. ''I guarantee you that in five years, you will see my wish list come true,'' she said.
Mr. Baker is also optimistic. ''Downtown Stamford,'' he said, ''is going to look a lot different six months from now, just as it did six months ago.''
