Seton Hall had a recent problem with effort, but apparently the Pirates' hearing is just fine.
With a tirade by Coach Louis Orr still echoing in their ears, the Pirates played their best game of the season Tuesday night, beating 13th-ranked Syracuse, 74-67, before a season-high crowd of 10,602 at Continental Arena.
Seton Hall (12-4, 2-2 Big East) halted a two-game conference losing streak that had smudged its early success, and the Pirates stopped the Orangemen's 13-game winning streak.
Gleeful students rushing the court nearly ran over Pirates forward Marcus Toney-El, who seemed taken aback by the celebration. Seton Hall was happy, but not satisfied. Its season had hit a ditch after a loss to Boston College on Saturday. Orr launched into a 20-minute locker-rattling rant that could be heard beyond the walls.
No player seemed to have taken the scolding to heart more than the sophomore center Kelly Whitney. He was by far the Pirates' best player on the floor, scoring 21 points, shooting 9 of 14 and grabbing 8 rebounds. Andre Barrett and John Allen added 16 each. Barrett and Allen combined to make 14 of 16 free throws in the last 3 minutes 40 seconds to end the suspense.
Syracuse (13-2, 3-1) inched to 4 points behind to begin the second half but never got closer than 7 in the last four minutes.
''It's not the first time I got after them,'' Orr said. ''In reality, we all want the same thing. They all know we have to defend people to compete.''
Syracuse forward Hakim Warrick scored a game-high 26 points, but guard Gerry McNamara pulled a groin muscle and had only 6 points and an assist while being harassed by Barrett. The injury limited him to 10 minutes in the second half.
The Pirates played the first four minutes to perfection. They forced four turnovers and raced to a 12-0 lead. ''Seton Hall jumped us,'' said Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim, who lost to Orr, his former player and assistant coach, for the first time in five meetings. ''We never were really able to recover.''
A jump shot by McNamara broke the initial drought and Syracuse was able to close the gap to 17-12 at one point in the first half. Seton Hall still went into the half up by 35-25. It was the Orangemen's lowest halftime total this season and only the second time they had trailed at intermission.
The Pirates kept the pace fast enough to prevent Syracuse from settling into its zone, which is no friend of iffy-shooting Seton Hall. The Pirates shot 52.2 percent to the Orangemen's 42.9 percent. The tempo also allowed Seton Hall to be outrebounded by Syracuse, 39-28, and still control the game.
Syracuse had beaten eight of its previous nine opponents by double figures. That included road victories at Missouri and Notre Dame. Far from their best against the Pirates, the Orangemen plugged on without much help from their bench. Four of their starters had averaged 31.7 minutes, and this outing also produced little from their reserves: 2-for-10 shooting and 6 points.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
