HIGHLIGHTS
LIVERPOOL: LENNON'S HOME -- Caretaker wanted: for Mendips, a semi-detached property on Menlove Avenue in Liverpool. Successful applicant must have an in-depth knowledge of the Lennon family during John Lennon's boyhood. The National Trust of Britain is looking for someone to serve from March to October this year as the live-in custodian of the house above, where the Beatle-to-be lived beginning when he was 5, the BBC reported. The property was given to the trust by his widow, Yoko Ono, and is used as a tourist attraction, as is Paul McCartney's former family home on Forthlin Road. Both houses reopen on March 27.
THEATER: NO GO FOR THIS 'GODOT' -- A German theater has been barred from staging Samuel Beckett's absurdist masterpiece ''Waiting for Godot'' with women in two key roles, Agence France-Presse reported. The orders came from Beckett's German publishers, S. Fischer Verlag, said Gerhard Hess, the manager of the theater in Wilhelmshaven in Lower Saxony, where the play was to have opened on Saturday. ''This manner of defending the holy grail is a bad joke,'' Mr. Hess said. He noted that the publishing house explained that its action was taken out of respect for Beckett's wishes that women never perform in ''Waiting for Godot.'' The Daily Telegraph of London said the director, Philip Kochheim, had cast women in the roles of Lucky and Estragon, leaving males in the roles of Vladimir and Pozzo in a sexually charged interpretation. Beckett's German rights expire in 2059, 70 years after his death.
MUSIC: THE SOUND OF SILENCE -- Listeners who tuned in to BBC Radio 3 on Friday heard the musicians of the BBC Symphony Orchestra tuning up and turning the pages of a score, as the composer specified, in a performance at the Barbican in London. Four minutes and 33 seconds later, they heard enthusiastic applause. In between, except for some coughing and rustling in the audience, they heard nothing -- nothing, that is, except the avant-garde composer John Cage's 1952 piece ''4'33'','' which has no notes. The BBC reported that to broadcast the performance, Radio 3 had to switch off its emergency system, which turns on in the presence of silence.
FOOTNOTES
The lives of children and attitudes about children in ancient Greece will be examined in ''Coming of Age in Ancient Greece: Images From Childhood From the Classical Past,'' an exhibition of more than 80 objects opening today at the Onassis Cultural Center in the Olympic Tower, 645 Fifth Avenue, at 51st Street.
