Clint Mathis, who has been in Europe for the past few weeks trying out with several soccer clubs, will sign a contract with Hannover 96 today to play in the German Bundesliga for the next two and a half seasons.
''He's very excited about playing in the Bundesliga; it has always been his first choice,'' Craig Sharon, Mathis's agent, said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''Hannover has been interested in the past and it was a good choice for Clint because Steve Cherundolo is there and the coach speaks English.'' Cherundolo is also a member of the United States national team.
Mathis, 27, played the last three seasons and half of another for the MetroStars in Major League Soccer, scoring 33 goals. He has also appeared in 34 games for the national team, scoring 11 goals. He was a member of the 2002 World Cup team that advanced to the quarterfinals.
Before the World Cup, his goal-scoring exploits and Mohawk hairstyle drew the attention of the news media, including a spot on the cover of Sports Illustrated. But he started only one match for the United States. He never seemed to recover from the letdown and disappointment of his limited role. ''With Clint, we've gotten a good forward,'' Carsten Linke, Hannover's assistant manager, told The Associated Press yesterday.
Hannover, in 11th place in the 18-team Bundesliga, returns to action Jan. 31 after a six-week winter break. Mathis's contract will run through June 30, 2006, and be worth ''many multiples'' of his M.L.S. contract, Sharon said. Last year, Mathis earned the league maximum, $285,000; he also had a lucrative endorsement deal with Adidas, which has its headquarters in Germany.
Mathis, who had trials with Glasgow Rangers in Scotland and Sunderland in England (where he was also offered a contract), is the latest American player to leave M.L.S. He left on a free transfer; his contract with M.L.S. expired Dec. 31.
Also yesterday, Brian McBride, 31, who was due to make $341,000 with the Columbus Crew this season, confirmed that he had joined Fulham of the English Premier League on a $1 million transfer. Last week, defender Carlos Bocanegra, 24, left Chicago for Fulham on a free transfer and played 90 minutes in the club's 3-1 loss to Newcastle on Monday.
''I don't think players' leaving M.L.S. is necessarily such a bad thing,'' MetroStars General Manager Nick Sakiewicz said in a telephone interview. ''Instead, I think it's a testament to the quality of our league.''
SOCCER
