No country in the world has a higher rate of homicide by firearms than Brazil, and the toll is highest in large cities like this one. But now, in what gun control advocates describe as a bold but risky social experiment, Brazil has virtually outlawed the possession of handguns.
Since just before Christmas, no one in this nation of 175 million except police officers, soldiers and prison and security guards has been authorized to carry a pistol.
The sale and trade of weapons has been similarly limited: the illegal purchase, possession or furnishing of arms has become a criminal offense with no bail and long prison sentences. Gun owners are being told that most of them will have to hand over their weapons within six months.
''This is an expression of the unanimous will of society to cut the spiral of violence that unsettles us and embarrasses us before humanity,'' President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva said when he signed the bill. Noting that a homicide occurs in Brazil every 12 minutes, he added that ''this statute is certainly not the solution to everything, but it is an exceptional step forward.''
No one knows how many guns are circulating in this vast nation, which is larger than the 48 contiguous states of the United States and shares a similar history of cowboys and explorers pushing, often violently, to open a rugged frontier.
About two million guns are legally registered, but government officials estimate that the number of unregistered weapons may run as high as 20 million, including those of poor peasants who hunt out of necessity.
Under the legislation, no one who is under 25 or has been convicted of a drug or alcohol offense is permitted to own a gun. To acquire a weapon, an applicant must submit a statement of need -- the rural hunters, for example, can qualify, but the standard of need is much stricter in cities.
The applicant must also prove that he or she has no criminal record and is gainfully employed and then register the weapon with a new centralized federal data bank after paying a $350 annual tax.
But the law also contains an unusual feature that worries gun advocates in a country where people talk routinely about ambitious laws that are passed but ''don't catch on'' because of a lack of enforcement. A national referendum has been scheduled for October 2005, in which voters will be asked whether they want the gun sale restrictions to continue or be revoked.
''This is an act of cowardice by the governing class, which ought to at least be willing to take the political risks involved,'' said Oscar Vilhena, board chairman of the Latin American Institute for Crime Prevention here.
''They can't offer security to the people,'' he said, ''so by asking a terrorized populace to vote in favor of this, they have assured that if things don't work out, they are not the losers.''
Originally introduced in 1999, the legislation had to overcome tenacious resistance from the military and a gun lobby generous with campaign donations.
The main cartridge manufacturer, for instance, opposed the bill because it contained a provision requiring that lot numbers be stamped on all bullets sold to the police and the military so that their origins could be traced.
''This was an important amendment that makes it possible to trace the diversion of military and police stocks,'' said Rubem César Fernandes, the co-chairman of Viva Rio, a civic organization concerned with urban violence that worked in favor of the legislation. ''You see an enormous quantity of material diverted from these institutions and private security firms to Paraguay, and then brought back into the country illegally.''
Many of the guns used to commit crimes are, in fact, police or military weapons that have been stolen by or, more often, sold to criminal groups. There is also a booming traffic in weapons seized by police officers, so the law calls for the destruction within 48 hours of all guns confiscated by the police that are not needed as evidence.
More than 40,000 people are murdered annually in Brazil, about 90 percent of them with firearms, the highest rate in the world among more than 60 countries studied by the United Nations.
About a quarter of the killings occur in this state of 38 million, which includes Brazil's largest city as well as extensive ranch and farming areas where gun ownership is traditional.
''The majority of those who kill are not criminals, but ordinary people with guns who get into arguments about banal things, like traffic disputes or arguments in a bar,'' said José Vicente da Silva, a former secretary of public security for the state of São Paulo. ''Obviously this law is not going to deter the professional criminal, but it can be a valuable tool to substantially reduce the murder rate.''
Supporters of the legislation are calling on the federal government to make more money available for complementary measures that will help toughen the law.
''It doesn't make any sense for the population to be disarmed if the bandits have easy access to weapons,'' Geraldo Alckmin, the governor of São Paulo State, argued in an interview with O Globo, a major daily.
''The contraband of arms is disgraceful,'' Mr. Alckmin added. ''It is essential that there be a border police and an effective combatting of that contraband, because the ease with which criminals have access to weapons is enormous.''
Legislators have given the Justice Ministry until the end of March to draw up regulations to enforce the new law. But already some problems have emerged, most notably as the result of a provision that forbids municipal civil guards, a sort of police auxiliary, in cities with less than 250,000 people from carrying weapons.
''Criminals aren't stupid,'' said Luiz Tortorello, the mayor of São Caetano, a Sao Paulo suburb with 146,000 people that is completely surrounded by other cities that are above the cutoff line. ''They are going to look at the situation and realize that they can operate here with alacrity.''
In one widely publicized case, a bank clerk from an interior state who was on vacation in Rio de Janeiro was arrested there when he drew his gun and fired it in the air to scare off what he thought were three criminals intent on robbing him.
The would-be assailants fled, the gun owner has been fined and criticism of what are seen as unfair features of the new law have grown in the news media.
''For this law to have the greatest impact, it must be accompanied by an intense publicity campaign in favor of disarming and alerting people that possession of a gun leads to imprisonment,'' said Mr. da Silva, now a researcher on public security issues at the Fernand Braudel Institute here. But so far, he added, that has not happened.
