IF you were to ask me to name the best wine region in the world, or the most underrated one, I'd have to think a long time. But if you were to ask for the most exciting wine region, I'd have an answer right away: Languedoc.
Languedoc by no means comes close to making the best wines in the world. It's not even consistently good enough to be called underrated. It's an ancient winemaking region that has been transformed in the last 10 or 20 years by an infusion of money and innovation. Where once the wines were predictably bad, they are now thoroughly unpredictable. No matter what you prepare yourself to expect when you open an unfamiliar bottle, chances are you will find something else.
''It's a jack-in-the-box region,'' said Joshua Wesson, a chief executive of Best Cellars, a chain of wine shops. ''You never know what's going to pop out, but what pops out will be interesting.''
Mr. Wesson and another guest, Tara Q. Thomas, senior editor of Wine &amp; Spirits magazine, joined Amanda Hesser and me recently for a tasting of 25 reds from the Languedoc that was, at the least, fascinating. ''They're not flashy,'' Ms. Thomas said. ''They're real wines that are not overwhelming when good.''
Languedoc, like its wines, is a paradoxical region. It is by far France's largest winemaking area. The vineyards, which stretch in a long crescent along the Mediterranean between Provence to the east and the Pyrenees to the south, account for around a third of the country's grape plantings. For many years, Languedoc was a principal source for enormous amounts of the thin, indifferent wine that was a staple of cafes and cheap bistros. Plonk, in other words.
While France's more famous wine regions became increasingly subject in the 20th century to government regulations designating what kind of grapes could be planted where and what kinds of wine could be produced, the low-status Languedoc was treated like something of an afterthought. The rules that bound other regions were not as strict there. As a result, winemakers have been able to experiment with different grapes and winemaking techniques.
Part of what makes opening a bottle of Languedoc red so exciting is that you don't know how the wines were made or even what grapes are in the blend. Fifty years ago the wines might have included many varieties that are virtually unknown nowadays, like aramon and terret noir. Today, they most likely include carignan, a sturdy blending grape, and, increasingly, syrah, mourvèdre and grenache, the best red grapes of southern France. But the blend could just as easily include cabernet sauvignon and merlot, French varietals that have achieved success around the world.
Since I knew that more of these grapes were being planted in Languedoc, I was expecting to find many wines made in the fruity, oaky international style that seems to be more and more popular among well-made wines of little character. To my surprise, we found wines that were unmistakably French -- southern French, at that -- with aromas of dried spices and herbs, light to medium bodies and gentle fruit flavors. I should have remembered that, as open as Languedoc has been to innovation, it is also fiercely protective of its heritage. It was in Languedoc, after all, that the Robert Mondavi Corporation abandoned plans a couple of years ago to plant a vineyard and make wines after concerted local protests.
Clearly these were wines with an identity, though they were not particularly polished.
''They were more rustic than refined,'' Mr. Wesson said. ''But they're not about wood -- they're about grapes and terroir.''
There's that tricky word again, terroir, which the French use somewhat mystically to account for the milieu of soil, climate and intangibles that produce a particular wine. It's hard to apply the concept to Languedoc, which is divided into a mishmash of regions and subregions.
It is both the beauty and the curse of Languedoc that few can say what a St.-Chinian wine ought to taste like, or what makes a Corbières differ from a Faugères. Some appellations, like Coteaux du Languedoc, have subdistricts, like Pic St.-Loup. Some wines are labeled simply vin de pays, because they either are beyond the bounds of an appellation or don't conform to any rules.
Nonetheless, based on our small sample, we can suggest that the wines from Pic St.-Loup are worth trying. We tasted 4 among our 25 wines, and all made the top 10, including 2 of the top 5. Our favorite, a 1999 Mas Mortiès from Pic St.-Loup, was a delicious, spicy yet subtle wine that was also, at $13, our best value.
By contrast, our second favorite was a '98 from Domaine l'Aiguelière in Montpeyroux, another subregion of the Coteaux du Languedoc. The intensity and concentration of this wine seemed a result of a more strenuous sort of winemaking -- successfully pretentious, you might say -- and its $29 price bears this out.
Our No. 3 wine, the 2001 Cuvée Roches Noires from Cave les Vins de Roquebrun in St.-Chinian, was much more humble, settling for fruity and graceful over big and powerful, a fine commercial bottle for $10.
While Languedoc wine has much improved over the years, it is still not consistent. We tasted our share of unpleasant bottles. ''Now I understand what plonk means,'' Ms. Hesser said at one point.
And yet, these are bottles that I would be drawn to in restaurants, if I saw them more often. In almost every case, they seemed to be complementary food wines that would improve with a meal. But restaurants are hesitant to commit to wines unfamiliar to customers. It is the rare inexpensive restaurant that is either confident or visionary enough to look extensively to Languedoc.
We did not taste bottles from some producers that I've liked in the past, like G. Moulinier or Canet Valette, but that's fine. The joy of Languedoc is not in falling back on old favorites, but in finding something new.
Tasting Report: French, Yes, but From a Region Not Bound by the Rules
BEST VALUE
Mas Mortiès Pic St.-Loup  Coteaux du Languedoc 1999 -- $13  *** [Rating: three stars]
A consensus favorite. The panel liked its delicate fruit and spice aromas, and its harmony. Amanda Hesser tasted cinnamon and allspice. Joshua Wesson found a lovely balance, while Tara Q. Thomas said it sneaked up on her.
Domaine l'Aiguelière  Côte Dorée Montpeyroux Coteaux du Languedoc 1998 -- $29  ** 1/2 [Rating: two and a half stars]
Intense and concentrated, with the flavors of sweet cherries and chocolate, Eric Asimov said. Wesson termed the combination chocolate-covered cherries, while Thomas found the aromas of white flowers and the texture of melted chocolate.
Cave les Vins de Roquebrun  Cuvée Roches Noires St.-Chinian 2001 -- $10  ** 1/2 [Rating: two and a half stars]
A graceful combination of light body and ripe fruit flavors, Asimov said. Thomas found it intriguing, with delicate fruit and floral flavors.
Aurelles Déella  Coteaux du Languedoc 2002 -- $13  ** [Rating: two stars]
Hesser liked its freshness and detected aromas of strawberries and eucalyptus. Wesson found a nice balance in the mouth, while Thomas noted the gorgeous color. Asimov felt it would go well with a grilled steak.
Mas Bruguière La Grenadière  Pic St.-Loup Coteaux du Languedoc 2000 -- $19  ** [Rating: two stars]
A fresh, friendly wine, Thomas said. Asimov was surprised by its subtle berry flavors and soft tannins. Wesson wished for more concentration.
Château St.-James  Cuvée Priéure Corbières 2000 -- $11  ** [Rating: two stars]
Medium-bodied, with lots of herbal and spice aromas and flavors layered with dried fruit, Asimov said. Wesson felt this wine would improve with food, like very rare beef. The panel agreed that this wine's earthy, spicy qualities were typical of the region.
Fourrier Adagio des Terroirs  Faugères 2001 -- $19  ** [Rating: two stars]
A favorite of Thomas, who found it generously fruity, spicy and very earthy. Hesser called it honest, while Wesson found aromas of roasted meat.
Château de Lancyre Vieilles Vignes  Pic St.-Loup Coteaux du Languedoc 2000 -- $18  ** [Rating: two stars]
The panel members all noted a discord between the aromas of sour cherries and pickling spices, and the fruit flavors in the mouth. Asimov said he liked it better than he expected.
Château Baronne Montagne d'Alaric  Corbières 2000 -- $10  * 1/2 [Rating: one and a half stars]
Spicy and peppery, Hesser said. Wesson found it simple and cleanly made, like a two-note samba. It reminded Asimov of a Côtes-du-Rhône.
Domaine St.-Michel  les Clauses Chorus Corbières 1998 -- $19  * 1/2 [Rating: one and a half stars]
The panel agreed: this is a decent wine, with a little fruit, some spice and balance. Nice sipper, Thomas said.
WHAT THE STARS MEAN  (None) Pass it by  * Passable  ** Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the panel's reaction to the wines, which are tasted with names and vintages concealed. The panelists this week are Eric Asimov; Amanda Hesser; Joshua Wesson, a co-chief executive of the Best Cellars chain; and Tara Q. Thomas, senior editor of Wine &amp; Spirits magazine. Wines tasted represent a selection generally available in good retail shops and restaurants. Prices are those paid in liquor shops in the New York region.
Tasting Coordinator: Bernard Kirsch
nytimes.com  Recent wine columns from The New York Times are online: nytimes.com/wine.
WINES OF THE TIMES
