At the 2004 Sundance Film Festival, it's the documentaries, as usual, that are creating a sensation.
Two are the products of well-known commercial photographers who decided to try their hands at nonfiction filmmaking. One, Matt Mahurin, is a media multitasker, an illustrator, a photographer whose moody, heavy-grained portraits have inspired a continent of imitators. As a music-video director, his best work conveyed a dense intimacy. He made Tracy Chapman's first video, ''Fast Car,'' and his output includes shorts for Peter Gabriel and U2.
That same familiarity can be found in the robust and compelling character study ''I Like Killing Flies,'' his first feature documentary, which is competing here at Sundance.
The movie tells the story of a West Village restaurateur, chef and philosopher, Kenny Shopsin. Shopsin's is completely its owner's creation; it began as a dry goods store on Bedford Street and Mr. Shopsin learned that the tiny location could make a little more money if he cooked there. Though the physical space never enlarged, the menu grew to more than 900 items, and the kitchen became a jury-rigged port for the man behind the stove.
Its proprietor is -- as Robert E. Howard described his creation Conan the Barbarian -- a man of gigantic mirth and gigantic melancholy. He set up rules and stuck to them with a scarifying firmness that could be called bullying, like allowing no customer to order what someone else had and kicking out people he just didn't like. His establishment existed as a parody of Manhattan service etiquette.
''Kenny would be pontificating about his ideas about life and death and sex and politics and even food,'' Mr. Mahurin said in an interview. ''And when you went in, you would enter whatever family drama was going on that day.'' He never allowed photographers in there, no reviewers, no signs. And then when he lost his lease in 2002 after 33 years, he decided to ask Calvin Trillin to write a piece about it for The New Yorker.
''And he asked me to come in and take some pictures and document the place before it closed and moved,'' Mr. Mahurin said. I'd been writing all these scripts and pushing them around -- wild action-adventures, big-budget studio movies -- and was tired of talking about making movies and wanted to just get down to making one. I heard you could make a movie on your own computer and decided I would give it a try.
''I started filming, thinking I was just going to do a 10-minute short and loved the idea that I was in there where no one had ever been with a camera. What I believed is that Kenny's life and his philosophy really transcended those four walls. He's very dependent on his environment, his kitchen, his food, his customers and his family, yet he really protected himself. I wanted to get his ideas, not just this kooky character. He'd always say these ideas that would complete these circles for me. You should treat people with the morality that makes you a good person, not whether or not they deserve it.''
''Flies'' captures the expanse between the poles of Shopsin's personality, a purview that covers miles and yet was confined to a few hundred square feet. Mr. Mahurin had a few filmmaking goals for himself, too.
''Personally I wanted to challenge myself and see where I could go with the technology,'' he said. ''I'm not a film buff. I go to a lot of cheese-ball summer movies. I'm more interested in process and image making. I haven't had much experience with storytelling. I bought the hard drives, hooked it up to my G4 and started work.'' He said he liked ''the open-endedness of music videos, but that can handicap you, too, because it doesn't teach you storytelling.''
''I had to learn that,'' he said. It's a skill that he demonstrates with an admirable spareness.
Surprisingly, another video director known for flourish has an intense bare-bones documentary in Sundance this year. The photographs and videos of the director David LaChappelle are drenched in colors that seem viscous; the artists nearly sweat the hues into the film stock, and his love for dancers' bodies made him just the person for Christina Aguilera's ''Dirty,'' among other videos.
It was while working on ''Dirty'' that he found the able and propulsive dancers about whom he decided to make a short documentary, ''Krumped,'' which is featured in one of Sundance's short programs.
''Apparently the word krumped goes back a long ways, from the black church,'' Mr. LaChappelle said. ''When you're krumped, you're feeling it. It's about being brave and doing something with grace.''
His quick, excitable mode of speaking is similar to krumping, the whip-quick dancing of his subjects that includes bits of hip-hop and pantomime martial-arts movement. You can spot the attraction just by hearing him talk about it; he's temperamentally suited to it.
''I got to be there before krumping became a Burger King commercial, before it started getting used in videos,'' he said. ''You can see krumping in the OutKast video, where the kids are dancing and breaking into it while wearing tuxedos.
''The African tribal influence is so visible. What's incredible is that so many of these kids have never seen African art. So, why do the little girls want to paint the dots on their faces, like African women? It's just something they have within them, and they say themselves, 'It's in our blood.' They're telling stories with these dances, and when they're really feeling it, their eyes roll into the back of their head, like tribal dancing. The way I feel about krumping is the way I felt about break-dancing when I first saw it.''
''Krumped'' communicates that excitement, with a lack of wide-eyed condescension.
''I didn't want to do another film about poor kids in the ghetto, even though there's danger all around them,'' Mr. LaChappelle said. ''That ends up being used in the dances.''
The dancing in ''Krumped'' does have the symbolic visualization that's a staple of Mr. LaChappelle's photographs.
''It's true, because the dancing is spectacle -- African spectacle -- and incredibly dramatic,'' he said. ''The kids know a film is a window for them to be seen. Who wants to sing in the shower? They're proud of their bodies, their athleticism and creativity. They want to be seen. 'Krumped' is 24 minutes long, but I have a lot more footage that I shot. And it will be a feature. That's part of why I submitted it to Sundance, to try and find financing and also to get some reaction. I thought it might be tough, at first, to make a movie and not try to force things, but when you're shooting film and there's a Payless Caskets store right next to the Dance Academy -- we pulled up the first night, and the headlights illuminated these little kids' coffins -- you don't have to invent anything. That helped me to getting into recording, without dictating.''
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
