WITH the ease of a habitual wallflower, Michael Arad tucks himself into a chair in a dimly lighted corner of Cafe Mogador, the funky, distinctly non-Starbucks-paced East Village hangout where he tended to take ruminative breakfasts before, during and after his life-altering participation in the global contest that named his design the winner of the World Trade Center memorial competition. In the end, there was ''Reflecting Absence,'' Mr. Arad's elegiac homage to loss, and 5,200 also-rans. His victory, if winning a tragic albeit historic lottery can be called that, is still sinking in, modestly. Now his father understands why he chose architecture over law school, the prescribed family path.
He remains a regular at this cafe, seeking and receiving no special treatment. That would be gauche, no way for the architect son of an Israeli diplomat/lawyer to behave in his own neighborhood in his adopted city. He prefers to blend in.
What made him stop feeling like an outsider and start feeling like a bona fide New Yorker was, he says, the horror of Sept. 11: he watched the second plane hit from his rooftop, raced downtown to find his wife and, from Fulton Street, experienced the collapse of the first tower. Even before the memorial contest, he began work on a memorial. ''I was thinking about what type of a memorial would feel right, what I would find meaningful,'' he says. ''The idea of absence was a very tangible thing to me.'' Mr. Arad's first concept involved a pair of inaccessible voids, representative of the ruined towers, set in the Hudson River. He made a model of his idea, put it aside, but revisited it when the World Trade Center competition was announced.
He also entered the contest for the Pentagon memorial, but spent just a few hurried days on it; in contrast, the World Trade Center design became a 24/7 obsession. He shuttled between his day job with the New York City Housing Authority, late-night brainstorming sessions at a fellow architect's apartment, and the Kinko's on Astor Place, where all the copying was done. The project took over his life to the point where his wife, Melanie, then pregnant, issued an ultimatum: ''At one point she told me, 'That's the last competition you're gonna enter!'''
Pale-skinned and boyish, with the slightly stooped shoulders common to tall, thin men for whom self-aggrandizement is anathema, Mr. Arad, 34, is no showboat. He lives on the small scale, in an apartment where space is scarce and divided between himself, his spouse, their 5-month-old son, and two strapping Rhodesian Ridgebacks. Because a sister-in-law is visiting and the baby is down with the sniffles, there is no rational way, he apologizes, to conduct this chat on his home turf. Hence our relocation to this unsung Moroccan cafe. Besides, he likes its coffee; after an upbringing spent ricocheting around the globe for his father's postings -- London, Washington, Jerusalem, New York, back to Jerusalem, and Mexico City -- he has a worldly palate.
He self-consciously wipes away his cappuccino moustache after every sip and, when not searching a bit incoherently for the right words to describe his odyssey, wears a dazed smile. He was not insulted when the 13-member jury, which narrowed the field to eight in November and to three in December, suggested he consult with a landscape designer to soften the plaza above the watery voids that mark the footprint of the towers. He chose Peter Walker, a celebrated San Francisco landscape architect whose minimalist ethos mirrors his own: restrained, but not reductive. ''I don't feel like I've lost anything by collaborating with Peter; I'm happy to share the credit,'' he says, eyes unblinking behind their trendy silver specs. The greening of ''Reflecting Absence'' solves the starkness of the plaza without losing the effect he sought of ''a large central plain in which two voids have been cut out. It's not a park like any other park.''
What about those insinuations that he was unduly influenced by Maya Lin's presence on the jury, and by an out-of-competition memorial design she published? ''There is a resemblance on some level, but I think it's a superficial resemblance: no, strike the word 'superficial,''' he clarifies. ''What I took from her Vietnam Veterans Memorial, what I understand from it, is that it's about the experience of the people walking through it and what they bring to it; what they take away is a product of what they bring to it.''
MR. ARAD, an Israeli citizen, returned there to perform his mandatory army stint after his freshman year at Dartmouth, served in an infantry reconnaissance unit stationed on the Left Bank, completed his degree and, after a year in Colorado spent snowboarding and assembling his portfolio, he went to Georgia Tech for his master's in architecture. The army experience was stressful, but in a useful way: ''When you're 18, you think you can do anything; you want to prove to yourself that you can do anything.''
He moved to New York City in 1999, worked for Kohn Pedersen Fox, and later joined the city Housing Authority after admiring a police station it built in his neighborhood. He hoped to work on ''small, public projects.'' Instead, he landed what is perhaps the most visible, and emotionally charged, project in the world.
''I don't subscribe to the school of thought that Sept. 11 changed everything in everybody's life,'' he says. ''But it did make my wife and I decide to have a baby sooner rather than later. And it made me want to design a memorial, not because I thought I'd win, but to participate. To me, it was about being a New Yorker.''
Tomorrow: Peter Walker, the landscape architect.
PUBLIC LIVES  Correction:  January 23, 2004, Friday  The Public Lives profile on Wednesday, about Michael Arad, an Israeli who is one of the designers of the ''Reflecting Absence'' memorial to be built at ground zero, misstated the location where he served in an infantry reconnaissance unit in the Israeli army. It was in the West Bank, not the Left Bank.
