Following are excerpts from responses by Democratic presidential candidates to the State of the Union message.
Wesley K. Clark
Tonight, more than eight million Americans are out of work. But President Bush will pledge to spend trillions to privatize Social Security and make his tax cuts for the very rich permanent, locking in an unfair advantage for those who need it least.
He'll spend billions on the war in Iraq, missile defense and sending a man to Mars. But he's going to spend a grand total of $120 million for job training. That's just $15 for each unemployed American. That's not much more than the cost of bus fare to the training center, lunch and coffee.
Tonight, 44 million Americans still don't have health care. But President Bush won't do nearly enough to make health care truly affordable. He won't do nearly enough to make health care truly accessible.
Howard Dean
George Bush's empty proposals do nothing to address the real problems facing working Americans: problems his presidency has only made worse. On creating jobs, providing health care, and educating our children, I wish this president could learn from our example in Vermont, where we delivered real results for families. . . .
The state of the union may look rosy from the White House balcony or the suites of George Bush's wealthiest donors. But hard-working Americans will see through this President's effort to wrap his radical agenda with a compassionate ribbon.
John Edwards
Tonight, the president said that the state of our union is confident and strong. The first question you and I need to ask is, ''Which union, Mr. President?'' His America -- the country where the Washington lobbyists, special interests and his C.E.O. friends get what they want, when they want it -- is doing just fine. But in our America, the state of working Americans is a struggle every single day.
What this president fails to understand is that we still live in two different Americas: one for the privileged few, and another for everybody else. Instead of proposing ideas that would help heal our great divides, he is dividing us even further and believes that compassionate language and empty slogans will make working Americans forget the burdens they face every day.
John Kerry
After four years in office, this president still doesn't understand what's happening in living rooms across this country. Paul O'Neill is right: because this president only hears the special interests and lobbyists he doesn't see what's happening in our economy, in the workplace and to families everywhere.
I'm running for President because it's time we put country over campaign contributions.
Tonight, President Bush talked about how he wants to help people find jobs, but for three years he's stood by while we've lost more jobs than at any time since the Great Depression. He promised to create 250,000 jobs last month, but he's only created a thousand. We're 249,000 jobs short. Americans should be able to trust that what the President tells them is true.
Dennis J. Kucinich
The President mentioned the words ''terror'' and ''terrorism'' so many times tonight that it's clear to me that he is promoting a culture of fear. It's unfortunate because he could have done something more calming and healing for the nation. Instead he chose to continue to raise the red flag of terror.
Joseph I. Lieberman
I've spent the last year listening to Americans, and the state of the union that George W. Bush lives in is very different from the state that most hard-working Americans are living in. In fact, he seems to be in a state of denial about the state of our economy, our health care system and our relations with the world.
Right on schedule, George W. Bush is trying to camouflage his irresponsible, divisive right-wing agenda and repackage himself as a centrist compassionate conservative around election time. But no amount of election year conversions, extraplanetary travel or hollow gestures can cover up this president's leadership failures and his extreme politics.
STATE OF THE UNION
