When President Bush acknowledged Adnan Pachachi, the current chairman of the Iraqi Governing Council, in his State of the Union address on Tuesday night, the gesture was not merely a formality. If earlier parts of the speech were meant to underscore a continuing commitment to fighting terrorism, the nod to Mr. Pachachi highlighted the administration's hopes for an easing of the sacrifices that this commitment has thus far entailed.
''Month by month, Iraqis are assuming more responsibility for their own security and their own future,'' the president said before he turned to Mr. Pachachi, who was sitting next to Laura Bush in the House gallery along with other invited guests. ''Sir, America stands with you and the Iraqi people as you build a free and peaceful nation.''
The guests were chosen, as has been the custom since President Ronald Reagan first welcomed personal invitees in 1982, to lend human faces to the list of initiatives outlined in Mr. Bush's address. But in this election year, as Democrats try to point to weak spots in administration polices -- both foreign and domestic -- the assorted faces in the balcony also served as glimpses of the issues the administration may use to shape the direction of the campaign.
While some were invited so as to shine an optimistic light on troublesome issues like Iraq, others were chosen to personify hard-won victories, like the recently signed law overhauling Medicare. Some were there to underscore an upturn in the economy, others to showcase the administration's resolve to continue with initiatives like wider federal financing of community service programs run by religious organizations.
Among several invited members of the military was Chief Warrant Officer Stephen Douglas Combs Jr. of Fall River, Mass., who, the White House said, participated in the capture of Saddam Hussein.
Joining Mr. Pachachi as a face in the next phase of Iraqi reconstruction was Rend Rahim Francke, the Governing Council's senior diplomatic representative in Washington.
While there were plenty of guests signifying a show of strength in foreign policy, there were also many invited to highlight accomplishments on domestic issues, including the new Medicare law.
One was Elsie Blanton, who administration officials said would greatly benefit from the legislation. Ms. Blanton, from Apopka, Fla., spends $900 a month on prescription drugs, the White House said, roughly three-quarters of her monthly income from Social Security. She stands to save $6,000 to $9,500 a year when the new benefit goes into effect in 2006, the president said.
Eileen Halter, a small-business owner from Ottoville, Ohio, was present as a symbol of the recovering economy. Ms. Halter runs an engraving company and benefited significantly from Mr. Bush's tax cuts, the White House said -- so much so, officials said, that her company will hire 50 new employees this year.
Several of those present were from religion-based community service organizations, invited to signal a continued commitment to the president's initiative to provide federal money to such groups for drug treatment programs.
One of those guests was Julio Medina, a drug dealer turned counselor. Mr. Medina graduated from the New York Theological Seminary while serving a lengthy prison sentence. He now runs the Exodus Transitional Community, a religion-based counseling center in East Harlem that is dedicated to issues related to addiction and AIDS.
Others attending included Tom Brady, the quarterback for the New England Patriots, to whom television cameras turned when the president called on star athletes to stand up against the use of illegal performance-enhancing drugs. Mr. Brady and his teammates, who are headed to the Super Bowl, run a sports camp for local youths.
STATE OF THE UNION: THE GUESTS
