Two elderly women were zipping through ''Schoenberg, Kandinsky and the Blue Rider'' at the Jewish Museum, a cerebral exhibition that others appeared to be savoring slowly.
''This music is awful,'' said one of the women, yanking off her audio-tour headphones, through which Schoenberg's vigorously atonal Second String Quartet could be heard.
Apparently agreeing, her companion pulled her headphones off, too. ''Let's have lunch,'' she said.
Not pleasing everyone has become almost obligatory for the Jewish Museum, which is celebrating its 100th birthday. Like many ethnic museums, it is a repository of a particular culture and its artifacts, drawing many patrons looking for inspiration as well as education. But it is also a significant art institution unafraid to mount exhibitions with provocative themes that challenge and sometimes anger visitors, like a 2002 show on Nazi imagery in contemporary art.
''The Jewish Museum has taken its history and made itself into a contemporary institution with an enormous embrace of the past,'' said Kathy Halbreich, director of the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis. ''It's a place for debate at a time when, not only in our culture but in many cultures, debate is looked upon as something dangerous. It's an institution which shows how cultural identity can be an enormously elastic and buoyant mission instead of a constraining one.'' This kind of questioning is reflected in the title of a work-in-progress that Tony Kushner will read tomorrow night at 8 as part of the centennial celebration, ''It's an Undoing World, or Why Should It Be Easy When It Can Be Hard?'' (The reading is sold out.)
Other centennial exhibitions include a laser installation by Shimon Attie in collaboration with Norman Ballard (opening today), the photographs of Lotte Jacobi (Feb. 6-April 11), the art of Modigliani (May 21-Sept. 19) and a celebration of Friedl Dicker-Brandeis, a Bauhaus-trained artist who gave art instruction to children in the Terezin concentration camp (Sept. 10-Jan. 9). Admission is free today, tomorrow, Friday and Sunday. (Information on other centennial events is available at www.thejewishmuseum.org.)
In its permanent exhibition, ''Culture and Continuity: The Jewish Journey,'' whose reinstallation was completed last year, the museum, at Fifth Avenue and 92nd Street, offers a wide-ranging dissertation on 4,000 years of Jewish life. Serious and frisky, brainy and sentimental, it covers the basics of Torah study as well as, for example, the importance to Jewish life of schmoozing in cafes. Similarly the artifacts include exquisitely wrought ceremonial objects and also kitschy pieces like a Hanukkah menorah with Statue of Liberty candle branches facing in different directions.
Yet the museum has also attracted attention for upsetting its primary constituency with exhibitions like ''Mirroring Evil: Nazi Imagery/Recent Art.'' That 2002 exhibition infuriated some people, who thought that the Holocaust was trivialized by pieces like ''Giftgas Giftset,'' a 1998 work by the American artist Tom Sachs, which included cardboard gas canisters festooned with Chanel and Tiffany logos.
For Joan Rosenbaum, the museum's director since 1981, challenging the status quo is more important now than ever. As she and her curators look ahead, she said, they find it impossible not to be affected by world events, namely the rise of anti-Semitism throughout the world and the chaos in Israel. ''Everyone feels it tremendously,'' she said. ''In some subtle way it must be affecting everything we do here, making intellectually challenging shows that make people think about the assumptions we walk around with, whether it's class or religion or race, about the common humanity we have.''
The search for identity, which has become so fashionable, has been part of the Jewish Museum since it was established in 1904 as part of the Jewish Theological Seminary. Assimilated Jews in Europe and the United States were interested in making a break with the ghetto without losing their heritage. The founders wanted to examine Jewish culture ''scientifically,'' by removing the Torah and other religious artifacts from synagogues and putting them in museums. This would also, they thought, help to combat anti-Semitism by demystifying Jewish ritual and history.
But the museum's collecting took on new urgency in the years before World War II, as European anti-Semitism threatened to destroy not only European Jewry but also all vestiges of its existence. It was able to buy important pieces of Judaica, including ceremonial objects from the Jewish community, now extinct, of Danzig, Poland, known as Gdansk since 1945. (Some of these objects are on display in the permanent exhibition.) For some time after the war, as an important repository of objects from a lost civilization, the museum became a kind of Holocaust memorial, long before such institutions began cropping up around the world.
American Jewish life changed after the war and so, too, did the museum. Its assimilation took the form of artistic bravado. During the 1950's and 60's, before the Whitney Museum moved uptown and before SoHo and Chelsea became centers for contemporary art, the Jewish Museum was recognized as the premier New York institution for cutting-edge art. Robert Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns and Kenneth Noland were shown when they were fresh on the scene. Minimalism was identified as a major trend in the museum's ''Primary Structures'' show, organized by Kynaston McShine, now the chief curator at large at the Museum of Modern Art.
The Jewish Museum had broken out of the ghetto but the trustees were not happy. They wanted to move the focus back to Jewish culture and history and away from artistic discovery, where links to Jewish heritage were often tenuous. By the mid-1970's the museum lost its status as a place to discover new art.
When Ms. Rosenbaum took charge, however, a convergence between art and the culture of identity was beginning to take hold in the wider world. ''We couldn't return to being a contemporary art space, where Jewish content didn't matter,'' she said. ''But I believe in the power of art. So we began to define this institution as an art museum that presents Jewish culture.''
And sometimes it is a Jewish museum that presents modern art. On display in the permanent collection is ''Being the Light,'' a menorah by Matthew McCaslin made of industrial cable and naked light bulbs. ''The curatorial staff is very open and flexible,'' said Mr. McCaslin, who is not Jewish and was surprised that the museum allowed him to install his piece in the ''Culture and Continuity'' area. ''There's a very generous spirit there,'' he said.
Under Ms. Rosenbaum's watch, which coincided with a late 20th-century museum boom in New York City, the Jewish Museum underwent a huge expansion in 1993, increasing its size to 82,000 square feet from 52,300 and adding a kosher cafe. Membership more than doubled in Ms. Rosenbaum's first 10 years, but it has remained steady at around 11,250 for the last 10 years, while the number of visitors has steadily increased to around 200,000 a year. In a 2002 survey the museum determined that about 64 percent of its visitors were Jewish.
With Ms. Rosenbaum the curatorial staff has produced demanding exhibitions like the Kandinsky-Schoenberg show, which looks at how these artists influenced each another and the Expressionist movement, as well as crowd-pleasers like last year's ''Entertaining America: Jews, Movies and Broadcasting.''
In this way, Ms. Rosenbaum says, she expects the future to resemble the past. ''What should we be really?'' she asked. ''That question underlies everything we do, still. We identify ourselves as an art museum presenting Jewish culture for people of all backgrounds. All three things are challenges: What kind of art museum are we? How do you present Jewish culture while maintaining the integrity of the art itself without simply being illustrations for the story? How can, indeed, people of all backgrounds find some meaning here? We think about these things all the time.''
