IN the chill of winter, Chanoodle, a bright and inviting restaurant on the western edge of Chinatown, offers something special for each of the five senses. First, as you enter, a startling roar whooshes from the open kitchen's forced-air stove, which rams intensified heat up through the burners, allowing chefs to raise cooking temperatures instantly. If you happen to glance toward the kitchen at the sound of the roar, you may see a rising column of flame -- hot oil in flambé mode, Hong Kong style.
In too-perfect contrast to this fiery tableau is a sticky front door, which stays open almost every time someone passes in or out of the storefront restaurant. On a merely cold day, this is a simple annoyance, requiring the people at the door-side table to get up and shut it a dozen times or so in the course of a meal. On one of this month's marrow-chilling days, though, it became a comic ordeal worthy of Job, had he been a fan of Chinese food.
Though sorely tested, I kept my faith in Chanoodle. I had only to breathe deeply and inhale the wonderful, warming smell of freshly cooked rice, an aroma that does not get nearly enough credit. And, of course, I had only to eat, because this is the sort of food that can be good enough to cause a double take.
A case in point is the fried rice with two kinds of sausage ($7.95), a dish that caused me to re-examine a long-held distaste for fried rice, formed through years of takeout misery. This fried rice is different: fresh and fluffy, with lively colors of green peas, red cubed peppers, yellow egg and deliciously earthy sausages, one aged until almost dry, one younger and moister. I liked seafood fried rice ($8.95) almost as much, made with perfectly fried fish.
Fried dishes like peppered and salted baby silverfish ($5.25) are superb, crisp and delicate. These fish are like the tiny fried fish you get at Greek restaurants, but with a distinctly Chinese flavor, tossed with minced garlic and slivers of hot pepper. Fried oysters ($6.95) are crisp enough, served with a sweet-and-sour sauce, but a little bready for my taste. Much better -- astoundingly good, in fact -- are what the menu calls fried clams ($5.25). They aren't really fried, by the way, but cooked quickly in their shells and served with crisp slivers of aromatic garlic, nuggets of minced pork and cilantro.
Chanoodle pays its respects to the international tastes of recent Hong Kong immigrants with some unusual fusion dishes, like an exceptional blend of roast pork, soothing, sweet coconut milk, sliced mushrooms, delicate circles of tofu and, for texture, clear-colored ginkgo nuts ($9.95). Morsels of minced quail ($8.95) are blended with similar-size pine nuts and bits of onion and pepper. You scoop some up in a lettuce leaf, and you have a savory, nutty, crisp and cool quail sandwich.
More conventional choices from the enormous menu include thin, glossy noodles with shreds of roast duck and pungent pickled cabbage ($8.50), and lively beef lo mein ($4.95). Slices of those deeply flavored dry sausages make a welcome reappearance on a simple platter of sautéed mushrooms and marinated carrots ($9.50). It pays to ask whether the kitchen has any fresh greens on hand. I asked and was rewarded with gleaming, delicate baby bok choy with garlic ($5.25), stir-fried so quickly the flavors remained clear and pure. Maybe they felt bad that I had to close the door so many times.
One surprising dish, called ''house-special sliced pork knuckles'' ($3.95), seemed more like high-class charcuterie, with a sensual, almost alluvial flavor that contrasted well with its sesame oil dressing.
Not every dish is a feast for the senses. Congee ($2.50 to $7.95), the rice porridge, which seemed as if it would be a perfect weather antidote one frigid day, was watery and weak, while an appetizer with the irresistible name King of Roast Duck ($4.95) should abdicate for the sins of toughness and greasiness.
Except for the fact that it closes so early, I can imagine Chanoodle for one of those late-night meals in which Chinatown memories are forged. It is friendly, accessible and apart from a few cold months each winter, that door won't be a problem.
Chanoodle  79 Mulberry Street (Canal Street), Chinatown; (212) 349-1495.
BEST DISHES -- Fried rice; baby silverfish; clams with minced pork; roast pork and bean curd in coconut milk; minced quail with lettuce; vermicelli with roast duck and pickled cabbage; beef lo mein; mushrooms with preserved sausage; stir-fried baby bok choy; sliced pork knuckles.  PRICE RANGE -- $3.25 to $14.95, except for a whole Peking duck, $19.99.  CREDIT CARDS -- Cash only.  HOURS -- Sunday through Thursday, 8:30 a.m. to 9 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 8:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Ramp at entrance. Dining room and restroom are on one level.
$25 AND UNDER
