The chief of the Army Reserve said on Tuesday that a series of mistakes in mobilizing and managing reserves for the war in Iraq had put the Army on the brink of serious problems in retaining those soldiers.
The officer, Lt. Gen. James R. Helmly, said 10,000 reserves were called up for active duty on less than five days' notice. An additional 8,000 were called up but never deployed. And of those 8,000, about half were remobilized not long after they were taken off active duty.
''The mobilization for O.I.F. was so fraught with friction, it really put a bad taste in people's mouths,'' General Helmly told reporters at a luncheon briefing, referring to Operation Iraqi Freedom, the military's name for the campaign in Iraq.
In addition, the military's orders to keep active-duty and Reserve forces on the ground in Iraq for up to 12 months added so many strains on reserves' families and employers that many part-time soldiers have said they will not re-enlist when their terms are up.
Recruiting and retention levels have remained steady so far, General Helmly said. But he said that those figures had been ''artificially propped'' up by temporarily preventing reserves in certain specialties from leaving the military as previously scheduled.
''The numbers mask the potential difficulty,'' said General Helmly, who met with troops in Iraq over the Christmas holidays. ''We don't have a picture of normalcy under current conditions.''
A large-scale exodus from the Reserve and National Guard, the other major reservist component, would greatly complicate military operations in the gulf region and beyond.
About 66,000 of the 210,000 Army reserves are dispatched overseas in jobs ranging from military police to water purification experts, with roughly half of those deployed in Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan.
In the past several months, General Helmly said he had pushed a series of steps ''to prevent a recruiting-retention crisis,'' ranging from newer equipment to $5,000 re-enlistment bonuses.
''It is imperative we communicate with our soldiers and their families in advance, and not set false expectations,'' he said.
