Motorola, the nation's largest wireless communications equipment company, did its bit to support growing optimism in the technology sector yesterday by reporting stronger-than-expected earnings and sales in the last quarter of 2003.
''We're seeing economic improvement across the board in the U.S. and the world,'' said Edward J. Zander, who succeeded Christopher B. Galvin two weeks ago as chairman and chief executive.
Like Nokia, the worldwide cellphone market leader, and several smaller rivals, Motorola saw a surge in the second half of 2003 in demand for cellphones, particularly those with cameras. But Motorola was unable to ship all the phones it could have sold, leaving it to the company's other businesses to produce the increases in profits and sales from a year earlier.
Motorola said its wireless networking equipment segment and its integrated electronics unit, which is the leading supplier of electronic components to the auto industry, led its revenue growth. The integrated electronics unit and the group that sells radio communications systems to government and industry led the increase in profits. Profits in the battered semiconductor unit, which Motorola is in the process of spinning off, jumped to $51 million from $7 million a year ago, excluding severance payments to laid-off workers and other one-time costs.
''Over all, we had a very strong finish to the year,'' said Mike Zafirovski, president and chief operating officer.
Motorola, based in Schaumburg, Ill., said it earned $489 million, or 20 cents a share, up 181 percent from the $174 million, or 8 cents a share, in the last quarter of 2002. Taking into account special charges like severance payments and write-downs in the book value of obsolete equipment, Motorola earned $409 million, or 17 cents a share, in the recent quarter, compared with $291 million, or 13 cents a share, a year ago.
The earnings topped the consensus expectations of analysts by 4 cents a share, according to Thomson Financial. Motorola's revenues for the quarter, $8.02 billion, were 4 percent ahead of the $7.7 billion the company achieved in the last quarter of 2002. Analysts had expected Motorola to report essentially flat revenues.
Motorola also said that increased cash flow and reduction in its debt had left it with its strongest balance sheet in more than 20 years.
The spate of good news from other technology companies in recent weeks apparently had investors anticipating a strong performance. Before the earnings report was released, Motorola's shares closed up 10 cents, at $17.05, a 52-week high. But profit-taking then drove them as low as $16.80 in after-hours trading.
Analysts said the report left lingering concerns about the cellphone unit, which is Motorola's largest. The fourth-quarter sales and earnings would have been stronger had the company not fallen behind its shipping schedules for new models because of problems obtaining components. As it was, although sales jumped 12 percent from the third quarter of 2003 and orders rose 64 percent, the unit's $3.3 billion in revenue was down 3 percent from the last quarter of 2002.
Motorola said now that the new products are reaching market, it expects sales in the current quarter to be 20 to 25 percent higher than in the first quarter of 2003. That should help the company achieve total sales in the first quarter of $6.4 billion to $6.8 billion, up 7 percent to 13 percent from a year ago, the chief financial officer, David Devonshire, said.
But Mr. Devonshire's projection of 5 to 7 cents a share in earnings for the quarter was cautious enough to have contributed to the after-hours selling, said Brian T. Modoff, who follows Motorola for Deutsche Bank in San Francisco.
