The Yankees avoided arbitration with second baseman Alfonso Soriano by agreeing to a one-year, $5.4 million contract yesterday, the day he and the team were scheduled to file arbitration figures. Soriano earned $800,000 last year, when he hit .290 with 38 home runs, 35 stolen bases and 114 runs scored.
Fernando Cuza, one of the agents representing Soriano, said the sides had focused solely on signing Soriano for this season and hoped to work toward a long-term deal in the future. Soriano cannot become a free agent until after the 2006 season.
The signing left reliever Gabe White as the only unsigned arbitration-eligible Yankee.
The Yankees have also begun speaking with the agent for John Burkett, a 39-year-old right-hander, about joining them in spring training as insurance in case a starting pitcher is injured. Burkett went 12-9 with a 5.15 earned run average with the Boston Red Sox last season, starting 30 of the 32 games he appeared in.
Rodriguez Report Denied
A report on ESPN.com yesterday that the Boston Red Sox and the Texas Rangers had restarted talks for a trade sending Alex Rodriguez to Boston for outfielder Manny Ramirez was denied on multiple fronts.
''That report is baseless,'' Red Sox General Manager Theo Epstein said on a conference call with reporters to announce the re-signings of outfielder Trot Nixon and reliever Byung Hyun Kim. ''We just learned about it. I was surprise by it. John Henry was surprised by it. Larry Lucchino was surprised by it. Tom Werner was surprised by it. It's unfortunate that someone can fabricate a story and then Nomar Garciaparra and Manny Ramirez have to read about it in the press.''
Henry, the Red Sox owner; Lucchino, the president; and Werner, the chairman, were involved in talks with the Rangers that broke down Dec. 23.
Had they acquired Rodriguez, the Red Sox would have traded Garciaparra to the Chicago White Sox for Magglio Ordóñez. Epstein described the Red Sox' relationship with Garciaparra as ''good, and there's a lot of mutual respect.''
Rodriguez's agent, Scott Boras, who last week called talks between the teams ''a dead issue,' told ESPN yesterday that there was nothing to the report, and Jeff Moorad, Ramirez's agent, said he was unaware of any continuing discussions between Boston and Texas.
The Red Sox signed Kim to a two-year deal worth $10 million. Nixon received a one-year, $6.6 million deal.
Arbitration Day
Philadelphia pitcher Kevin Millwood asked for $12.5 million, and Albert Pujols and St. Louis had the biggest gap to close among 27 players who swapped proposed salaries with their teams in arbitration yesterday. Millwood, who became a free agent and accepted the Phillies' offer to arbitrate, was offered $10 million. Pujols, the 2001 National League rookie of the year, asked for $10.5 million; the Cardinals offered $7 million.
Last season's Cy Young Award winners also submitted big-money requests. Toronto's Roy Halladay asked for $9 million and was offered $6.5 million, and the Dodgers' Eric Gagne requested $8 million and was offered $5 million.
Sixteen more players settled yesterday among the 65 who filed for arbitration last week, including Kansas City outfielder Carlos Beltran, who is eligible for free agency after next season. He agreed to a one-year, $9 million deal.
For players and teams who don't settle, hearings before three-arbitrator panels will be scheduled for the first three weeks of February. (AP)
Mets Win, in Britain
In case you were confused, the Mets are the United States baseball team, and the British Meteorological Office is the source of weather reports for the United Kingdom. British officials ruled yesterday that the public would not have too much trouble telling the two apart, after the weather agency tried to keep the Mets from registering their logo, saying it would be too confusing.
Major League Properties Inc., baseball's merchandising arm, had applied to register the Mets' logo for use on hats, toys, stationery, magazines and other goods for sale in Britain. But Britain's Ministry of Defense, which owns the logo Met Office for the weather agency, protested, saying people might not be able to tell the difference. (Reuters)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
