Imagine an episode of ''Father Knows Best,'' where the father coaches a basketball team and has to play against his son's team. The son does not play well, the father's team wins and the show ends with the father grinning and shaking his head, knowing he has taught his son a valuable lesson in preparation, teamwork and shot selection.
It did not happen on TV. Los Angeles Clippers Coach Mike Dunleavy wishes it never would have happened in real life, either. But it did, two months ago, and it will again Wednesday night, when he has to face his son Mike Jr. and the Golden State Warriors. Then twice more in March.
''It's not something I look forward to,'' Dunleavy said in a telephone interview Sunday. ''It's definitely awkward. It's the first time in our lives that we've been on the opposite sides of what we want for each other. It's the first time that I don't want his team to win.''
On Nov. 14, the Clippers beat Golden State, 104-98, as Dunleavy Jr. struggled, shooting 2 for 10 from the field and scoring 7 points. Dunleavy, the Warriors' starting small forward, watched his father more than he planned; he played only five minutes in the second half.
He would have rather been sent to his room.
''It was strange,'' Dunleavy Jr. said in a telephone interview Monday. ''We had played a couple of times in the preseason, so I thought it wouldn't be a big deal, but it was weird. I'm glad I got the first one under my belt.''
The game marked only the second time in N.B.A. history that a father coached against his son. On Nov. 9, 1976, New Orleans Jazz Coach Butch van Breda Kolff had to give his team a scouting report on the New York Nets' Jan van Breda Kolff. The younger van Breda Kolff fouled out of that game, and his father was ejected for arguing a call.
''When it happened, I didn't look at it as the first and only time it was going to happen,'' Jan van Breda Kolff, now an assistant with the New Orleans Hornets, said in a telephone interview Tuesday. ''And afterwards, my dad and I never mentioned it to each other. I never thought about it.''
Warriors Coach Eric Musselman has not talked about the father-son matchup with Mike Jr., but he can relate to it since he once coached against his late father, Bill, in the Continental Basketball Association.
''It's just a great accomplishment for their family, to have one of the 29 coaches in the league and to have Mike also playing in the league at the same time,'' he said in a telephone interview Monday. ''I can't imagine what it's like when Mike's inbounding the ball in front of his dad. I guess you just have to put blinders on.''
At this point, father and son would rather be on opposing teams than on the same one. Before Musselman was hired in 2002, the Warriors talked to Dunleavy about their head-coach opening. He withdrew his name when all parties -- especially Dunleavy Jr. -- realized that a father coaching his rookie son may not be the best thing for an N.B.A. team.
''I would love to coach him someday, not only because he's my son, but also because he's a great player who makes his teammates better,'' Dunleavy said.
Dunleavy also knows his son's weaknesses, but he takes no responsibility for his son's bad game in November. Simply put, a coach cannot spend too much time preparing for an opposing team's fourth-leading scorer, even if it is his son. Dunleavy, in his second season out of Duke, is averaging 12.2 points and shooting 43 percent from the field. He is still struggling defensively and not playing much in the fourth quarter.
''All coverages are based on ability, and we prepare for him just like anybody else,'' Dunleavy said. ''If he is having a good game, then you just make an adjustment or switch defenders.''
Dunleavy Jr. said it was just random that he did not play well, and not the result of being nervous or preoccupied. He did not take the loss well, but his father may have felt even worse.
''I felt bad for him, and it was immediate, as soon as the game ended,'' Dunleavy said. ''I hate being in a position where I want him to lose or even see him lose. He's got the better situation. He can just go out and play. He knows what he wants to do. I worry about 11 guys, and he just worries about one -- the guy he is going against.''
His son agreed.
''It is more difficult for him,'' Dunleavy Jr. said. ''I don't usually pay attention to the opposing coach when I play. And if I beat him, I wouldn't feel bad for him.
''Not at all,'' he said, smiling.
The Dunleavys had dinner Tuesday night, and there was a third family member present -- Emily. Would she root for her husband or for her son?
''She is not telling anybody,'' Dunleavy Jr. said. ''Though I got a hint from my younger brother that she wants me to play well and the Clippers to win.''
Dunleavy Sr. is not sure he buys that.
''She roots for him,'' he said. ''She is a Warriors fan. No, she won't say. She is trying to remain politically correct.''
Maybe, in this instance, mother knows best.
PRO BASKETBALL
