President Bush plunged squarely into the debate over gay marriage on Tuesday, declaring that if ''activist judges'' insisted on redefining marriage, the nation must defend the ''sanctity'' of the institution by ''the constitutional process.''
Some conservatives hailed his comments, saying they went further than Mr. Bush had gone before in embracing a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage. Gay rights advocates said they were dismayed.
In his State of the Union address, which was rich with appeals to traditional values, Mr. Bush described marriage as ''one of the most fundamental, enduring institutions of our civilization.'' The president then alluded to a recent Massachusetts court decision that held gay couples had the right to marry. He argued that some judges ''have begun redefining marriage by court order, without regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives.''
''On an issue of such great consequence, the people's voice must be heard,'' Mr. Bush said. ''If judges insist on forcing their arbitrary will upon the people, the only alternative left to the people would be the constitutional process. Our nation must defend the sanctity of marriage.''
The Family Research Council, a leading group of social conservatives, indicated some disappointment that he had not gone further. But Michele Ammons, a spokeswoman for the Christian Coalition, said: ''The president has taken a stand for the family. We applaud his courage.''
Cheryl Jacques, president of the Human Rights Campaign, a gay political organization, said she was distressed to hear Mr. Bush suggest that he would support a constitutional amendment. ''In more than 200 years of American history,'' Ms. Jacques said, ''it has never been necessary to use the Constitution to deny basic rights.''
Mr. Bush's domestic policy proposals Tuesday night included a call for doubling the money for sexual abstinence programs for teenagers and a lengthy list of health care proposals. His domestic agenda was marked more by appeals to traditional values than by sweeping new spending initiatives.
But he took pains to defend his record on health care, which many Democrats say he is vulnerable on.
He acknowledged, implicitly, what many experts assert is a crisis of rising costs and declining coverage. The number of uninsured has climbed to a record 43.6 million, and the government reported this month that health care spending jumped 9.3 percent in 2002, the biggest increase in 11 years.
Mr. Bush declared: ''On the critical issue of health care, our goal is to ensure that Americans can choose and afford private health care coverage that best fits their individual needs. To make insurance more affordable, Congress must act to address rapidly rising health care costs.''
Mr. Bush renewed his proposal for Congress to provide tax credits to help low- to moderate-income people buy health insurance -- up to $1,000 in assistance for an adult, up to $3,000 for a family. Mr. Bush has also said that Congress should make it easier for small businesses to band together and buy health insurance through trade associations. The president maintains that Congress could also slow the growth of health costs by capping jury awards in medical-malpractice lawsuits, contending that frivolous lawsuits are driving up premiums for malpractice insurance and forcing doctors out of business. Such legislation has passed the House but is stalled in the Senate.
In all, Mr. Bush's plans amounted to a different vision on how to hold down health costs and expand coverage -- one that relies heavily on the private sector and costs only a fraction of the Democratic proposals. Conservative health analysts and some health industry leaders hailed it, while liberals asserted it fell far short of what was needed and could actually make the problems worse.
Mary R. Grealy, president of the Health Care Leadership Council, which represents large health care corporations, said Mr. Bush's proposals were ''on the right track.''
The crisis of the uninsured, she said, ''will not be solved with any single solution.''
But Judith Feder, a former health adviser to President Bill Clinton, now the dean of policy studies at Georgetown University, asserted that the Bush proposals were ''part of a strategy that relies on individuals fending for themselves.''
Given that most of the uninsured have incomes below $30,000, she said, the assistance provided by tax credits was far too little to buy decent coverage, she added, particularly for older people with modest incomes.
Ron Pollack, executive director of Families USA, the liberal consumer advocacy group, asserted that Mr. Bush's health care agenda was ''a smoke screen for significant failures in the health care system under George Bush's watch.''
Mr. Bush's proposals on health care were quickly denounced by leading Democrats. Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, fresh from his victory in the Iowa caucuses, asserted that if Mr. Bush was ''really serious about holding down health care costs, he'd focus on solutions instead of sound bites.''
Virtually all of the Democratic candidates have proposed major new programs to cover the uninsured and rein in health care costs -- most of them by expanding public programs like Medicaid and the State Children's Health Insurance Program, and providing additional subsidies through tax credits and other means.
Most of the Democratic candidates would pay for their plans, at least in part, by rolling back part of the Bush tax cuts -- setting the stage for what could be a tough fight in the general election over tax cuts versus government help for the uninsured.
STATE OF THE UNION: DOMESTIC AGENDA
