THE space that Sofiya Avrukina takes up in her adopted country is one room in Brighton Beach, with a sink, stove, refrigerator and sofa bed. Walk six paces this way, you hit the wall; 12 paces that way, and you're out the door.
Normally, Ms. Avrukina would have been out the door by now. Gone to that adult day care program in Canarsie, where the meals are free, the camaraderie is forced, and the workers don't mind if she, a widow of 83, tucks a tiny milk carton or a fistful of sugar packets into her overcoat before boarding the shuttle for home.
But she stayed in this morning because the handymen from the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty were coming to install a grab bar above her tub; that way, at least, she would have something to hold onto. Maybe she will ask for other things while they are here. It would be nice if they spoke Russian.
Ms. Avrukina is small but sturdy, with gray hair that she keeps battle-ready short. She is one of those old Russian women you will see on the coldest, most unforgiving days, walking into the wind along the boardwalk, as if daring the elements to knock them down because nothing else has.
She closes a Russian novel, marking her place with a Food Stamps for Immigrants pamphlet, and agrees to explain how she wound up alone in Brooklyn. Valeriya Beloshkurenko, the council's director of home services, translates, occasionally muttering, ''Typical, typical'' -- typical of the elderly Russian immigrant experience.
In 1941, the Nazis came to Ms. Avrukina's small village, outside Minsk, and laid waste to all that she knew. On bent, arthritic fingers, she counts off the family members who were killed: her sister Genya; her sister Bronya; and Mendel, her brother, who ''was forced to dig his own grave.''
There is a knock at her door, an occurrence that she describes as rare. Standing at the threshold are the handymen, Sergey and Nahum, God-sent angels so large they seem to take up a fifth of the room. ''You speak Russian?'' she asks. ''Wonderful.''
She leads the men to the cramped bathroom, and soon the telling of her life story is competing with Sergey's hammering.
Family members who survived the Nazis scattered, including Sofiya, the youngest. In 1943, she was reunited with her mother and a sister in Birobidzhan, Stalin's Jewish Autonomous Region. Then on to Maykop, where she married, raised two children, and became a dentist. Those years were filled with cooking, dancing and family. At least, that is how she remembers it now, here.
After her husband, who was not Jewish, died 20 years ago, Ms. Avrukina began to feel less safe as a Jew, and her sister Rachelle was calling from the Bronx, begging her to come to America. Finally, two years ago, she agreed, taking with her a grown son, his family, and $4,000.
What happened next has Ms. Beloshkurenko, the translator, nodding in recognition. Money spent; sister dies; son becomes too busy for his mother. Ms. Avrukina found herself in Brighton Beach, America, covering her $600 rent and other monthly bills with food stamps and modest government assistance.
FOR a while, memories of what she left behind conjured musings of suicide. But now, she says, she finds comfort in her frequent walks along the shore, where the ocean air is ''like medicine for my emotional condition.''
Ms. Avrukina may be a tough old woman, but she still harbors worries familiar to the elderly. She never unfolds the sofa bed that she sleeps on because it was here when she moved in, and she fears the dirt that lies within. She wants her locks changed because, who knows, the prior tenant probably still has keys.
These fears are why Sergey and Nahum are here. Working for a program called Project Metropair, they travel from one apartment to the next, replacing locks, installing grab bars, even lowering peepholes for people who are not as tall as they used to be. Sometimes, the tenants are happy just for the company.
Later today, Sergey and Nahum will visit a man named Abraham, who needs his windows caulked. But not before the simple needs of Sofiya Avrukina are met: a new lock; a smoke detector; a carpet for the worn floor.
Ms. Beloshkurenko asks if she needs anything else.
An electric fan.
Anything else?
A small stepladder, so that she can reach the cabinets above the sink.
Ms. Beloshkurenko jots the information down and rises to leave. Soon the handymen will be gone too, and an elderly Russian woman in a Brighton Beach cubicle will be eating her dinner of oatmeal, alone.
About New York
