At 85, but looking at least a decade younger, Stanley Whitman still plays tennis and comes to work almost every day. His son, Randall, 60, is only half-kidding when he introduces himself as ''the world's oldest boss's son.''
Together, father and son operate the 500,000-square-foot Bal Harbour Shops, an open-air luxury mall lined with palm trees and fountains in a narrow enclave just north of Miami Beach. Founded by the elder Mr. Whitman in 1965, the shopping center, one of only a handful of family-owned malls across the country, is considered a retailing phenomenon.
Sales per square foot in 2003 (excluding the anchor stores, Neiman Marcus and Saks Fifth Avenue) were not what they were before the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, but were still nearly four times the national average, the Whitmans say. Even on weeknights, the restaurants at Bal Harbour are jammed with fashionably dressed patrons, many of them foreign tourists carrying shopping bags with designer logos.
For nearly four decades, the Whitmans, who own no other retail property, have had the luxury market in Miami-Dade County virtually to themselves. But the mall is facing a challenge from a new 700,000-square-foot shopping center that opened in September 2002 in Coral Gables, about 14 miles south of Bal Harbour.
The new mall was built on a former industrial site by the Rouse Company, a real estate developer based in Columbia, Md., as part of the Village of Merrick Park, a $275 million project. The mixed-use Mediterranean-style development has the county's second Neiman Marcus (130,000 square feet, compared with 90,000 square feet at Bal Harbour), a 200,000-square-foot Nordstrom that is the chain's first store in either Miami-Dade or Broward County, and about 100 stores, 39 of them luxury, including several, like Gucci, Roberto Cavalli and Tiffany, that are also represented at Bal Harbour.
Rouse officials say the high-end stores, which occupy the first of three levels, are doing well, but they acknowledge that over all, the mall is off to a slower start than anticipated. Duke S. Kassolis, an executive vice president, blamed a decline in tourism, the economic slowdown and the fact that two of the major restaurants had not yet opened. The mall, expected to earn an 11.2 percent return on investment, has been yielding in the range of 7 percent, he said.
The Whitmans are tough-minded executives who are known for casting out underperforming retailers, among them Chico's, the clothing store chain that caters to women over 35, which now has a store at Merrick Park. But the Whitmans say their family pride was wounded when the Rouse Company filed an antitrust lawsuit against them. The suit sought to overturn Bal Harbour Shops' unusually far-reaching radius restriction, which allowed the shopping center to impose a financial penalty on tenants that opened a second store in either Miami-Dade or Broward County.
''We've had competition before,'' the elder Mr. Whitman said. ''The only significant difference with Merrick Park is that they announced they were coming in to take over our position. No one else has done that.'' In a settlement reached in 2002, which both sides are barred from discussing, Bal Harbour Shops agreed not to apply its clause to prospective tenants at Merrick Park.
Mr. Kassolis, however, said that the Miami area, with a population of more than 2.2 million, was now big enough to support more than one luxury mall. ''Bal Harbour is a great project,'' he said, ''and no less of a great project than it was before we came to Coral Gables. We have the utmost respect for the Whitmans and what they've accomplished.'' He said Merrick Park saw itself as ''a little more fashion-forward'' and was aiming for a younger customer than Bal Harbour's.
James J. Walsh, a retail specialist in Miami for Cushman &amp; Wakefield, said that despite Merrick Park's slow start, it would probably take some customers away from Bal Harbour, particularly those who live in downtown Miami or farther south. ''It's going to impact them to some degree,'' he said. ''Some people will say, 'Why should I drive all the way up to Bal Harbour when I'm so much closer to Merrick Park?'''
When Stanley Whitman decided in the 1950's to build a mall on the site of a former Army barracks on Collins Avenue, within a block of both the Atlantic Ocean and Biscayne Bay, Miami Beach was deteriorating badly and upscale department stores like Bonwit Teller had fled the main shopping street, Lincoln Road.
Mr. Whitman, whose family owned the art deco Whitman Hotel, now closed, had ideas that seemed outlandish, like charging a parking fee. In a period when enclosed malls were popular, he placed his shopping center in a gardenlike setting and even planted palm trees in the parking lot, to the irritation of some tenants. ''Everybody, including my own family, wanted to put me in a nuthouse,'' Mr. Whitman recalled.
Mr. Whitman took several other steps that were risky for the 1960's. He opened a fashion-oriented mall without anchor stores or even a supermarket or drugstore, and he charged much higher rent than other mall operators. He said it took him years to persuade Neiman Marcus to open its first store outside Texas at Bal Harbour; it was quickly expanded by 30,000 square feet. In 1983, the Whitmans opened a second level, but they say they will never add a third.
''Stanley Whitman,'' said Steven B. Greenberg, the president of the Greenberg Group, a retail real estate consulting company based in Hewlett, N.Y., ''was light-years ahead of his time. He envisioned a Madison Avenue lineup. He went out and got the best tenants. They know quality when they see it, and they are entrepreneurial enough that when the next Prada comes along, they respond.''
Recent additions to Bal Harbour include Lalique, Valentino, Yves Saint Laurent Rive Gauche, Gianfranco Ferré, Paul&amp;Shark, Francesca Romana and Cole Haan.
Bal Harbour charges modest annual rents by Madison Avenue standards -- roughly $100 a square foot for ground-floor space and $70 on the second level, where the tenants include some decidedly nonluxury retailers like Banana Republic and the Gap. (The average mall tenant pays $30 a square foot, said Greg Andrews, a retail REIT analyst for Green Street Advisers, an independent investment research company in Newport Beach, Calif.) But retailers also pay a percentage of their sales, a sum that tends to be much higher than the base rent, Mr. Greenberg said. (Leases at Merrick Park range from $40 to $80, depending on the shop size and when the tenant signed up, and include a percentage of sales, said Mr. Greenberg, who has placed tenants there.)
Sales at Bal Harbour Shops have declined since 2000, when they reached $1,350 a square foot, the Whitmans say. Even so, the mall's sales per square foot were the highest in the nation in 2002, according to the Greenberg Group's annual survey of the top 25 malls, and in 2003 reached $1,170, Randall Whitman said. The national average for 2002, the latest available, was $330, according to the International Council of Shopping Centers, a trade group.
Real estate specialists say that the mall's private ownership enables the Whitmans to act in ways that would be unheard-of for public companies, which are under constant pressure from stockholders. For example, one tenant, Bonwit Teller, went out of business more than a decade ago, but some of its 60,000 square feet was unoccupied until recently because the younger Mr. Whitman hoped -- vainly, as it turned out -- to lure Barneys New York to Bal Harbour.
The Whitmans attribute their success to their stable, hands-on management and long-term employees and say they were never tempted to try to clone Bal Harbour elsewhere. ''I didn't see any thrill in doing it over and over,'' Stanley Whitman said.
These days, he said, he devotes his time mainly to strategic planning. Recently, he tried to bring a movie theater to the mall but said that he abandoned the idea because the construction costs would have been too high.
But Randall Whitman said there was no question about who was actually in charge. Recently, the son said, his father rejected a suggestion from him in no uncertain terms. ''I laughed,'' the younger Mr. Whitman said, ''and that was the end of that. It's not easy working for your dad.''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE  Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  A picture caption in Business Day yesterday about the owners of Bal Harbour Shops, a luxury mall in Florida, misidentified the man at the right. He was Randall Whitman, managing partner of the mall and the son of its founder -- not Matthew Lazenby, a grandson.
