In the isolation ward of the pediatric hospital here where 10 children suspected of having avian influenza are being closely monitored, Le Anh Quan, 7, sat on his bed on Tuesday drawing a helicopter gunship, a mask over his mouth and nose, and nurses, well protected in disposable gowns and shoes, hovering nearby.
Quan came here with his mother on the family motorbike four days ago after he complained of a high fever and a rough cough. His temperature has subsided a bit and he said he felt ''normal'' and wanted to go home. But his wish was not going to be granted.
Since Dec. 30, four children who were patients in this ward have died of avian flu, and seven others who have died since October could also have succumbed to the virulent strain of influenza, a World Health Organization doctor, Peter Horby, said in an interview on Tuesday.
Dr. Horby, a epidemiologist who has been tracking the flu outbreak (often called bird flu) in the two Hanoi hospitals where cases are being treated, said that in the cases he had seen the disease had been transmitted from live poultry to humans.
But, he said, the World Health Organization was most concerned that bird flu could become a disease transmitted from humans to humans. Vietnam has one of the weakest health care systems in Asia and would be hard pressed to meet such a challenge, agency officials said.
Bird flu has spread through poultry populations in Japan, South Korea and Vietnam. Vietnam is the only country where there have been confirmed deaths of humans, the health agency said. In all, five Vietnamese -- four children and one adult (the mother of one of the children) -- have died of the disease since Dec. 30, according to laboratory tests the agency said it had reviewed.
Laboratory tests on seven other children who have died since October were not completed, leaving open the possibility they had also died of the disease, Dr. Horby said.
In an effort to curb the outbreak, Vietnam says, it has killed two million chickens in 15 provinces stretching from Ho Chi Minh City in the south to Hanoi in the north.
But a spokesman for the World Health Organization, Bob Dietz, said bird flu was so widespread among chickens in Vietnam that there was concern that the virus could ''work with other viruses and increase the probability of reforming itself to become the type of virus that could spread between people.''
There were reports that ''significant'' numbers of chickens had died in Vietnam as early as October and ''questions'' on how forthright Vietnam had been in making the extent of the infection in the poultry population public, he said.
To help the health organization get a firmer grasp on the situation, six specialists from the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention arrived Monday night.
The isolation ward in the pediatric hospital, a two-story structure built 22 years ago, was chilly on Tuesday, with a winter draft blowing along the corridor outside the ward. The sick children wore parkas, socks and wool caps to keep warm. Either a mother or a father sat with the children, keeping them company and providing the most important thing: home-cooked meals.
Why children seemed to have been harder hit by the disease than adults in Vietnam was not certain, Dr. Horby said. He had several theories based on the notion that rural children in Vietnam -- as in many developing countries -- come in very close physical contact with chickens.
One way that scientists believe the disease is transmitted is through touching the feces of infected birds, or inhaling the dust kicked up by infected chickens in a village yard.
''Often children have closer contact with chickens in the village,'' Dr. Horby said. ''They often have the task of caring for the chickens and ducks. Children are more exposed to chicken feces when they play in the dirt.'' It was also possible, he said, that adults had acquired immunity from the disease.
The one Vietnamese adult who died from the disease was the 30-year-old mother of a girl, 12, who also died, Dr. Horby said. The family kept chickens, and Dr. Horby said he believed that both mother and child became infected from the chickens, not each other.
The director of the pediatric hospital, Nguyen Thank Liem, 52, said he had seen lung material from the autopsies of some of the dead patients and that the virus had moved rapidly through the lung tissue.
''The chicken epidemic is not eradicated,'' said Dr. Liem, who is a surgeon specializing in organ transplants for children and who spent a month with surgery specialists at the University of California, Los Angeles, last year. ''I think we will get more moderate and severe cases of confirmed avian flu.''
Human Vaccine Is Sought
The World Health Organization said yesterday that laboratories in its network have begun using newer genetic techniques to develop a human vaccine against the A(H5N1) strain of the avian influenza virus that is circulating in Asia. The Geneva-based agency said it was taking steps to prepare the vaccine as a precautionary measure in case the virus mutates and starts spreading from person to person.
Laboratories in Hong Kong and Japan have isolated the virus from two of the five confirmed human deaths attributed to avian influenza in Vietnam. Using a technique known as reverse genetics, the scientists aim to develop a seed virus in about four weeks that manufacturers could use to produce a human vaccine.
The scientists are also trying to determine the molecular structure of the A(H5N1) virus isolated in Vietnam in recent weeks for comparison with a strain isolated from cases in Hong Kong in 2003.
Correction:  January 23, 2004, Friday  An article on Wednesday about a deadly outbreak of avian influenza in Vietnam misspelled the name of a doctor who runs a Hanoi pediatric hospital, where 10 children suspected of having the disease have been quarantined. He is Nguyen Thanh Liem, not Nguyen Thank Liem.
