Bank of America said on Tuesday that it could not find an account linked to Parmalat that an Italian lawyer had said held billions of euros.
The lawyer, Carlo Zauli, over the weekend gave details of what he said was a Bank of America account at a New York branch holding 7 billion euros ($8.7 billion) belonging to Parmalat, the Italian food and dairy giant that collapsed last month. Bank of America had previously denied that such an account existed, but said it would do an internal investigation.
''We have completed our systemwide search of deposit accounts and that account does not exist and never existed at Bank of America,'' a spokeswoman for Bank of America in London said Tuesday.
Investigations into the collapse of Parmalat continued Tuesday. In the Netherlands, regulators said that their inquiry into whether the company had violated Dutch securities laws was now a formal investigation.
Parmalat raised at least 5.2 billion euros ($6.4 billion) by issuing bonds in the Netherlands through at least five shell companies. One person close to the inquiry said that investigators scrutinizing four of the five companies had been unable to locate some prospectuses that Parmalat's financing companies would ordinarily have been required to file. Failing to do so would in some circumstances be against the law.
Werner van Bastelaar, director of communications for the Netherlands Authority for the Financial Markets, confirmed the formal investigation but declined further comment.
Banks and other financial institutions will now be required to cooperate with regulators and turn over any documents related to the Parmalat bonds.
Investigators in Brazil, meanwhile, have met with executives of Parmalat's struggling Brazilian unit after a court in São Paulo ordered its assets frozen.
The local arm of Sumitomo Mitsui, a Japanese bank that is owed $10 million by Parmalat, had sought the injunction.
Parmalat Brasil S.A. said it would appeal, not because it intended to sell any assets but because it was already trying to negotiate a settlement on loans with several banks, including Sumitomo Mitsui.
Parmalat's Brazilian unit is operating at over 80 percent of its regular capacity, and says it owes $160 million to local banks and $17 million to suppliers. Local media have put the bank debts at three times that figure, because of debts incurred by holding companies that answer directly to the company's Italian headquarters.
