By the end of the first period at Madison Square Garden last night, the Rangers learned that defenseman Darius Kasparaitis would be out for 10 to 12 weeks, not the 7 to 10 days they had anticipated.
By the end of the second period, a chorus of Garden fans was calling for the head of Rangers Coach Glen Sather, who is also in his fourth season as the team's president and general manager.
And by the end of another long evening, after a 4-1 loss to the Boston Bruins and louder calls for Sather's firing in the third period, the Rangers had dropped to 10th place in the Eastern Conference and lost more ground in the race for the eighth and final playoff berth.
With their second loss to the Bruins in two days, the Rangers (18-18-7-4) dropped back to .500. And that is only because the N.H.L. does not count overtime losses as defeats.
One day after being blown out by the Bruins, 5-2, in Boston, last night's rematch was not nearly as bitter as Monday afternoon's game, when Eric Lindros broke Joe Thornton's cheekbone with a punch, Boston's Doug Doull earned a one-game suspension for opening a gash on Petr Nedved's forehead and Dan McGillis injured Kasparaitis with a leg-on-leg collision. McGillis received a game misconduct but was not suspended.
''We have to be really careful,'' Sather had said at yesterday morning's skate, after being asked whether, in another era perhaps, he might have counseled his team to retaliate. ''Besides,'' said Sather, referring to the injuries that have plagued his defense, ''we can't afford to lose any more people.''
While Sather was pointing afterward to the Rangers' injuries, his most outspoken player, Bobby Holik, had a different view.
''All the teams go through that,'' Holik said. ''They can make adjustments. We should, too. We're not the only team whose players get hurt. Personally, I don't think that's the cause of the way we played. I think it's the other way around. We should tighten up.''
In his fourth game, Boston center Carl Corazzini scored the first two goals of his career to lead the Bruins, who also received goals for the second consecutive game from Jiri Slegr and Brian Rolston.
Corazzini opened the scoring with a short-handed goal at 1 minute 34 seconds of the second period.
Corazzini's goal came on a two-on-none break against Rangers goaltender Mike Dunham. The Rangers' Lawrence Nycholat, a rookie defenseman who was playing his first game in the wake of Kasparaitis's injury, had slipped and fallen at the left point while trying to keep the puck in the offensive zone near the end of a Rangers power play.
Ordinarily, Nycholat -- who finished at minus-2 working alongside Brian Leetch in his N.H.L. debut -- would be considered the 10th defenseman on the Rangers' depth chart.
But Kasparaitis is out with a tibial plateau fracture in his left leg and a slight tear of the medial collateral ligament in his left knee. Greg de Vries is sidelined at least another month with a more serious tear of the medial collateral of his right knee. Tom Poti was out last night with a back sprain. Fedor Tjutin, the Rangers' top minor league prospect on defense, is out for as long as de Vries with torn knee ligaments.
The chants of ''Fire Sather!'' first rose from the crowd at 17:34 of the second period, after a goal by Slegr, a 32-year-old defenseman who was obtained from Vancouver for future considerations on Saturday.
Leetch cut the Rangers' deficit to a goal, at 2-1, on the power play at 1:21 of the third period, with the Rangers on a four-on-three advantage. But Leetch was whistled for interference on Rolston as he attempted to prevent Rolston from a breakaway at 2:51 of the third. And when the rookie right wing Jed Ortmeyer slashed P. J. Axelsson at center ice at 4:17, the Bruins went on a five-on-three power play.
Sixteen seconds later, Rolston restored the two-goal lead, and when Corazzini scored at 9:33, the calls for Sather's firing resumed.
SLAP SHOTS
After learning that defenseman DARIUS KASPARAITIS would be out, in all likelihood, for the remainder of the regular season, GLEN SATHER acknowledged he had to trade for, or sign, a defenseman as soon as possible. ''Those are the only two options I can think of,'' Sather said. ''Nobody's going to grow a defenseman for us who can play in the National Hockey League. We have to make a deal for one.'' . . . According to a team official in the National Hockey League with knowledge of Sather's discussions around the league, Carolina Hurricanes General Manager JIM RUTHERFORD ''has had casual conversations with Glen'' recently, and right wing JEFF O'NEILL's ''name has come up.'' When Sather was asked yesterday morning whether he had any interest in O'Neill, Carolina's leading scorer, Sather sidestepped the question, saying, ''I don't know where he's going.'' Considering that the Hurricanes have been interested in trading the veteran defenseman BOB BOUGHNER, Sather could try to put together a package for Boughner and O'Neill.
HOCKEY
