In the last two seasons, the Nets captured consecutive Atlantic Division titles and Eastern Conference championships. But they have not been able to win a game against the Dallas Mavericks.
Since the Nets traded for Jason Kidd, they have beaten every team in the N.B.A. -- except Dallas.
This was not the time or place to end the streak. The Nets wobbled through the final three quarters at American Airlines Center on Tuesday and staggered to a 106-93 loss, their seventh in a row against the Mavericks. The Nets' only real accomplishment was combining with Dallas for only 11 turnovers, an N.B.A. record for fewest in a game.
The Mavericks (25-16) have apparently left their struggles in the past, winning their fifth in a row. The Nets (21-18), meanwhile, have lost four of five games, and they wasted a season-high 29 points from Kenyon Martin, who graduated from Bryan Adams High School in Dallas. The Nets visit San Antonio on Wednesday.
''At least it gets easier,'' Lucious Harris said sarcastically of matchup with the Spurs. ''They've got eight more guys who can play.''
The Nets might have a better chance against the defending champion Spurs than they did in Dallas. The Nets have not beaten the Mavericks since 2000.
Before the game, the Nets hailed Steve Nash's quickness, the Mavericks' wide array of outside shooters and their underrated ability to rebound. They talked about all of it and stopped none of it.
The Nets did not defend the perimeter and Dallas took aim in the first half, shooting 62.5 percent from 3-point range. For the first time in franchise history, the Mavericks did not commit a turnover in the first half and finished with only four.
When the Nets finally started guarding the arc, the Mavericks alertly shifted inside, outrebounding the Nets, 52-38. It seemed that every time the Nets cut the deficit to 6 or 8 points, Dallas would snatch an offensive rebound and score 2 of their 22 second-chance points.
''Some teams just have your number the way the matchups go,'' said Richard Jefferson, who scored 21 points. ''Kenyon Martin has to be guarding Dirk Nowitzki, so they get our best rebounder out on the perimeter. And then Jason Kidd is completely occupied most of the time with Steve Nash. Not a lot of teams beat them.''
The Nets might have expected to have more success against Dallas since the Mavericks traded for Antoine Walker. When Walker played with the Boston Celtics, he usually succumbed to Martin and the Nets. In recent years, however, Dallas has dominated the Nets much the way the Nets have taken care of the Celtics.
Although Walker made only one of his first six shots, he settled in and finished with a team-high 22 points and a game-high 13 rebounds.
Oddly enough, these teams prefer the same up-tempo style, but Dallas has a deeper bench and superior shooters. The Mavericks play the Nets' game better than the Nets do.
''We like to run with them, which can be fun,'' Martin said. ''But it can also get embarrassing.''
Wearing the gray alternate uniforms they have had on in many of their worst performances, the Nets were on the verge of humiliation at several points in the game. Each time, they rallied, but they never threatened.
Although the Nets were losing badly in the battle for rebounds, the backup center Aaron Williams played just three minutes because Coach Byron Scott did not like the matchup with him. The front line was not as much of a problem for the Nets as the backcourt, with Kidd and Kerry Kittles shooting a combined 8 of 24.
The Nets' weaknesses tend to be magnified in Dallas. Although Scott said he was not concerned about the team, and Kidd insists the Nets are simply going through a typical rut, they are starting the most daunting stretch of the season. They can either view their recent slump as the byproduct of improved competition or their own regression.
Or, in this case, maybe both.
PRO BASKETBALL
