The Mets reserved a corner of Grand Central Terminal to unveil their roster and their motto, Catch the Energy, for the coming season yesterday, and Mike Piazza seemed more energized about playing games at first base than he ever did last season.
Piazza received the biggest cheer from the few fans that stopped by, smiling shyly as he tucked his hands into his jeans. José Reyes, a rare bright spot last year as a rookie shortstop, is also facing a position switch, to second base. He punched the air with his right fist as the Mets, one by one, trotted under a banner with their new motto.
The success of the Mets this season may have as much to do with the transitions of Piazza and Reyes as the performances of three new players: shortstop Kazuo Matsui, center fielder Mike Cameron and closer Braden Looper. Piazza and Reyes may have to embrace their new roles if the Mets are to avoid a third straight last-place finish. The previous two dismal finishes followed off-seasons of high expectations.
''It's a lot of talk in the off-season,'' General Manager Jim Duquette said. ''In the past couple of years, we've been all talk and really no production. I think there's a level of skepticism, and rightly so, to the way we played the last few years.''
Piazza will work in spring training toward his long-discussed move to first; it is not clear how many games he will play there. In some newspaper reports in November, Piazza was said to be so unhappy with the Mets' plans to move him from catcher that he asked to be traded.
Yesterday, Piazza termed those articles ''a complete fabrication'' and ''fiction.'' Asked if he was happy, Piazza said, ''I've not given any indication otherwise, so that goes without saying.''
Duquette said Piazza's agent had told him he would be willing to consider a trade if the Mets were planning to go with a rookie-laden lineup. Told they would not, Piazza ''said he never wanted to be traded,'' Duquette said.
Manager Art Howe, who announced his intention to have Piazza practice at first base to television reporters before telling him last season, said he spoke to Piazza a couple of times by phone this winter. ''He's got to be open to it, and I've talked to him and he's ready to do it,'' Howe said.
Piazza said, ''I think in the long run, personally, it will prolong my career, and I've been very much looking forward to it.''
Reyes learned of his position switch when Mets officials made a trip to the Dominican Republic to inform him they were close to signing Matsui.
Asked if he initially felt hurt at the request to give up a position he had played since childhood, Reyes said: ''When they told me about it, I think a little bit about it, but I don't worry too much. I said it's all right.''
Reyes, 20, has been working on the transition for the last month and a half with the former major leaguer Rafael Belliard in the Dominican Republic.
Matsui, sporting spiked orange hair in his first team function since signing in December, said there was no awkwardness when he met Reyes for the first time Monday night. ''The communication between the two of us is still something that needs to be worked out,'' Matsui said through an interpreter.
After a year of failed attempts to trade Roger Cedeño, the Mets told him at their recent minicamp that he would enter spring training competing for time in right field. But his main competition was introduced yesterday; the Mets announced they had completed a one-year, $800,000 deal with Karim Garcia.
Garcia, a left-handed hitter, was traded from Cleveland to the Yankees last June, batting .262 over all with 11 homers and 35 runs batted in in 244 at-bats. He hit .305 for the Yankees as a platoon right fielder.
The Mets still do not have a fifth starter, and they hope to find one from among Aaron Heilman, Jeremy Griffiths, Tyler Yates or Grant Roberts, or a possible nonroster invitee.
The Mets and the Yankees were 2 of 23 teams watching Scott Erickson throw in Arizona yesterday. Tomorrow, they will also have representatives watching the workouts of the former Yankee Orlando Hernández in Miami and the Cuban defector Maels Rodriguez in San Salvador. Duquette said he was unsure if the Mets could count on Rodriguez's being a starting pitcher immediately and said the Mets would not offer him the four-year, $32 million deal the agent Henry Vilar was seeking.
The Mets may also pursue Todd Ritchie or the former Met Rick Reed, Duquette said.
Duquette listed a right-handed-hitting outfielder to complement Garcia as another need and said offensive production, especially after Piazza and Cliff Floyd in the lineup, was his biggest concern.
The Mets believe the Plan, the organizational motto defined as becoming younger, more athletic and better on defense, is mostly complete. But the failure to sign Vladimir Guerrero has overshadowed some of the Mets' winter accomplishments.
''I think there's some level of our fan base that is more disappointed that we didn't get Vladimir Guerrero than they are upbeat about our acquisitions,'' Duquette said.
A majority of fans, though, ''have been very positive of the direction where we're going,'' he said.
INSIDE PITCH
The Mets have hired BEN BAUMER, a recent graduate of Wesleyan University, for the newly formed role of statistical analyst, modeled in part on the job the statistician BILL JAMES performs for the Boston Red Sox.
BASEBALL
