Scott Clemmensen, the Devils' surprise starter in goal Tuesday, lost his stick. He tried to pick it up, but left wing Jeff Friesen stepped on it.
The Devils made Clemmensen's first N.H.L. start difficult at first. But they were playing the inept Pittsburgh Penguins, and by the final horn, Clemmensen had posted a 3-0 victory.
Clemmensen stopped 25 shots, 13 in the first period.
''The first period he saved us; we weren't very good,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''Actually we weren't very good as a whole.''
Clemmensen was good enough. Turner Stevenson scored the first and third goals for the Devils (23-11-10-1) and assisted on the other. Friesen scored his 200th career goal and assisted on Stevenson's first goal.
Clemmensen provided the Devils with a memorable game on a day when defenseman Scott Stevens, their captain, went on injured reserve because of postconcussion syndrome. Stevens, 39, had missed the previous five games.
''If I was worried about something, I wouldn't have played the way I wanted to,'' Clemmensen said.
Clemmensen helped the Devils creep closer to Philadelphia in the Atlantic Division. The Devils trail the Flyers, who lost Tuesday to the Canadiens, by 2 points and have played three fewer games.
The 26-year-old Clemmensen was recalled from Albany, the Devils' American Hockey League affiliate, earlier Tuesday. Burns wanted to rest Martin Brodeur, who has played 41 games this season, and the backup Corey Schwab is injured -- again. Clemmensen's only N.H.L. experience was two games in relief for the Devils two seasons ago.
Burns said Brodeur decided last week to take off the Washington and Pittsburgh games because he wanted to sharpen his skills by practicing harder. Schwab would have started this game, but he aggravated a groin injury Saturday, when he made 18 saves in a 2-1 victory over Washington.
General Manager Lou Lamoriello called up Clemmensen instead of Ari Ahonen, Albany's other goaltender. ''It wouldn't have made a difference; it wasn't my call,'' Burns said.
It does not seem to make a difference who replaces Brodeur. The Devils are 3-0-1-0 and have allowed just two goals in the four games he has not played.
Clemmensen, a native of Des Moines, was not exactly an acrobat for the Albany River Rats. He was 5-12-4 with a 3.07 goals against average and a .902 save percentage. He played 20 minutes in the 2001-2 season opener, allowing a goal in a 6-1 loss to Washington. He also played a minute in relief in a 2-1 loss to Boston on Nov. 3, 2001. That was his last N.H.L. game before Tuesday.
Clemmensen was told Monday afternoon to report to the team. When the game started, the Devils did not give him much help. ''Even though it wasn't a positive for the team,'' Clemmensen said of the team's slow start, ''it was a positive for me.''
The Penguins (11-29-5-3), who beat the Devils on Jan. 7, 4-2, had six shots in the first five minutes. Clemmensen was as busy as he had been in A.H.L. games. That, he said, was a plus. He said he never stopped realizing that he was playing an N.H.L. game, but that he concentrated.
''Today was kind of an easier game for me,'' he said.
The first goal helped enormously. Stevenson scored 9 minutes 27 seconds into the game when he tapped in a pinpoint pass from Friesen.
The Penguins had three power plays in the first period and built a 13-4 advantage in shots, but Clemmensen stopped everything.
Friesen gave the Devils a 2-0 lead at 2:13 of the second period. Stevenson added an unassisted goal with 3:07 to play.
Pittsburgh had four shots in the third period, and Clemmensen turned them all aside. By then, the Devils were in full lockdown in their zone, keeping him out of trouble. ''I was in awe back there with the way they did it,'' he said.
HOCKEY
