The Other Elle Word
TRACY CHEVALIER, the author of ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' was in town to talk about her latest novel, ''The Lady and the Unicorn,'' when a question was asked about how Ms. Chevalier writes.
Standing before a capacity crowd last week in the ''Love &amp; Sex'' section of Barnes &amp; Noble Astor Plaza, Ms. Chevalier brushed a blond forelock from her face and frowned at the still-fresh memory.
With each of her novels and short stories, she said, she struggles to write three, maybe four, pages a day in longhand, and then throws much of it away.
Brightening suddenly, she said the exception was ''Girl With a Pearl Earring,'' her international best seller about the famed Vermeer painting and now a motion picture starring SCARLETT JOHANSSON and COLIN FIRTH.
''It came out of me like a train!'' she almost yelled.
After the reading, she elaborated on her locomotive locution. ''If I'm being really candid and prosaic about it,'' Ms. Chevalier said, ''the day I started researching the book, I found out I was pregnant.''
She wanted to complete the novel before she had her baby (Jacob, now 5) and she did, 240 pages in eight months. Ms. Chevalier said she feared motherhood might change her writing somehow and, at the very least, put new demands on her time.
Whatever the struggles of a writer's life, said Ms. Chevalier, the daughter of a Washington Post photographer and a homemaker, it was better than the editor's life she once led, even if it was in London, where she lives with her family.
What did Ms. Chevalier, an Oberlin College graduate (class of 1984), edit? Mostly reference books about writers and writing. ''So I was editing,'' she said, her eyes rolling, ''other people's words about other writers' words.''
But ''Falling Angels,'' Ms. Chevalier's earlier novel, about Edwardian London, won little notice, and she assumed ''Girl'' would sell, at best, a few thousand copies.
So what was it about Vermeer that drew in Ms. Chevalier and the novel's more than two million readers in 21 languages?
The painter's aloofness, she said. ''Vermeer steps back,'' she said. ''He puts stuff in the foreground of paintings, like curtains, like dark objects, to actually hold you at a distance, so you feel like you've been privileged to have this curtain drawn open.''
Ms. Chevalier added, ''It encourages viewers to fill in the gaps and make their own story.''
But why Vermeer instead of Caravaggio or Georges de la Tour or other painters captivated by shadow and light?
De la Tour was too interested in religion, she said, and Vermeer's Holland of the 17th century was more concerned about daily life. ''I didn't want to talk about saints,'' she said of de la Tour.
As for Caravaggio, she said, ''You don't sit there and think, I wonder what they're thinking in that painting? There doesn't seem to be that much subtext, it's all about chiaroscuro and pretty boys.''
That Tyco Guy Has A $15,000 Stand Available
The 50th anniversary Winter Antiques Show opened last week and the Boldface Names trooped out in force and in uniform, designer business suits and couture.
Patrolling the fancy bric-a-brac were the designers ALBERT HADLEY, JOANNE DE GUARDIOLA, KITTY HAWKS, who is also the daughter of director Howard Hawks, ALEXA HAMPTON (and her mother, DUANE HAMPTON); ANDREA Q. ROBINSON, president worldwide of Ralph Lauren Fragrances and a chairwoman of the show; DANIEL LUFKIN, a founder of Wall Street's Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette, and his wife, CYNTHIA LUFKIN; MICHAEL R. BLOOMBERG, mayor; JOANNE WOODWARD and PAUL NEWMAN; and OPRAH WINFREY.
DENISE RICH the songwriter and fixture in these pages, stopped at Booth 18, the Morning Star Gallery of Santa Fe, N.M., which specializes in Southwestern and Native American art.
''I'm crazy about the Ute Indians,'' Ms. Rich said. ''They come every Christmas and bless my house in Aspen.'' Any tchotchkes, Ute or non-Ute, appeal to her, our Boldface correspondent asked?
''From the sublime to the mundane,'' she said, grinning. ''I saw a great umbrella stand on the other side. It's so cool.''
with C.J. Satterwhite
Boldface Names
