Tourism officials in San Mateo County cheered wildly on Tuesday when a judge announced that the murder trial of Scott Peterson would be moved there.
''You couldn't hear us screaming?'' asked Anne LeClair, president and chief executive of the San Mateo County Convention and Visitors Bureau, which is in Burlingame, about 15 miles south of San Francisco. ''This is wonderful.''
Ms. LeClair predicted the trial -- or more precisely, the news coverage it is expected to generate -- would inject at least $8 million into the county's economy, which remains in the doldrums because of the dot-com collapse there and throughout the Silicon Valley.
''I haven't even had time to play back all of my voice mails,'' said Ms. LeClair, fielding inquiries by reporters around the world. ''Every time I talk to somebody, they build up.''
Mr. Peterson, who is accused of killing his wife, Laci, and their unborn son, has been a favorite subject of television newscasts and talk shows. Even the most routine hearings in the case have drawn convoys of television satellite trucks to the Stanislaus County Courthouse in Modesto. About 400 journalists are registered with the authorities to receive updates on the case.
''Depending on what is happening, we can get 3,000 hits a day just on our media Web site,'' said Kelly Houston, a spokesman for the Stanislaus County Sheriff's Department.
The judge in the case, Al Girolami of Stanislaus County Superior Court, chose San Mateo, from among four counties under consideration, during a hearing in Modesto. Over the past two weeks, some officials had been quietly positioning their counties for the trial. Ms. LeClair sent Judge Girolami a package of promotional materials by overnight delivery.
Judge Girolami determined earlier that the trial needed to be moved because so many people in Stanislaus County had made up their minds about Mr. Peterson's guilt.
The trial was to begin next week, but officials said it would probably be delayed for several weeks because of the change of venue and the possibility that Judge Girolami might not continue with the case. The judge said on Tuesday that he would prefer that a retired judge be appointed to handle the trial so that he could remain in Modesto.
Mr. Peterson, a former fertilizer salesman, has pleaded not guilty to the deaths, which occurred sometime between Dec. 24, 2002, when Mrs. Peterson was reported missing from the couple's home in Modesto, and early last April when her body and their son's fetus were found washed up on the shores of San Francisco Bay.
In choosing San Mateo County, which is about 70 miles from Modesto, the judge said the trial would be close enough to Modesto for the convenience of the prosecution and witnesses but far enough to distill some of the emotion from the case.
Another important consideration, Judge Girolami said, was that San Mateo County officials had indicated that the trial would be assigned to a courtroom in Redwood City, which has a jail next door where Mr. Peterson could be kept. ''Clearly they are close and ready to proceed,'' Judge Girolami said. ''I'm satisfied that we can get a fair and impartial jury in San Mateo County.''
Wasting no time in capitalizing on the decision, Ms. LeClair's staff spent much of Tuesday stuffing media packets. She also began brainstorming ways to draw publicity to the county, coming up with one idea to supply journalists with videotape of houses and neighborhoods in the mostly upscale county to help illustrate reports about jury selection.
''I think out of the box, way out,'' said Ms. LeClair. ''I read a lot of John Grisham books.''
Government officials in the county were less enthusiastic about the decision, in part because of concerns about the disruption it would create in the courthouse schedule and because of questions about how the county would be reimbursed for playing host to the trial.
Officials in neighboring Santa Clara County, which was also in contention, had estimated a four-week trial would cost the host county $300,000. ''My first reaction was, 'God help us,' '' said Mike Nevin, who is on the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors. ''Maybe there is a county that can absorb it better. But I am willing to do our share.''
The last prominent murder trial in the county lasted about nine months and cost the county more than $3 million. In that trial in 1992, Joe Hunt, the leader of an investment group known as the Billionaire Boys Club, was accused of the 1984 murder of a former official in the shah of Iran's government. The jury in that case could not agree on a verdict, and a mistrial was declared. The murder charge was later dropped, though Mr. Hunt was already serving a life term for another murder.
''It wasn't a cheap date,'' said John L. Maltbie, the county manager in San Mateo County.
