When the January issue of Princeton's conservative student magazine, The Princeton Tory, criticized Dr. Shirley Tilghman's ''maternalistic'' policies for reshaping campus life, it was the latest round in a battle over which values will prevail at the university.
Critics at the magazine see Dr. Tilghman, the university president, as leading Princeton away from many of its traditions, discarding individual rights and responsibilities in favor of "collectivist" policies.
Central to the conflict are Dr. Tilghman's appointments of women to senior university positions -- appointments that critics say were the product of gender-based affirmative action. The criticism leaves Dr. Tilghman, Princeton's first female president, baffled. ''I was very surprised that students question that when you appoint a woman, that person may not be the very best,'' she said.
Since becoming president in 2001, Dr. Tilghman has named four women and four men as academic officers of the university, and she says the appointments were based purely on merit. The women all replaced men and hold highly visible offices: Janet L. Rapelye is the dean of admissions; Maria Klawe, dean of the engineering school; Amy Gutmann, provost; and Anne-Marie Slaughter, dean of the Woodrow Wilson School.
Criticism has come from some expected quarters, notably The Tory, which has frequently attacked Dr. Tilghman's ideology and which ran a cover article this month titled ''The Modern Mommy University.''
Last year, however, the mainstream campus newspaper, The Daily Princetonian, also took the president to task, saying in an editorial, ''It seems implausible that this many women -- a standout group in the Ivy League -- could have ended up at Princeton through a completely gender-blind process.''
At a panel discussion last fall, Dr. Tilghman said: ''I waited for the undergraduate women to rise up as one and reject the view of the editorial. One of my biggest surprises in my two years as president was that that really didn't happen.''
Conservative critics wonder whether Dr. Tilghman is leading the university away from its roots. Evan Baehr, a Princeton junior and editor in chief of The Tory, said Dr. Tilghman's administration has acquired a markedly different makeup that separates it from the traditions that have, historically, defined Princeton. ''There is an ideological notion -- unquestionably liberal -- within the context of women in academia that runs contrary to the Princeton of the 1950's and 1960's,'' Mr. Baehr said. ''It is impossible to divorce female appointments from overall liberal ideology.''
But Katherine Reilly, a junior and president of the Organization for Women Leaders, points out that in the 1950's and 60's, Princeton did not admit women and accepted few minority applicants.
''I think that change has been a good thing,'' she said.
Dr. Tilghman says that gender was not a factor in the selection process and that three of her four female appointees were chosen by search committees. She said she did not expect charges that she was favoring women from a student body with 47 percent of its members being some of ''the most talented women in the country.''
John Andrews, a junior and publisher of The Tory, said he feared that Dr. Tilghman's administration, particularly through Dean Rapelye, would create a new university environment where ''what makes Princeton distinctive will be lost'' and demographic contributions matter more than individual merit.
He cited a statement Dr. Tilghman made when she took office, expressing hope that Princeton would begin to attract ''students with green hair.''
''Selection based on one's ideology -- green hair included -- is a conscious manipulation of societal institutions that should be seen in a broader context of social engineering, which includes affirmative action,'' Mr. Andrews said.
Mr. Baehr also found fault with Dean Rapelye, formerly of Wellesley. ''She is a progressive liberal and could change the shape of the student body,'' he said, ''not so much in terms of gender composition, but she may be looking for people with green hair rather than the typical Brooks Brothers/J. Crew student.''
Dr. Tilghman says her appointments are a ''natural continuation'' of a wave of change that started with coeducation in 1969 and continued with former President Harold T. Shapiro's efforts to bring more women to the faculty.
''I am taking advantage of a wave that began with the social revolution of women 30 years ago and crested as I became president,'' Dr. Tilghman said at the panel discussion. ''If you fast-forward that revolution 30 years, this is precisely what you would think would happen.''
Mr. Andrews says he doubts that someone who so strongly favors gender diversity could engage in a completely gender-blind process.
''The only difference between saying that more women are needed and saying that women should receive preferential treatment is whether the administration will act on this need,'' he wrote in the recent Tory article.
Dr. Tilghman said she saw no inconsistency in arguing strongly for the benefits of diversity while saying her appointees won their positions based solely on merit. She said the administration would be all male if, in every case, a man had been the best candidate for the position.
