General Motors reported a slight decline in its fourth-quarter profit on Tuesday as strength in its financial operations was offset by a price war in North America that failed to increase market share.
G.M. continued to show difficulty making money in its core business, making cars and trucks. Global automotive operations, struggling everywhere but in the Asia-Pacific region, swung to a $167 million loss in the quarter from a $574 million profit in the period a year earlier, including one-time items.
Those included charges for restructuring its European business and complying with a new labor contract that requires G.M. to make lump-sum payments to its own retirees. Additionally, a $277 million charge was taken to cover similar payments made to retirees at Delphi Automotive, the supply giant G.M. spun off in 1998, but the company listed it separately from its automotive results.
Profit at the company's crucial North American auto operations shrank to $52 million on nearly $31 billion of revenue, down from a $644 million profit in the quarter a year earlier. For the year, G.M.'s North American auto business earned $811 million, down from nearly $3 billion in 2002.
As a result, G.M.'s 125,000 production workers in the United States will receive an annual bonus of just $170, down from $940 last year and the second-lowest bonus G.M. has paid to its hourly workers in the decade since its struggles of the early 1990's.
Excluding charges, G.M.'s North American automotive operations earned $397 million in the quarter and $1.2 billion for the year.
On the positive side, G.M. -- whose profits have been far more robust than its crosstown rival Ford Motor -- forecast improving results for 2004 on the strength of a new product wave and optimistic projections for North American industry sales. And its quarterly results were well above Wall Street's estimates.
For the fourth quarter, G.M. posted net income of $1.01 billion, down about 1 percent from $1.02 billion in the period a year earlier. Earnings per share actually increased, to $2.13 from $1.71. The discrepancy was because of accounting complexities related to the completion of G.M.'s sales of its stake in its former subsidiary, Hughes Electronics, to the News Corporation in December. Revenue climbed 7.7 percent, to $49.1 billion from $45.6 billion.
For the year, G.M. posted net income of $3.8 billion, or $7.14 a share, compared with $1.7 billion, or $3.35 a share, in 2002. Revenue rose to $185.5 billion from $177.3 billion.
Fourth-quarter and full-year results were lifted by a $1.2 billion gain from the sale of the company's Hughes stake.
The company forecast 2004 operating earnings of $6 to $6.50 a share, up from operating earnings of $5.62 a share in 2003. Company executives said G.M. hoped to earn $10 a share by 2005 or 2006.
''We're continuing to work on structural costs and material costs,'' said John Devine, G.M.'s chief financial officer. ''Volume should be up slightly in most of our markets, we continue to make inroads in places like the Asia Pacific and we expect a recovery there.''
What has really buoyed the company's results has been the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the company's financing, mortgage and insurance division.
G.M.A.C., as it is known, reported a profit of $630 million in the quarter, up from $524 million in the period a year earlier. For the year, G.M.A.C. had profits of nearly $2.8 billion, up from nearly $1.9 billion in 2002.
The Hughes gain was partly offset by one-time charges, principally a $725 million charge stemming from the company's negotiation of the new four-year contract with the United Automobile Workers.
Excluding Hughes and the special charges, G.M. earned $1.47 a share, about a quarter above what Wall Street analysts were projecting.
''While G.M.'s margins remain low for an auto company running 94 percent of capacity, and much of its earnings are generated through the financing of cars rather than the manufacturing of cars, the fact is that the company is growing earnings in a difficult pricing environment,'' John Casesa, a Merrill Lynch analyst, said in a research note.
Investors reacted by pushing G.M. shares down 20 cents, to $53.87.
In the United States, big rebates and zero percent financing have sapped results. G.M.'s incentive spending fell slightly in December, but the company is still spending an average of $3,589 a vehicle, compared with an industry average of $2,455, according to Edmunds.com.
But G.M. executives said their revenue per unit, less incentives, has been increasing as buyers use cheap prices to trade up to more luxurious models and consumers continue to buy more light trucks -- sport utility vehicles, pickup trucks and minivans -- which are more lucrative than cars.
Market share declined in the quarter, though, to 28.8 percent from 29.2 percent in the period a year earlier, even as sales to rental car companies and other fleet customers increased. Such sales are generally less lucrative than retail sales.
''The biggest eyebrow raiser was that share was down but the fleet business was up,'' said Stephen J. Girsky, an analyst at Morgan Stanley, adding that ''the company's having trouble growing share and maintaining price.''
And if health care costs continue to burden domestic automakers, one immense item G.M. crossed off its to-do list was closing a pension financing gap that exceeded $18 billion after a big bond offering last summer.
Analysts have said G.M. was wise to take advantage of low interest rates, though it did create a new challenge. Merrill Lynch projected that G.M.'s interest expenses alone would cost it about $3.70 a share this year.
