Although bringing out first-time voters was central to the strategy of Howard Dean, they largely supported Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina in the Iowa caucuses Monday, according to polls of voters as they entered the caucuses.
This year, roughly 122,000 people attended the caucuses. That is twice the number of people who turned out in 2000, but less than the estimated 125,000 who turned out in 1988.
Unofficial results, with 99 percent of precincts reporting, show that Mr. Kerry drew 37.6 percent of the vote, Mr. Edwards 31.9 percent, Dr. Dean 18 percent, and Representative Richard A. Gephardt 10.6 percent.
Entrance polls showed that 55 percent of the participants in the caucuses Monday night were attending for the first time, compared with 46 percent in 2000.
Mr. Kerry drew the support of 36 percent of this year's first-time voters, while Mr. Edwards drew 24 percent and Dr. Dean drew 22 percent.
The results seemed to challenge one of the fundamental premises of the Dean campaign -- that Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, could be powered to victory by people who had never voted before.
Dr. Dean may have inspired their interest in the political system. The polls indicate that first-time Iowa voters who made up their minds more than a month ago stuck with him.
But they also show that first-time voters who made up their minds more recently were more likely to vote for Senators Kerry or Edwards than for Dr. Dean.
Political scientists said this dynamic indicated that many of those undecided first-timers could have been influenced by what the political scientists saw as Dr. Dean's missteps in the last few weeks and a conclusion that he would not be able to beat President Bush in November.
''Dean had an awful couple of weeks,'' said Dennis J. Goldford, chairman of the department of politics and international relations at Drake University here.
''Toward the end, he fouled up enough, either in verbal gaffes or his inability to take criticism in the normal give and take of hardball politics, that he made a lot of people nervous.''
The polls were conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the National Election Pool of television networks and The Associated Press. They questioned 1,666 people as they arrived Monday night for the caucuses in 50 precincts throughout Iowa. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 4 percentage points.
Dr. Dean drew 32 percent of first-time caucusgoers who made up their minds more than a month ago, while Mr. Kerry attracted 28 percent.
Of the first-time attendees who decided more recently, 39 percent supported Mr. Kerry, while 29 percent backed Mr. Edwards. Only 18 percent backed Dr. Dean.
The only real differences between first-time voters and others were that they were younger, more likely than experienced caucusgoers to rely on the Internet for information about politics and less likely to identify strongly as Democrats.
This year 17 percent of all caucusgoers were under 30; by comparison, four years ago only 9 percent were under 30.
In terms of issues that were important to them, first-time voters generally were no different from other voters.
Thirty percent of first-timers (29 percent of all voters) said the economy was most important, and 27 percent said health care (28 percent of all voters). Only 12 percent of first-timers (14 percent of all) said the war in Iraq -- Dr. Dean's signature issue -- was of paramount importance, although 70 percent disapproved of the war (75 percent of all).
Political scientists said that candidates' claims of bringing out new voters are rarely borne out in election results.
In the recall of the California governor last year, Arnold Schwarzenegger, the leading Republican and the eventual winner, asserted that he could inspire new voters. Polls by Edison/Mitofsky showed that only 3 percent of California voters said they had never voted before, and another 3 percent said they rarely voted. Of that 6 percent, about half voted for Mr. Schwarzenegger.
''It's a very populist message to push: 'I've got new voters who are upset with the process,' '' said Andrew E. Smith, a political scientist and director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center.
But Mr. Smith said that particularly when the new voters were expected to be young, the numbers could fall short.
Mr. Goldford of Drake agreed, noting also that the campaigns left themselves vulnerable if they relied on youthful volunteers. ''You can't run a professional presidential campaign on a kiddie corps,'' he said. ''Lots of folks said they had been approached by Dean people and that they were enthusiastic, but then they would wander off and talk about where they went to college and what their major was. Iowans don't want to be told by kids from out of state how to vote.''
Moreover, the 122,000 Iowa caucusgoers represented only about one in five of all registered Iowa Democrats. So even if they were all first-time voters, there were still far more people who were not inspired to turn out.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: IOWA
