WHEN you raise the lid on a pot of good biriyani, the Indian equivalent of arroz con pollo or paella, the smell should beguile you: chicken, butter and spices should dominate, followed by the subtle aroma of basmati rice. You might even smell the salt.
This is one of the world's great dishes, and yet in restaurants it is often underspiced and made without care. I was served a particularly memorable version in New Delhi at a restaurant known for its steamed dishes. The restaurant used clay pots and sealed the lids with dough. While I am sure that both of these features helped matters along, neither is practical for the home cook.
Nonetheless, I was determined to recreate the dish. If the biriyani below is not the equivalent of the one served in India, it is fragrant, delicious and hard to stop eating.
The dish must be made carefully, but it is not difficult. The chicken is not browned, which actually makes it easier than many similar preparations. One key is to use butter, not oil or margarine (I am sure the ultimate biriyani has more butter than this version) and good spices: cardamom in the pod, whole cloves, a cinnamon stick and real saffron. (It is red and costs about $35 an ounce, but is worth it.) Good coarse salt does not hurt either, and the better the chicken, the happier you will be when you bite into it.
It is also important to leave the lid on as much as possible. I am not one who believes that rice must be cooked undisturbed, but in this instance you want to make sure the chicken cooks fairly quickly and that the aroma remains in the pot. The goal, remember, is to smell everything.
CHICKEN BIRIYANI  Time: 1 hour
4 tablespoons butter  1 large onion, chopped  Coarse salt and ground black pepper  1 large pinch saffron  10 whole cardamom pods  5 cloves  1 3-inch cinnamon stick  1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger  1 1/2 cups basmati rice  3 cups chicken stock  1 3- to 4-pound chicken, cut up and trimmed of excess fat; skin removed if desired
1/4 cup slivered blanched almonds, optional.
1. Put 2 tablespoons butter in a deep skillet or casserole that can be covered. Turn heat to medium-high. Add onion and some salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until onion softens, 5 to 10 minutes. Add spices, and cook, stirring, another minute.  2. Add rice, and cook, stirring, until ingredients are well combined, 2 or 3 minutes. Add stock, chicken and more salt and pepper, and bring to a boil. Cover and simmer.  3. Cook undisturbed for about 25 minutes. When chicken and rice are tender and liquid is absorbed, turn heat off. If either chicken or rice is not quite done, add no more than  1/2 cup boiling water, and cook until done.  4. Melt remaining butter in a small skillet over medium heat. Add almonds (or simply melt butter), and brown lightly. Pour mixture over biriyani, and sprinkle with a bit more salt. Let rest 2 or 3 minutes. Take pot to table, and serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
Note: Cardamom seeds can be eaten, but cloves should be removed after cooking.
THE MINIMALIST
