NBC came late to the network bidding war last year over an interview with Michael Jackson, which was to be timed for the February sweeps. On the auction block were a proposed interview with Mr. Jackson and videotapes taken by the Jackson camp, including a rare interview with his former wife and another of a conversation between Mr. Jackson and a British journalist, Martin Bashir.
Network officials knew that Fox had the inside track, but NBC chose to play a valuable card in its hand. NBC made a written offer to pre-empt an investigative program into Mr. Jackson by ''Dateline,'' an NBC News program, an offer that the Jackson side understood to mean the segment's cancellation, a senior Jackson adviser said, not just its indefinite postponement, as NBC insists.
In an e-mail message sent on Feb. 15, 2003, Marc Graboff, an NBC business executive, urged Mr. Jackson's representatives to consider a bid of ''$5 million for the exclusive rights to the footage and the interview.''
Mr. Graboff then added: ''Unlike with other networks, the acquisition of the rights to this special on NBC will have the added benefit of pre-empting NBC's planned broadcast of the one-hour Dateline scheduled for Feb. 17.'' The message was copied to the executive producer of ''Dateline'' and to the president of NBC Entertainment.
When first reported a year ago, deep in a Washington Post gossip column, Mr. Graboff said the offer ''was not a quid pro quo: 'You give us the interview, and we'll kill the Dateline special.' ''
But a close adviser to Mr. Jackson who negotiated with NBC said the offer had been precisely that. ''They said they would remove it, that they would not run the special if we gave them the interview,'' said the adviser, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''They would get rid of the special.''
In the end, the Jackson adviser said, the deal with Fox went ahead for more than $5 million, even without an interview with Mr. Jackson, his advisers said, and the NBC offer was spurned.
''Dateline'' expanded its Jackson segment to two hours, and it ran on Feb. 17. Titled ''Michael Jackson Unmasked,'' the special was critical and featured Mr. Jackson's extensive plastic surgery and his ties to a former producer of pornographic films, Marc Schaffel.
Mr. Graboff's e-mail message was followed by a ''term sheet,''laying out the offer and noting carefully that the pre-emption of the ''Dateline'' special was to be a talking point and ''not for inclusion in formal deal memo,'' apparently because Mr. Graboff did not want it widely available. The terms also called for Mr. Jackson's cooperation ''in pre-broadcast publicity/promotion of the Special.''
Two executives named in the memo -- Mr. Graboff and Jeff Zucker, who was the president of NBC Entertainment at the time -- were not available for comment, said Rebecca Marks, an NBC spokeswoman. David Corvo, the ''Dateline'' executive producer, who was named in the message, said yesterday, ''At no time did anyone discuss not running the 'Dateline' material.'' He said he did not see the term sheet and did not remember seeing the e-mail message. He said the negotiations broke down before anyone could consider moving the ''Dateline'' report, but said, ''We would not have agreed'' to cancel it. ''I can't imagine that happening.''
Ms. Marks, the spokeswoman, acknowledged that the offer had been made to Mr. Jackson, but she said that it had been for an entertainment special and that it therefore had not fallen under the rules of the news division, which does not pay for interviews. She said again that the offer to cancel the ''Dateline'' special had been only an offer to move the broadcast date, since there would have been little call for two Jackson specials back to back. ''It wasn't that 'Dateline' won't run ever,'' she said. ''It's that we weren't going to run two specials in February.''
The NBC bid is just the latest example of how the networks are blurring -- if not entirely erasing -- the traditional lines between their entertainment and news divisions. Part news, part spectacle, interviews with celebrities attract huge ratings, offering an incentive for the networks to find ways to work around the standards of their news divisions.
Under the entertainment rubric at NBC and the other networks, the traditional standards of the news division do not apply. Thus, the host of ''Access Hollywood,'' Pat O'Brien, who was suggested in the deal memo as one who might interview Mr. Jackson, could conduct a paid interview, while ''Dateline'' would not.
Asked how viewers could know the difference, a ''Dateline'' spokeswoman, Caryn Mautner, said: ''I don't know how you know the difference. But the news division doesn't pay for interviews.''
Mr. Zucker has been criticized for mixing news and entertainment as far back as when he produced ''Today'' in the 1990's. Now, as head of the network, he places great importance on ''Access Hollywood,'' owned by NBC, and has moved to integrate the show into ''Today'' and ''Dateline,'' which has troubled some NBC News producers.
The networks also use the purchase of videotape from celebrities like Mr. Jackson as another way to compensate them, but in a fashion that cannot be considered a direct payment for an interview, another blurring of the line between news and entertainment. Instead, the interviews are packaged with videotape provided by the interview subject as ''specials,'' which can then be excerpted for news programs or packaged with them.
The furor over Mr. Jackson has raised other allegations of checkbook journalism. CBS denied a recent allegation by a close Jackson adviser that the network's entertainment division agreed to pay $1 million to Mr. Jackson for an interview to run on ''60 Minutes'' last February.
Both CBS and the adviser said the interview had fallen through after CBS refused to pay for the interview in advance, while the ''60 Minutes'' correspondent Ed Bradley sat waiting at Neverland Ranch. CBS says it never agreed to pay in advance and insists that CBS News was not paying.
The adviser also said that CBS had paid another $1 million for a Christmas Day interview with Mr. Jackson by Mr. Bradley for ''60 Minutes.'' CBS has denied this, too.
The NBC offer last February came in the midst of a bidding frenzy over an interview with Mr. Jackson and videotape taken by the Jackson camp of an interview with his his former wife Debbie Rowe, who had never spoken in public since giving up custody of their children, and of Mr. Jackson visiting a sick child, the boy who subsequently accused the star of molesting him.
Mr. Jackson's representatives were selling the videotape to counter Mr. Bashir's damaging documentary, made for Granada Television and rebroadcast on ABC, in which Mr. Jackson acknowledged that he sometimes shared his bed with children. In the documentary the boy held Mr. Jackson's hand and said he often slept in his bed while Mr. Jackson slept on the floor.
The videotape sparked a complaint by an official from the boy's school, which led to an investigation by the authorities.
That ABC broadcast drew more than 27 million viewers.
In the end Mr. Jackson took up more than 10 hours on prime-time network television and another 10 hours on cable in the two-week period beginning last Feb. 6, during a sweeps month, when advertising rates are set.
As for last year's negotiations ahead of sweeps, Ms. Marks said if NBC had gotten the interview, there would have been little reason to broadcast the ''Dateline'' special.
But Ms. Mautner, the spokeswoman for ''Dateline,'' said the special would have been shown later, though she acknowledged that Mr. Zucker, now president of NBC Entertainment, News and the Cable Group, is in charge of programming prime time, including ''Dateline.''
''There's a line between our entertainment and news divisions, and they cannot kill a news special,'' she said. ''Entertainment doesn't have the authority to kill a news special.''
Within the network, however, not everyone is so sure. A senior NBC executive, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the lines between news and entertainment are increasingly unclear.
''We're at a crossroads, quite frankly,'' the executive said. ''It needs to be clear. If networks are going to make that choice, and I'm not necessarily advocating it, it needs to be up front. You can't play it both ways. Either acknowledge it, admit it, do it, or keep church and state separated.''
