A presidential State of the Union address is always a bit like a wedding, a stately, yet celebratory occasion that lays out a grand vision for the future. But when the State of the Union is delivered in an election year, just one day after a blistering contest among Democrats seeking to defeat a Republican president, the celebration can turn a bit prickly.
That was certainly the case on Tuesday night, as President Bush took his vision for the nation to a Capitol riven by politics.
In the Senate, Democrats were still parsing the surprise victory of one of their colleagues, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, in the Iowa caucuses on Monday. Some House Democrats, meanwhile, bemoaned the withdrawal of Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the former Democratic leader, from the race. In both chambers, they cast aside the usual niceties that accompany the annual State of the Union address -- hours before the speech even began.
Some, like Representative Robert Wexler, Democrat of Florida, went so far as to issue news releases lambasting the address in advance. Others, like Senator Byron L. Dorgan, Democrat of North Dakota, simply made their views known in the course of hallway conversations with reporters.
''I'm told that the thrust of the message from the president will be 'stay the course,' '' Mr. Dorgan said Tuesday afternoon. ''If that's true, the message is off track.''
Republicans, for their part, welcomed the president with the kind of warmth and good cheer reserved for a conquering hero -- or at least a commander in chief.
Mr. Bush took pains to remind his audience that the United States was still a nation at war. But he also laid out what Senator Bill Frist, the Republican leader, called a ''very aggressive'' domestic policy agenda, including initiatives on health care, space exploration and immigration. Many of these initiatives have little or no chance of passing Congress this year, but Republicans went out of their way to praise them nonetheless.
''It demonstrates leadership to tough problems, tough challenges with demonstrated leadership -- boldness, vision, courage, looking for the future,'' Dr. Frist said, ''and we all like that in our leadership, and we all admire it tremendously.''
The speech came on the first day of the new Congressional session, and many lawmakers had not seen one another since Thanksgiving. But the extended winter break did little to ease the bitter partisan bickering that prevailed on Capitol Hill last year, and some members of Congress were clearly looking toward Mr. Bush to help lift the tone.
''For several weeks now, the president has been hammered by candidates in Iowa and elsewhere, and so that can't help but take its toll,'' said Senator Ben Nelson, Democrat of Nebraska. ''I hope the president can rise above it, and I hope that if he offers to be conciliatory, that it will be accepted.''
Every State of the Union address is both a statement of policy and politics, and this year's address, coming at the outset of the presidential election season, was no exception. The White House's choice of guests -- among them military people, including an Army chief warrant officer who participated in the raids to capture Saddam Hussein, and a woman who stands to benefit from the new Medicare prescription drug legislation -- served to highlight what Mr. Bush sees as his domestic and foreign achievements.
The timing of the speech reflected the political season as well. The White House artfully scheduled the address in a manner that would draw attention from the Democratic contests in Iowa and New Hampshire; last year, the State of the Union speech was delivered on Jan. 28.
Republicans on Capitol Hill seemed especially eager for a shift in the news.
''The president's got a great story to tell about what he's accomplished for America the last three years,'' said Senator Rick Santorum, a member of the Republican leadership.
Noticeably absent from the Capitol were the three Senate Democrats running for president -- Mr. Kerry and Senators John Edwards and Joseph I. Lieberman -- as well as Representative Gephardt and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, all of whom were in New Hampshire campaigning.
Mr. Kucinich gave his own state of the union address in New Hampshire, with a decidedly different spin. He proclaimed the country is ''in a perilous condition due to fear, war, tax cuts to wealthy Americans, and trade policies leading to widespread unemployment.''
Also absent was Senator Trent Lott, the Mississippi Republican, who was asked by Senator Frist to watch the speech in a secret location -- a precaution that would ensure the survival of at least one member of Congress should the Capitol come under a terrorist attack.
Absent, as well, was the sense of good will toward the president that some Democrats felt last year as Mr. Bush addressed the nation. Republicans had just taken control of both houses of Congress, and lawmakers had several months earlier authorized Mr. Bush to use force against Iraq. As the president laid out his case for war, some Democrats applauded alongside their Republican colleagues.
Among them was Representative Steny H. Hoyer, the Democratic whip in the House. Asked Tuesday morning if he would clap this year, Mr. Hoyer reiterated his strong support for ousting Mr. Hussein as the right thing to do. But he followed with this caveat, about Mr. Bush: ''His domestic program has been an abject failure, and I'm certainly not going to cheer and holler about empty rhetoric.''
STATE OF THE UNION: THE CHAMBER
