It was less than two weeks ago that Stephon Marbury made his debut with the Knicks at Madison Square Garden. But the cheers soon changed to chants calling for the firing of Don Chaney when the Houston Rockets scored 21 consecutive points.
Since then, the Knicks have won five of six games, including the last four. But as the Knicks prepared for their game against the Rockets on Wednesday night, the first true test of what they hope is now a different team, they remembered the loss.
They remembered the 23-2 deficit and the humiliating 111-79 defeat. Marbury remembered how the Rockets took advantage of him when he barely had time to learn his teammates' names, much less the Knicks' system. Rockets Coach Jeff Van Gundy sent a big man out to double-team Marbury when he crossed halfcourt, forcing him to try to pass to teammates he could not find.
''I hope he does that tomorrow,'' said Marbury, who was named the Eastern Conference player of the week on Tuesday after averaging 22.5 points and 12.3 assists in four games last week. ''I wasn't as aggressive playing against them, because I didn't know where guys are going to be.''
Marbury anticipated that in the coming game, ''They're going to have to play straight up.''
Marbury and the Knicks do not believe they have reached their final destination just because of the progress they have made since the loss to the Rockets 12 days ago.
''We're not where we want to be,'' Marbury said. ''We're not playing like a team like Detroit. When you start winning like that, that's when you can say, 'We are there.' Right now, we're still learning each other, still playing off each other.''
Lenny Wilkens, who is 3-0 as the Knicks' coach, said of the recent success: ''We don't want to get fooled by it, but we feel we've taken a step in the right direction. But we got several more steps to take, so we have to keep working at what we have to do.''
While the game with the Rockets could serve as a measuring stick of how much the Knicks have improved, they dismissed the loss to Houston as an aberration.
''We were a bad team then,'' Marbury said. ''We play with way more confidence. We play better defense. The way we see the game is totally different.
''I think when we go into a game now our confidence, as far as winning, it definitely went up. We feel like we can win every game.''
The Knicks know that for every day that they move forward, there is the distinct possibility that the roster could be shaken up again. The team's president, Isiah Thomas, has worked two deals already and has made no secret of his desire to do more. And the players, despite the stability that they sacrifice, back his efforts.
''That's what it's all about,'' Marbury said. ''The only thing that you can do is try to get to the point where you've got things playing the way how you want them to be playing, and having the guys fit in all the pieces of the puzzle.''
Allan Houston said: ''We'll continue to look forward. We don't want to keep thinking about, 'We have to get to this, we have to get to that.'
''We look at the standings. We look at the possibility of even maybe winning the division. We don't know. But at the same time you have to look at here and now, how to make improvements now.''
PRO BASKETBALL
