Belinda Stronach resigned Tuesday as president and chief executive of Magna International, the auto parts company her father founded almost a half-century ago, to seek the leadership of the Conservative Party in Canada.
In announcing Ms. Stronach's departure from Magna, the company said that her father, Frank Stronach, would take the title of president for the time being. Mr. Stronach, 71, is the company's chairman and controlling shareholder.
One analyst said that Ms. Stronach's most likely successor would be Siegfried Wolf, an executive vice chairman and head of Magna's European operations.
With 72,000 employees and over 200 factories, mostly in Canada, the United States and Europe, Magna produces an array of parts and assembles vehicles. It reported net income of $384 million in the first nine months of last year on sales of $10.7 billion.
Sean McAlinden, chief economist at the Center for Automotive Research in Ann Arbor, Mich., described the company as one of the automotive industry's ''most widely admired firms, except by the unions.''
Even without Ms. Stronach at the helm, ''I think they'll be fine,'' said Nicholas D. Morton, an analyst at RBC Capital Markets in Toronto. Shares of Magna, which have risen by almost two-thirds over the last year, fell 10 cents, to $81.89.
Several analysts said that Ms. Stronach's role as chief executive was a limited one. According to Mr. McAlinden, she was most involved in ''policy, show-the-flag and being at government meetings.''
Magna's operating units have a high degree of autonomy and their senior managers include two former chief executives of the parent company, including Donald Walker, one of Ms. Stronach's two ex-husbands.
Mr. McAlinden said that one factor behind Magna's success had been its ability to secure government backing for many of its projects in the United States and Canada. The directors of the parent company and its listed subsidiaries include three former premiers of Ontario, a former Canadian industry minister and a former chancellor of Austria, where Frank Stronach was born and raised.
As Mr. McAlinden sees it, Ms. Stronach's new political career, if successful, ''will not harm the company.'' Among her responsibilities at Magna was a scholarship program for students who write the best essay on the topic: ''If I were prime minister ''
Two hours after announcing her resignation, Ms. Stronach told a group of cheering supporters at a veterans' hall in suburban Toronto that she was seeking the currently vacant leadership of the Conservative Party of Canada.
''From time to time I will make mistakes,'' Ms. Stronach acknowledged in her first stump speech. ''I'm not a professional politician. I'm a mother, a business person and a second-generation Canadian.''
But noting that some people thought she was not up to the task when she was named to the top job at Magna three years ago, Ms. Stronach, 37, said, ''I rose to that challenge as I will rise to the challenge of leading the new Conservative Party.''
The party, formed late last year through the merger of two right-of-center groups, has 58 of the 301 seats in the House of Commons, a third the number held by the ruling Liberals, led by Paul Martin, the prime minister.
