In the perennial swing state that is Florida, there was little unanimity among several groups watching the State of the Union address.
In Oregon, meanwhile, the high unemployment rate colored the reactions of viewers watching the speech.
An immigration lawyer in Miami Beach rained scorn on President Bush's defense of the war on Iraq. Retirees in Winter Park, outside Orlando, praised Mr. Bush's every word, saying he had made the world safer, while college students watching from a bookstore here perked up only at his education proposals.
The lawyer, David Shahoulian, noted with irritation that Mr. Bush had made little mention of his original reasons for going to war.
''He started and ended with 'Life is better without Saddam,' and no one can argue with that,'' Mr. Shahoulian, 32, said as he watched the speech in a friend's living room in South Beach. ''But the reasons we went to war -- the guy's supposed weapons of mass destruction and ties to Al Qaeda -- he just kind of stuck that in the middle.''
But at Winter Park Towers, an apartment complex for retirees in a wealthy suburb of Orlando, Roland Lee, a retired civil engineer who is 80, applauded Mr. Bush's urging that the Patriot Act be renewed.
Mary Danielson, 80, a former nurse, added, ''It would be more dangerous than ever if Saddam was still in power.''
In Oregon, where the unemployment rate was at 7.3 percent in November, the economy weighed heavily on voters interviewed. In 2000, the state's voters split 47 percent to 47 percent for George W. Bush and Al Gore, with 5 percent voting for Ralph Nader.
Oregon's outcome was almost as close as Florida's, which required a recount that lasted weeks and determined that Mr. Bush won the state by just 537 votes.
Richard L. Johnston, 73, a retired civil engineer for Southern Pacific Railroad and a Korean War veteran, watched the speech in his living room in northeast Portland with his wife and his dog, a chocolate Lab named Mocha. Twenty-five minutes into the speech, when Mr. Bush was still discussing Iraq, the war on terror and various foreign policy threats, Mr. Johnston sounded irritated, saying, ''Let's get to the economy here.''
When the president did turn to the economy and talked about economic growth, Mr. Johnston was skeptical. ''You won't convince anybody in Oregon it's better,'' he said.
While he was critical of Mr. Bush on the economy, Mr. Johnston said he agreed with the president's approach on security.
''I go along with him on the home security and so forth,'' he said, ''some of these things we should have been doing before.''
Sam and Linda Dahan, also residents of Portland and both unemployed, had a similar reaction to the time Mr. Bush spent on foreign policy versus the economy.
''It's been a jobless recovery and he didn't address that in my mind,'' said Mr. Dahan, 49, who was laid off last year from a high-technology firm, Electro Scientific Industries. ''I hear that the economy is going up, but I don't see it for me.''
Ms. Dahan, 53, was laid off in 2001, from the Portland marketing department of Enron. ''I'm not a Bush basher,'' she said, ''but I felt like it was just a pep rally.''
Ms. Dahan said she was torn in 2000 between Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore, ultimately voting for Mr. Gore. Mr. Dahan, an immigrant from Morocco, is not yet an American citizen and thus could not vote, but he said he would have voted for Mr. Gore.
Mr. Dahan said he was disturbed by the president's prominent and early discussion of the Patriot Act.
''I really regret that we've lost some of our freedoms,'' he said. ''It echoes through history that when freedoms are taken away they are very hard to bring back.''
Jim Burns, 64, a retired cherry and apple farmer from Milton-Freewater, in northeast Oregon, is a registered Republican who voted for Mr. Bush in 2000 and said he agreed with his assertion that it was America's role to pursue the ''thugs'' and ''killers'' of the world.
''I'm a believer in the war on terror,'' he said. ''I think we have to clean the world up and we're the only ones who can do it.''
Mr. Burns, however, was critical of Mr. Bush's plan to grant temporary work permits to millions of undocumented workers.
''I oppose amnesty,'' he said, adding that other farmers in the Walla Walla River Valley, where migrant workers -- including several who worked for him -- pick the Bing cherries and Red Delicious apples during their harvests, agreed.
During the address, Mr. Burns said that the plan was still too vague for him to understand it. ''When he said, 'no amnesty,' that helped, but really, he didn't expound on it so much that I know a heck of a lot more than I knew about it before.''
Mr. Burns said that while he recognized the importance of immigrant labor to the nation's economy, he opposed citizenship for those who entered the country illegally.
In Miami, Mr. Shahoulian, the immigration lawyer, said Mr. Bush's plan for immigration reform was not nearly as strong as two other sets of proposals that came earlier, which he feared would now be shelved. The main problem with Mr. Bush's plan, he said, was that it provided no path to permanent citizenship.
Mr. Shahoulian also cringed at Mr. Bush's mention of tax cuts, saying that they were not justifiable. ''We had a giant surplus when he passed them, but all the surplus has disappeared,'' he said. ''And now he wants to make the tax cuts permanent?''
At a bookstore on the campus of Florida International University in Miami, most of Mr. Bush's talk about tax cuts and the economy meant nothing to the handful of students watching the speech. But Grisell Gomez, 23, was struck by Mr. Bush's statement that the deficit would be cut in half over the next five years. She wondered how he could do it without reversing his tax cuts.
In Winter Park, however, John Hailand, 86, a former research executive, was of a different mind. ''The tax cuts did a great deal to get us back on our feet,'' he said.
Suzanna Sharkey, who watched the speech with Mr. Shahoulian in her South Beach apartment, said the president's emphasis on national security and the war in Iraq made her sick with frustration. A teacher at a school for juvenile offenders, Ms. Sharkey, 35, said Mr. Bush should invest less in the military and more in education.
''He's spending what, $84 billion on this war?'' she said. ''And I have kids coming to school who can't even afford health care and don't have enough money to buy lunch.''
STATE OF THE UNION: THE VOTERS
