WINES from the Languedoc have long been labeled as coarse, cheap and mass-produced. But now, in a world populated largely by hyperambitious wines, there's something lovable about their lack of pretense. You can buy a bottle and know there is a pretty good chance it will be acceptable. The winemakers know how to make wine, and they know how to make cheap wine.
This makes it a handy choice to drink at home. The wines our tasting panel tried were mostly concentrated (even a little inky), medium-bodied and uninhibited. Each taste was more clamor than chord.
For the first dish I paired with a Languedoc wine, I gave barley the risotto treatment, hydrating the grains with a mushroom broth (made by pouring chicken stock over dried porcini mushrooms). At the end, I folded in fresh thyme, butter and grated Parmesan cheese. The resulting dish was sturdy, and happily slaked by a sturdy wine.
That is as elaborate an accompaniment as I would recommend. Otherwise all you end up with is a meal that makes the wine look cheap. Best to keep that to yourself. Another time, I pan-roasted lamb shoulder chops on a bed of crushed garlic cloves, and served them with roasted potatoes and sautéed spinach. Bistro fare for a bistro wine.
PORCINI AND BARLEY 'RISOTTO'  Time: 40 minutes
1 cup dried porcini  5 cups chicken broth
1/2 cup chopped onion  2 cloves garlic, chopped  2 tablespoons olive oil  1 cup barley, rinsed
1/2 cup white wine  1 tablespoon butter  2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme  1 cup grated Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese.
1. Place porcini in heatproof bowl. In medium pan, bring broth to a boil. Pour over porcini, and let sit 15 minutes. Remove mushrooms, and chop. Strain broth through cheesecloth.  2. Scatter onion and garlic in a large heavy pan, and pour oil on top. Sauté until onion is translucent. Add barley, and cook, stirring, to toast barley, about 5 minutes. Pour in wine, and reduce until it is almost gone.  3. Begin adding mushroom broth a little at a time, stirring until it is absorbed. (It should simmer rapidly.) Continue adding broth until barley is just tender but still firm. Remove from heat, and stir in mushrooms, butter, thyme and half the cheese. Ladle into 4 shallow bowls, and sprinkle with rest of cheese.
Yield: 4 servings.
Pairings
