Toronto forward Darcy Tucker was cut under his left eye and spitting venom.
The Maple Leafs held a one-goal lead over the Islanders late in the second period Tuesday night when Islanders center Jason Blake's stick caught Tucker flush in the face, sending him to the ice as if Blake had landed a haymaker to Tucker's jaw.
No penalty was called, and Tucker jumped to his feet, circling a scrum of onlookers, pointing at Blake and promising retribution. Tucker, who does not wear a visor, left the game and was examined at a hospital.
It was the sort of play that could have served as inspiration for an Islanders team that is all too familiar with Tucker -- he knocked the Islanders' captain, Michael Peca, out of the 2002 playoffs with a low-bridge hip check, blowing out his left knee. Peca has grown accustomed to leaving Toronto disappointed. The Islanders have not won here since March 2002 and remained vexed by the Maple Leafs, who won, 2-0, in front of 19,367 at the Air Canada Center.
Six high-sticking penalties were called in the game, but the Blake-Tucker incident was not among them. ''I was dumbfounded,'' Blake said of Tucker's injury. ''I didn't think it was my stick. I'm not the kind of guy to go out and stick guys.''
Islanders Coach Steve Stirling said: ''Refs miss calls all the time. That doesn't give him the right to do whatever he wants.''
Ed Belfour stopped 25 Islanders shots for his fifth shutout and his second victory in his past nine starts.
Opening a three-game road trip, the Islanders (22-20-4-1) lost for the first time in four games but held on to the eighth spot in the Eastern Conference, a point ahead of Atlanta.
The Isles had more quality scoring chances in the opening period, but the Maple Leafs (25-12-8-3) scored the only goal, at 9 minutes 2 seconds.
After Toronto forward Gary Roberts muscled Islanders defenseman Janne Niinimaa away from a dump-in, Roberts funneled a pass to Mats Sundin, who relayed the puck to Mikael Renberg, sneaking off the point. With Sundin providing the screen, Renberg beat Islanders goaltender Garth Snow with a shot just off the ice for his seventh goal.
Snow stopped 19 of 21 Toronto shots. The Islanders came close to tying it midway through the second, when Mattias Weinhandl accepted a drop pass from Dave Scatchard and whipped a wrist shot that beat Belfour but ricocheted off the post.
Toronto scored an insurance goal at 17:21 of the third when Sundin found Roberts in the left slot. It was his 17th goal of the season.
CANADIENS 4, FLYERS 1
José Théodore made 22 saves and Richard Zednik scored two power-play goals to lead Montreal at Philadelphia. Before the game, the Flyers acquired defenseman Danny Markov from Carolina for right wing Justin Williams. (AP)
THRASHERS 4, SABRES 1
Slava Kozlov scored two goals and Pasi Nurminen turned away 24 shots, leading host Atlanta. (AP)
OILERS 3, STARS 0
Raffi Torres had two goals and Tommy Salo earned a shutout for host Edmonton. (AP)
SENATORS 3, HURRICANES 1
Marian Hossa had a goal and two assists for visiting Ottawa. (AP)
HOCKEY
