The chanting began, faintly from the upper seats, when the Rangers fell behind by 2-0 against the Boston Bruins in the second period last night at Madison Square Garden.
''Fire Sather!'' the fans yelled. ''Fire Sather!''
The chants grew louder and more widespread in the third period, after the Rangers fell behind by 3-1.
''Fire Sather!'' they repeated. ''Fire Sather!''
The chanting reached its highest volume and greatest saturation in the final minutes of a 4-1 Boston victory.
''Fire Sather!'' the fans concluded from all sides as they put their coats on and left the building. ''Fire Sather!''
Regime change for the Rangers would not be as complicated as it was for the Knicks. Should the executives at Madison Square Garden accept this advice and do with their hockey leadership as they did recently with their basketball team, they could dismiss the president, general manager and coach of the Rangers with a one-sentence news release.
For now, Glen Sather holds all three positions. What did he think of the chanting?
''I'm not going to make any comment about what the fans say or do,'' he said. ''They have a right.''
Given the recent Knicks' dismissals of General Manager Scott Layden and Coach Don Chaney, is Sather concerned that he might be treated in a similar way? ''I'm not going to comment about anything like that,'' Sather said.
Since Isiah Thomas replaced Layden and Lenny Wilkens replaced Chaney, the Garden's basketball team is playing better and the fans are interested again. Certainly the Rangers, and the National Hockey League in general, need a jolt of big-city interest.
Although the Islanders and the Devils are ahead of the Rangers in the Atlantic Division, it is the Manhattan team that drives hockey interest, up or down, in the market. Sather's Rangers have helped to make the sport nearly invisible here.
For fans who subscribe to Cablevision, which owns the Garden and the Rangers, it is more difficult this season to see this struggling team and the other two, too. In some communities, Cablevision has bumped its local hockey channels to a more expensive tier. In other words, it costs more to see bad hockey than it did before.
On talk radio, it is easier to find a January baseball debate than conversation about the three hockey teams. With the league headquarters in Midtown, the Rangers, the Devils and the Islanders make up the Bermuda Triangle of the sport. It disappears here, a mere decade after the Rangers won the Stanley Cup and spurred a huge surge of interest.
Last night's defeat was the Rangers' second in a row and their fourth game in succession without a victory. They have won just one of their last six. It has been almost four seasons since Sather swaggered into town from Edmonton with all the chilly bluster of an Alberta Clipper.
If the playoffs began today, his team would miss them, just as it has missed them for the past six seasons. With six games in the next 10 days and injuries beginning to damage the roster -- as is often the case with veteran teams -- the Rangers face a midwinter reckoning at a time of the season when calculations turn as cold as the air outside the rinks and when emotions can become heated.
It began Monday afternoon in Boston, when Eric Lindros broke Joe Thornton's cheekbone with a punch.
The Bruins retaliated when Dan McGillis injured Darius Kasparaitis's leg and knee and Doug Doull cut Petr Nedved's face.
For the Islanders, the friction came in a team practice Sunday, when goalie Garth Snow tangled with forward Oleg Kvasha. Practice was also edgy for the Devils on Friday, when Igor Larionov left early after harsh words from Coach Pat Burns -- as if the defending Stanley Cup champions did not have enough to worry about with Scott Stevens's head injury.
Last night, the Rangers looked tired, as veteran teams sometimes do early in the second half of an 82-game season. It is the veteran team that Sather has assembled. Would a change in leadership have a turnaround effect on the Rangers? It is harder to accomplish in hockey. Basketball teams use seven or eight players for most of the game; hockey teams need at least 14 with many minutes.
Last night's debacle was not without a humorous touch. In a promotion that probably did not take into consideration the possible mockery, the Garden staged a Retro Rangers Night, harking back to the 1970's.
The Rangers wore the strange shield-crest jerseys they first wore in 1976-77, when they missed the playoffs. It was as if the Garden were intentionally reviving memories of a dismal season -- at a time when the customers already have so much to chant and boo about.
N.H.L. Analysis
