Thousands of Iraqis demonstrated again on Tuesday in four major cities, demanding that the United States turn over Saddam Hussein to stand trial here and renewing calls for direct elections as the first step toward self-rule.
The protesters, mainly Shiite Muslims, gathered in central Baghdad, at a square where a towering statue of Saddam Hussein was torn down by jubilant Iraqis in April; in Basra, in the south; and in Najaf and Kerbala, two Shiite holy cities.
On Monday as many as 100,000 Shiites flowed through the main arteries of the capital echoing the call of their most respected leader, Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for direct elections of the Iraqi government, which is to take over from the American-led civil administration by July 1.
The spate of demonstrations and a suicide-bomb attack in central Baghdad on Sunday that killed 25 people have heightened the sense of combustibility. On Tuesday night, a mortar shell landed inside the civil administration's compound, exploding in the parking lot of a building that houses many offices and some soldiers.
As many as 5,000 people in Baghdad called Tuesday for Mr. Hussein to be handed over quickly to Iraq to stand trial as a war criminal. The United States is now holding him as a prisoner of war, and L. Paul Bremer III, the head of the civil administration here, reiterated in an interview on Tuesday with CNN in Washington that Mr. Hussein would be transferred to Iraqi authorities in the future.
That standing pledge failed to convince the marchers in Baghdad, many of them followers of Moktada al-Sadr, a young cleric and harsh critic of American policies in Iraq. Some protesters called for Mr. Hussein's execution.
The broader issue, however, remained the mechanism by which the Americans plan to turn over authority. The civil administration now plans to relinquish power to a government chosen by caucuses in Iraq's 18 provinces. The Americans argue that the timetable is too short for valid elections.
Long denied power under successive imperial and native governments, Iraq's Shiites, about 60 percent of the population, want direct elections, which they believe would tilt authority to them.
Against the backdrop of such political tensions, Iraq's external debt was reduced on Tuesday when the United Arab Emirates said it would forgive most of the $3.8 billion debt owed by Iraq, The Associated Press reported. The announcement, made by Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed, crown prince of Abu Dhabi, the capital of the Emirates, followed a recent visit by former Secretary of State James A. Baker III, who has been appointed by the Bush administration to persuade countries to forgive Iraq's prodigious debts.
Iraq owes a total of about $120 billion. Arab countries hold about $80 billion of the debt, and the so-called Paris Club of industrial nations the remaining $40 billion.
