The leader of an unofficial American delegation that visited North Korea this month said Tuesday that North Korea seemed anxious to resolve differences with the United States over its nuclear program.
North Korean officials told the delegation that the Bush administration's central concern, complete and verifiable dismantlement of their nuclear weapons program, was within reach, said John W. Lewis, the group's leader, in a telephone interview.
He spoke a day before another member of the group, Siegfried Hecker, a former director of Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico, is scheduled to tell the Senate of his conclusions about the state of the nuclear complex in Yongbyon that was the focus of the group's visit.
Dr. Lewis, a professor emeritus of Chinese politics at Stanford, is the founder of the Center for International Security and Cooperation at Stanford, which seeks to influence policy by engaging foreign officials and citizens on a second track, independent of the United States government. In this case, he led a delegation of civilian experts to North Korea, in advance of a delayed second round of six-nation talks to try to defuse the threat that North Korea might be building nuclear weapons.
Dr. Lewis declined to speak about what he had seen at the complex, but he said North Korea clearly hoped to present a more reasonable and friendly face to the West, including to the United States. On this visit to North Korea, his 10th since 1987, Dr. Lewis said he had seen evidence of real change in North Korea.
One sign, he said, was a bustling market several blocks long in Pyongyang that was divided into hundreds of privately run stalls, many of them full of meat and vegetables for sale. The visitors were told that the farmers were allowed to sell their goods after meeting production quotas.
In addition, Dr. Lewis said he and his colleagues had noticed brisk traffic in the capital and the use of cellular phones and the Internet. And they noted the availability of cable television in their hotel rooms.
North Korea has been in the iron grip of dictatorship for decades, with total government control of all aspects of daily life. It also imposes some of the tightest restrictions on foreigners anywhere; many visitors report seeing only what the government wants them to see.
Earlier this month, North Korea offered to suspend its nuclear weapons program in anticipation of further negotiations. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell welcomed the move as ''a positive step,'' though it is far from the ''complete, irreversible and verifiable'' dismantling of the project sought by the administration in the six-nation talks.
--------------------
Rights Abuses Charged
(By The New York Times), SEOUL, Jan. 20 -- Amnesty International charged Tuesday that North Korea's government distributed food aid unfairly, using it ''as an instrument of political and economic pressure and a means to persecute perceived political opponents.''
In a report, the human rights group said people caught stealing ''the food necessary to their survival'' had been publicly executed.
