In the Cradle of Coaches, the ice hockey coach is hoping the success of the football coaches will rub off on his players. Miami University is still savoring its football team's 13-1 season, Mid-American Conference championship and G.M.A.C. Bowl victory over Louisville.
At Miami, which gave the football world the likes of Woody Hayes, Ara Parseghian and Bo Schembechler, hockey is in its 26th season as a varsity sport. Only twice during that span have the RedHawks qualified for the N.C.A.A. tournament.
From his office in Goggin Ice Arena in Oxford, Ohio, Coach Enrico Blasi does not have a view of Yager Stadium, the football field several blocks to the north, but he believes that his skaters can be inspired by the football team's accomplishments.
''It really shows college athletics at its finest,'' Blasi said in a telephone interview. ''When a group of young men can get together and believe in one goal, it's really exciting for our university. And it really has helped our team, knowing that, you know, Why not? Why can't we do it? Who says we can't?''
The past four seasons, Miami (13-9-2, 10-5-1 Central Collegiate Hockey Association) could not get past the first round of the league tournament. But Blasi has the RedHawks in first place in his fifth season, his first with a totally different team than the one he inherited from Mark Mazzolini, who is now at Harvard. But with 2 points separating the top six teams, Blasi is not clearing shelf space for a trophy.
''We've been in first place since Dec. 5,'' he said. ''So I don't think you can look at the standings right now and decipher a lot about what's going on.''
Last January, Miami's leading scorer, Derek Edwardson, injured his left knee and was out for the season. Now Edwardson, a senior forward, is tied for fourth in the nation in scoring with 12 goals and 19 assists.
''He's come back to where he left off,'' Blasi said. ''He's really done a nice job in the summer to work his way back. He's our captain and our leader.''
Edwardson plays on a line with two freshmen, one of whom, Matt Christie, leads the team in goals with 15.
Blasi's agenda for the remaining six weekends of the C.C.H.A. regular season: trying not to look too far forward, getting better every day, and peaking in March.
The Miami athletic department Web site states, ''At last count, more than 100 Miami graduates were active in coaching or administrative work in the professional and collegiate levels.''
Referring to the Cradle of Coaches nickname, Blasi said, ''It just kind of filters through that people want to get back to Miami, whether it be in hockey or other sports, and that's happening more and more.''
HOCKEY EAST  Boston University Is Struggling
If the Terriers (6-8-6, 3-7-2) are going to turn their disappointing season around, their last chance may be this weekend when they play host to third-ranked Maine (16-5-1, 8-3-1).
Boston University dropped both ends of a home-and-home series against archrival Boston College last weekend. The defeats, by 5-1 and 3-2, left B.U. reeling and laid bare its shortcomings: lack of offense and subpar goaltending. Adding injury to the insult, Boston College was without two standouts, Ben Eaves and Dave Spina, and Patrick Eaves left Saturday's game early after blocking a shot with his sternum. Coach Jack Parker told reporters after the game, ''Maybe if B.C. loses four or five more people, we can beat them.''
B.U. has lost three of four games since registering back-to-back 5-5 ties at Minnesota.
W.C.H.A.  Showdown in Minnesota
Top-ranked North Dakota (17-2-2, 11-1-2), which has gone 13 straight games without a defeat, travels to Minneapolis for a weekend series against Minnesota. The Golden Gophers (13-8-3, 8-7-1 Western Collegiate Hockey Association), the two-time defending national champions, have rebounded from a sluggish start and have not lost since Dec. 6, a span of nine games. Last weekend, Minnesota outscored ninth-place Minnesota State, 16-3, over two games.
Kellen Briggs, the Gophers' freshman goalie, won his third W.C.H.A. rookie of the week honor.
WOMEN  Gophers' Darwitz Is Out
Natalie Darwitz, the leading scorer in Division I, may miss the rest of the season, according to the University of Minnesota. Darwitz, a sophomore, tore ligaments in her right elbow in a game Jan. 10 against Minnesota-Duluth. Darwitz led the silver-medal-winning United States team with seven goals in the 2002 Olympics.
Slap Shots
U.S. TEAM VS. COLLEGIANS -- Yale and Princeton play the United States under-18 team this weekend, and some will not be surprised if the high-school-age players win one or both of the games.
The 16- and 17-year-olds lost, 5-3, to Michigan last weekend in Ann Arbor, where the National Development Team Program is based.
HUMANITARIAN FINALISTS -- Five finalists have been named for the 2004 College Hockey Humanitarian Award, presented during Frozen Four week in April. They are Dan Boeser (Wisconsin), Patrick Foley (New Hampshire), Chanda Gunn (Northeastern women), Derek Nisula (Babson) and Mark Persick (Canisius).
COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
