With tears in his eyes and a voice choked with emotion, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri returned Tuesday to the city where his political career began 33 years ago and formally announced that he was abandoning his bid for the presidency.
Mr. Gephardt, who has spent nearly three decades in Congress, said he planned to serve the remainder of his term in the House of Representatives before retiring in December. He said he was not interested in seeking a Senate seat, but did not rule out the possibility that he might accept a vice-presidential slot on a Democratic ticket.
Surrounded by family members and friends who wept openly, Mr. Gephardt congratulated his Democratic rivals and said he accepted his defeat in the Iowa caucuses on Monday. He finished fourth in the race, garnering 11 percent of the vote in a state that he had won handily in his first unsuccessful presidential bid in 1988.
''I accept the results with the knowledge that I gave this campaign everything that I had in me,'' said Mr. Gephardt, 62, who was the Democratic leader in the House for 13 years. ''Today my pursuit of the presidency has reached its end. I'm withdrawing as a candidate and returning to private life after a long time in the warm light of public service.''
Mr. Gephardt's presidential campaign had promoted universal health insurance and fair trade but failed to catch fire with Iowa voters. His withdrawal began a battle for Missouri, which holds its primary on Feb. 3. Once a stronghold of Mr. Gephardt's candidacy, the state will become a battleground.
Mr. Gephardt's advisers said they believed that their candidate, who had spent years cultivating a network of supporters in Iowa, was too familiar to Democrats who were looking for a fresher face. His decision to help write the resolution that authorized the invasion of Iraq also alienated some caucusgoers.
His advisers added that the bruising battle between Mr. Gephardt and former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont, who were initially viewed as the top contenders in Iowa, had allowed Senators John Kerry of Massachusetts and John Edwards of North Carolina to surge far ahead of the field. Mr. Kerry, who came in first in the caucuses, ultimately won the support of most elderly voters and union members in Iowa, who have traditionally made up the bulk of Mr. Gephardt's base.
Campaign aides said their own internal polls were suggesting by last weekend that Mr. Gephardt would probably lose the contest, despite the effort by 21 labor unions to deliver votes.
Mr. Gephardt declined to assess his campaign on Tuesday.
''I'm looking forward,'' he said. ''I'm looking to what comes next.''
His friends and colleagues here focused less on his defeat in Iowa than on his imminent departure from public life. Mr. Gephardt's political career began here in his hometown when he was first elected as an alderman in 1971. In 1976, he was voted into Congress and over the decades he has played a major role in many of the nation's biggest legislative battles over Medicare, trade and the economy.
''It's obviously very sad,'' Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said in a telephone interview from Washington.
''He's been such a forceful voice for the Democratic Party for the last quarter of a century,'' said Mr. Matsui, who endorsed Mr. Gephardt's candidacy and has served with him in Congress since the 1970's. ''To see him now going in another direction, whatever that might be, is kind of a defining moment for many of us who have known him.''
Mr. Gephardt vowed to continue working on the issues that he emphasized in his campaign, including universal health insurance and amending trade deals with Mexico and China that have been blamed for severe job losses in the United States.
''Every day of my working life I've sought to bring positive change to the hard-working men and women of this country and my efforts will not cease in these final months,'' he said. ''My career in public office is coming to an end, but the fight is never over.''
But he also said he hoped to slow down and spend more time with his wife, Jane, and his three children, Matt, Chrissy and Kate, who stood beside him here.
Asked by reporters after his speech what he planned to do with his free time after years of a grueling schedule, Mr. Gephardt smiled. ''Embrace life,'' he said.
''I can take a walk with my wife,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''I can go to movies. I can go to ballgames. I can do all that stuff. And I'm really excited about that.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MISSOURI CONGRESSMAN
