Last night President Bush surveyed the state of his foreign policy over the past year and, unsurprisingly, gave himself high marks. In truth, while there have been achievements, the last year of war in Iraq and stubborn unilateralism on issues ranging from the use of military force to environmental policy and trade have dominated and strained America's relationships with most of the rest of the world.
While it is too early to draw final conclusions about the ultimate success of military operations in Iraq, the fact is that Mr. Bush's decision to engage American forces so heavily without reliable intelligence, real international backing, legitimate United Nations authority or serious postwar planning has exacted a high price, for which he did not account in the rather glossy assessment in his State of the Union address. In last year's speech, Mr. Bush made frightening allusions to Iraqi unconventional weapons presumably available for immediate use, almost all of them subsequently discredited. A pale echo of those inflated claims appeared last night as cryptic references to Iraqi ''weapons of mass destruction-related program activities.''
It was fitting that Iraq figured prominently in Mr. Bush's speech. No decent person regrets the toppling of a heinous dictator who murdered hundreds of thousands of Iraqis, and Mr. Bush can claim credit for his capture. Libya's decision to end its nuclear and other weapons programs and allow inspections was welcome. And Afghanistan is showing the first buds of a democratic government.
But at this point, Mr. Bush's optimistic talk of a ''new Iraq'' that is free and stable is anything but assured. Iraq's Shiite majority and Sunni and Kurdish minorities are grappling for advantage against an essentially arbitrary American deadline for turning over sovereignty to an interim government. American war deaths now stand at over 500, and combat is continuing. Washington is finally asking the U.N. to help smooth the transition to democracy and ensure international legitimacy. But that decision, however welcome it was, followed nearly a year of rudely ignoring U.N. procedures, undermining the authority of the U.N. and ignoring some of America's most important allies.
The burdens of occupying Iraq for what looks certain to be many months to come have severely strained the long-term capacity of American ground forces, both regular Army and reserves. And while the White House has focused its attention on Iraq, other compelling and dangerous crises have been more or less put on hold, at potentially grave risk. By abruptly shifting its attention to Saddam Hussein before fully consolidating peace in Afghanistan, Washington has contributed to a situation where the Afghan central government rules little more than Kabul. While Mr. Bush talked of the Afghans ''building a nation that is free, and proud, and fighting terror,'' the Taliban have re-emerged as a serious force barely two years after what seemed a crushing military defeat. Afghan warlords, at best a fractious bunch and at worst a mortal threat to Afghanistan's democracy, have armies that dwarf the national government's forces. The border with Pakistan remains porous to members of Al Qaeda and other terrorist groups.
In the past year, North Korea has proceeded incrementally toward assembling a nuclear arsenal. Israeli-Palestinian relations have frozen into a seemingly intractable standoff, which poisons Arab attitudes toward the United States, yet the Bush administration is now making virtually no serious effort to push the hostile camps toward negotiations. And Mr. Bush's policies have badly damaged America's alliances with its most important economic and military allies in Europe. Latin American governments are more estranged from the United States than they have been for a long time. Washington was also centrally responsible for the collapse of trade talks that were aimed at ending the crushing unfairness of the rich nations' subsidies for crops that cannot compete on the open market.
Mr. Bush's one-sided emphasis on Iraq is not the only explanation for these multiple reverses, but it figures in all of them. That may explain why Mr. Bush largely passed over them last night.
