Three years to the day after taking the oath of office, President Bush began his re-election campaign Tuesday night with a State of the Union address that blended potent reminders of his role as commander in chief of a nation at war with pledges to confront the domestic issues that his Democratic rivals hope may keep him from winning a second term.
With Saddam Hussein in captivity, Afghanistan beginning to build a new government and the United States on the offensive against terror around the world, Mr. Bush opened his address recounting his record on national security, ground where polls show he is politically strongest. He used the word ''war'' at least 10 times and asserted, ''Because of American leadership and resolve, the world is changing for the better.''
But he quickly turned to his own backyard, where polls show voters far less sure about his leadership, and there he used his speech to sketch out what amounted to a blueprint of a two-tiered campaign strategy that balanced compassionate appeals to swing voters on issues like the economy, health care and education with other issues popular with the conservative base he wants to rally.
''The values we try to live by never change, and they are instilled in us by fundamental institutions, such as families and schools and religious congregations,'' Mr. Bush said, portraying himself as the national paterfamilias, fighting to protect the American way. ''These institutions, these unseen pillars of civilization, must remain strong in America, and we will defend them.''
Accordingly, he vowed to fight efforts by ''activist judges'' to define marriage as anything but the union of a man and a woman, and he called for new legislation barring discrimination in the awarding of federal grants and contracts to religion-based institutions that provide social services. He pledged a doubling of federal money for abstinence education in schools and modest new amounts for school drug testing ''as a tool to save children's lives.''
The White House was so eager to highlight these passages that the president's chief political adviser, Karl Rove, telephoned social conservative groups on Tuesday to make sure they would be watching the speech. Afterward, leaders of some such groups expressed delight.
''I am thrilled, and our public is thrilled,'' said the Rev. Louis P. Sheldon of the Traditional Values Coalition. ''While you have most of the Democratic candidates not supporting marriage in this emphatic way, it really leaves them on the wrong side of the issue.''
Gary L. Bauer, a longtime conservative activist who sought the Republican presidential nomination against Mr. Bush in 2000, said: ''I don't think he wants history to record that on his watch the fundamental definition of marriage was changed. I think it'll send a strong signal not only to his base, which of course feels strongly, but I think swing voters will, from the evidence, come closer to the Republican position. I think this is a plus all the way around.''
Mr. Bush broke little new substantive ground on policy, instead highlighting his record of tax cuts and Medicare overhaul, declaring that a nascent economic recovery confirmed that ''the American people are using their money far better than government would have,'' vowing that any effort to repeal his new prescription drug coverage under Medicare ''will meet my veto.''. He offered little in the way of money for proposed new programs, and indeed pledged to limit growth in ''discretionary spending'' while acknowledging that his efforts to fight terror and increase domestic security would require continuing costs.
Above all, in the splendor of the Capitol, Mr. Bush portrayed himself as the best defender of American interests, from tax cuts at home to terrorism abroad. And he reminded his listeners, and his Democratic rivals, that he begins this election year conspicuously atop the political equivalent of Everest, while the men who would replace him are scrambling in the foothills of the White Mountains. Mr. Bush spoke like a man who is headed to the Moon and Mars, while the Democrats are headed to Manchester, N.H.
The president's very prominence also makes him a target, and the closely contested Iowa caucuses on Monday and next Tuesday's New Hampshire primary show widespread sentiment for unseating Mr. Bush in a both Midwestern swing state that Al Gore barely carried in 2000, and a New England one that Mr. Bush narrowly won. If this is a moment of some triumph for the president, it is also a time of potential peril.
The nation remains sharply divided over Mr. Bush and his policies, especially his handling of domestic issues like the economy, education and health care, and largely opposed to his grand goals for space exploration. The situation in Iraq remains unsettled, and the public sentiment remains mixed over whether the American invasion was worth the cost in lives and treasure.
''The country is closely divided,'' a senior Bush campaign adviser acknowledged in Iowa on Monday. ''That's a reality. It's not something to worry about. It's something to deal with. Ultimately, you talk about your policies and project a positive optimism for the country.''
That is what Mr. Bush sought to do Tuesday night.
In his first State of the Union message two years ago, Mr. Bush set the nation on a course of confrontation with the ''axis of evil,'' or Iraq, Iran and North Korea, and last year he laid out his case against Mr. Hussein, citing what later turned out to be sharply disputed British intelligence that Iraq had tried to buy uranium from Niger, in West Africa, and the threat of chemical and biological weapons that inspectors have yet to find. Both speeches had dark themes at their heart.
This year, Mr. Bush sounded continued warnings, noting that while 28 months had passed since Sept. 11, 2001, without further attacks on American soil, dangers remain.
But with his administration struggling to win broader international support for rebuilding Iraq, and United Nations backing for its efforts to create a new interim government there, Mr. Bush was also upbeat, insisting: ''The work of building a new Iraq is hard, and it is right. And America has always been willing to do what it takes for what is right.''
He concluded by closely echoing the words Franklin D. Roosevelt wrote on the day he died, April 12, 1945, declaring: ''My fellow citizens, we now move forward with confidence and faith.''
STATE OF THE UNION: NEWS ANALYSIS  Correction:  January 27, 2004, Tuesday  A front-page news analysis article on Wednesday about the impact of electoral politics on President Bush's State of the Union address referred incorrectly to a statement in last year's address, about Iraqi efforts to acquire uranium. The president said Iraq had been seeking to buy uranium in Africa. He did not specifically mention the African country of Niger, though it was identified several weeks earlier -- along with Somalia and Congo -- in the National Intelligence Estimate provided to members of Congress on Iraqi purchase attempts.
