The Democratic presidential candidates gathered here Tuesday for an intense seven-day primary campaign that has been drastically altered by the Iowa caucuses. Campaign aides said they were girding for a nominating contest that would be longer, costlier and more debilitating than they had been planning for just weeks ago.
After the anemic showing by Howard Dean in Iowa -- he lost by 20 percentage points to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts -- Democrats said it appeared less likely that any candidate would sweep to a quick and decisive victory and capture their party's nomination. Dr. Dean had been looking to do that with back-to-back triumphs in Iowa and New Hampshire.
Instead, some Democrats said the contest, which many had expected to turn into a two-way race between Dr. Dean and his strongest opponent, could turn into a slog of delegate accumulation, with little incentive for any more candidates to drop out, at least in the next two weeks. Representative Richard A. Gephardt withdrew from the race on Tuesday, after coming in fourth in Iowa.
''We always thought that this was a delegate contest,'' said Mary Beth Cahill, Mr. Kerry's campaign manager.
The first sign of the muddled shape of the contest came in New Hampshire on Tuesday, where Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who skipped Iowa to build support here, and who had been planning for a two-way contest with Dr. Dean, woke up to a state teaming with energized and clearly viable Democratic candidates for president.
Leading that pack was Mr. Kerry and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who scored No. 2 in Iowa, and whose aides said he would campaign vigorously here.
Aides to Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who also skipped Iowa, said he drew inspiration from Mr. Edwards's strong performance. Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, has spent as much energy preparing for New Hampshire as he did for Iowa.
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio is also mounting a campaign here.
If this new landscape brought smiles to Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, it seemed to pose challenges to Dr. Dean and General Clark.
General Clark had been preparing for a one-on-one contest with Dr. Dean, in the belief that his military background and Arkansas roots would allow him to present himself as the Democrat most able to defeat Mr. Bush. In Iowa, nearly one quarter of caucusgoers told pollsters that electability was their chief criteria in picking a president.
But now, the field includes another veteran, Mr. Kerry, who served in Vietnam, and another Southerner, Mr. Edwards, both of whom used the electability argument against Dr. Dean to great effect in Iowa.
Further complicating General Clark's to-date largely unencumbered efforts here, Mr. Kerry made an organized effort in Iowa to round up veterans' support, the very thing the general has been doing here. In adjusting to this new terrain on Tuesday, General Clark tried to draw sharp contrasts between what he characterized as his extensive experience in foreign policy and what he suggested was the merely peripheral involvement that his opponents have had in matters of national security. ''I'm the only candidate who's done high-level work in foreign policy and foreign affairs and national security,'' General Clark told reporters. ''I'm the only one who can stand toe-to-toe with George W. Bush, critique him and hold him accountable on misleading this country to Iraq, and on failing to do what he should have done before 9/11.''
Taking a lesson from Mr. Edwards's success in Iowa, he and his aides began casting their message in the upbeat terms that have characterized the Edwards campaign. ''We've got an optimistic message,'' said Eli Segal, the Clark campaign chairman. ''That is what has connected with the voters in New Hampshire.''
Behind the scenes, on the same day that Mr. Gephardt announced his withdrawal in St. Louis, the remaining presidential contenders tried pick up his supporters in Congress, pressing, among others, Representative James E. Clyburn, Democrat of South Carolina.
Dr. Dean, after a rocky few weeks, had to deal with coming in a poor third in a state he had predicted he would win. Many Democrats said his performance was likely to cause Dean supporters to take a second look at Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards.
Dr. Dean's aides have long been confident in New Hampshire because his high standing in the polls has been buttressed by a network of supporters that the campaign has painstakingly assembled. But they had the same feeling about Iowa.
On Tuesday, with aides to some of his rivals suggesting Dr. Dean could not withstand a defeat here in the New Hampshire primary next week, his campaign manager moved to reel back the expectations.
''We're the insurgent, man,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager. ''We are right back where we want to be, which is the underdog, the insurgent.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CHANGING RACE
