The labor unions that backed Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri and Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, were embarrassed yesterday and searching for answers why their candidates -- and the unions themselves -- fared so poorly in the Iowa caucuses.
Officials from the unions that supported Dr. Dean, who placed third, and Mr. Gephardt, who dropped out of the presidential race after placing fourth, said the pair had been weakened by the flurry of negative charges they directed at each other. They said this helped Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who won the caucuses, and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who came in second, pick up support because they ran more positive campaigns.
Strategists from the two major unions that backed Dr. Dean -- the service employees and the state, county and municipal employees -- said they would redouble their efforts to lift him to victory in next Tuesday's primary in New Hampshire.
But leaders of the blue-collar unions that supported Mr. Gephardt said they were unsure what they would do next.
''We're not going to jump out of any window, but we're not going to jump into bed with anyone right away either,'' said Bill Klinefelter, political director of the steelworkers' union, one of Mr. Gephardt's most staunch supporting groups. ''At the end of the day, the steelworkers will line up behind whoever the Democratic candidate is in an effort to defeat George Bush.''
Several longtime union political officials said Mr. Gephardt did so poorly in Iowa partly because campaigners from the 21 unions that endorsed him primarily talked to their base without expanding support for the candidate.
Union leaders who backed Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt insisted that they got their members to the caucuses but said they were surprised by the large turnout. They also said that in the horse-trading that took place at the caucuses, Dean and Gephardt supporters often ended up backing Mr. Kerry or Mr. Edwards and rarely banded together, thus hurting their candidates' vote counts.
''There's a stepping back to see how things sort out, and at some point people will be uniting behind a candidate because there's a lot more that unites these unions than divides them,'' said Steve Rosenthal, former political director of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Several labor officials said Dr. Dean had been hurt by his many missteps and by the other candidates' attacks on him.
If one labor official looked smart, it was Harold A. Schaitberger, president of the International Association of Fire Fighters, the one major union to back Mr. Kerry. He was standing at Mr. Kerry's side when the candidate gave his victory speech Monday night.
Mr. Schaitberger said he spent much of yesterday dispatching firefighters to New Hampshire and urging other union presidents to back Mr. Kerry. ''I would like to think that at the end of the day we'll see some of the unions coming our way,'' he said. ''You might even see a few unions back Kerry before New Hampshire. As I've said from Day 1, we have the guy, the entire package, the guy that can be elected.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: UNIONS
