Milton White of Hollis, Queens, talks about death more than any father of three should have to. But he says he has no other choice.
At 48, Mr. White has had two heart attacks, one mild, the other serious. The first came in June 2002. But Mr. White, who has the bearing of a football player, hardly took much notice. He never even went to the hospital. The pain came -- a short firecracker burst -- and then subsided after he took a week off from his job as an assistant superintendent for the New York City Housing Authority.
The next attack, a month later, nearly killed him. Triple-bypass surgery saved him, but the damage, complicated by diabetes and hypertension, limited the functioning of his heart. Mr. White's doctors told him that his scarred heart operates only half as well as that of a healthy man. Which means that Mr. White is easily winded and has dizzy spells.
He can no longer wrestle with his son, Steve, 13. And though he went back to work shortly after his second heart attack -- remembering his own father's decades-old lesson that providing for family is a man's primary responsibility -- Mr. White could not do the heavy lifting involved in cleaning and repairing boilers.
''I'm very hardheaded, and I wanted to try to do what I'd always done,'' he said. ''If I could work, I would. And I would probably drop dead on the job.''
Retirement and rest were his only options. At the time, in August 2002, the mortgage payment on his two-story home was $1,605 a month, and his two older children were in private school. And his wife, Melissa White, 40, who also has heart disease, was unable to work because of her condition. Yet Mr. White's retirement pay was only $673 a month, 40 percent of his full-time salary. With the regular bills, Mr. White's situation was unworkable.
This month, his benefits for Social Security, retirement and disability kicked in, but the economic fallout from the yearlong income reduction has been substantial.
''The gas, light bills and mortgage backed up,'' he recalled. ''And I was in and out of the hospital.''
In December 2002, Mr. White filed for bankruptcy to settle with his creditors. His payments amounted to $600 a month, but he was still strapped with the mortgage. Steve and Mr. White's daughter Victoria, now 12, were pulled out of private school to cut costs. But the mortgage was still due.
''I was about to lose everything I worked for,'' he said. ''It's not much, but it's my house, and I didn't want to be sick and homeless.''
Out of work and out of options, Mr. White and his wife turned last September to Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens. The agency is one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
''It took all I had as a man to ask for help; I had to swallow my pride when I went to Catholic Charities,'' Mr. White said. ''But the day I called, they didn't turn me away.''
He connected with Rosa Orihuela, a Catholic Charities caseworker. Ms. Orihuela gave Mr. White $555 from the Neediest Cases Fund to help the family with the mortgage arrears.
''I put myself in their shoes and their problems became mine,'' she said. ''With all the problems he went through, he's still a survivor. I was grateful that I could help him through the fund.''
Mr. White still has some back mortgage payments due, but Ms. Orihuela's assistance was a real gift.
''God bless Miss Rosa,'' he said. ''She probably had a lot of cases, but she worked with me and helped me.''
With his finances more manageable, Mr. White focuses on his health.
And though Mr. White, who talks in the soothing tones of a preacher, is a man of faith, he is also a realist. He wears a silver cross that rests on his stomach, but he can't forget the 12-inch scar that runs from the top of his chest to his navel.
''I know that God will keep me, but I know what's happening to me,'' he said. ''I don't have the time that I think I need, so I have to set everything up.''
With this, Mr. White tried to hold back his tears, distracting himself by smoothing out the tablecloth. But they came anyway. And when talk turned to his youngest child, Tiana, 2, there were more tears.
''She's so young and we're going through so much,'' Mr. White said. ''Will we be there for her?''
When Mr. and Mrs. White kneel in their bedroom, they pray for health and strength and endurance. They also pray for time.
''I just want to make sure that when I leave, my kids will be O.K.,'' he said. ''And that they know I did the best I could. I'm going to fight the good fight.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,044,057.12  Recorded Friday: 275,964.35  Total: $7,320,021.47
Last year to date: $7,590,565.39
