DURING this long buildup to the Super Bowl on Feb. 1, many Giants fans are brooding over the fact that both coaches were defensive coordinators of the Giants at different times.
This is a very galling reality. The Giants could have had Bill Belichick as their head coach. Instead, he is with the Patriots. The Giants could have had John Fox as their head coach. Instead, he is with the Panthers.
''They are both very sound,'' Ernie Accorsi, the Giants' general manager, said yesterday. ''But they are not the same package. John is a little more of an inspirational type. You're more inclined to go have a beer with him. With Bill, you're more likely to talk X's and O's.''
In football, let it be quickly noted, talking X's and O's is considered a highly desirable personality trait.
Accorsi was in cold and damp Mobile, Ala., scouting at the Senior Bowl, and recalling, over the phone, the first time he met Belichick.
''I go back to when he was a $50-a-day assistant with the Colts,'' said Accorsi, a reformed sportswriter who moved up to the Baltimore Colts' front office. ''Bill was staying in Ted Marchibroda's motel room at the airport because he didn't have a place to stay,'' Accorsi added, referring to the Colts' head coach back in 1975.
''Bill was what the basketball coaches call a gym rat,'' Accorsi added. ''His father was a coach. He was preparing to be a coach since he was 6.''
Accorsi moved on to Cleveland, and in 1989 he was preparing to hire Bud Carson as the Browns' new head coach. But then George Young of the Giants, who also had Baltimore roots, talked Accorsi into interviewing Belichick, by then the Giants' defensive coordinator.
''I was in Mobile in this same hotel, only it had a different name,'' Accorsi said yesterday. ''I was already late to practice. Bill came in and blew me away. It was instantaneous. He was meticulously prepared. He knew everything and he was ultraconfident.
''I told him, 'This was like a basketball game where you are 30 points behind and you can't win, but you cut the lead down to 4.' I couldn't hire him then, but I did, two years later.''
They worked together one year for Art Modell, and Accorsi had great respect for Belichick.
''We were on a scouting trip for Cleveland one time, and Mr. Modell flew us to four schools in one day in bad weather,'' Accorsi said. ''When we got to our hotel, I just wanted a beer and something to eat. I heard Bill arguing with the motel clerk because there was no VCR in the room so he could watch film.''
Accorsi moved back east to be closer to his family, and watched from a distance as Belichick rebuilt the Browns, faltering only when Modell began moving the franchise to Baltimore.
''I chuckle when people say Bill failed in Cleveland,'' Accorsi said. ''I give him a free pass for 1995.''
The two men stayed in touch after Belichick left Cleveland and moved to the Jets as an assistant and then to the Patriots. Accorsi replaced Young in 1998 and the Giants went to Super Bowl XXXV after the 2000 season.
''I told Bill how we weeded out the locker room, and we bottom-fed the roster with guys who had been around but were not that expensive,'' Accorsi said. ''Bill did the same thing when he took over in New England. He did a great job.''
Fox was the defensive coordinator in 2000, and Accorsi found himself fretting as the Giants prepared to play Minnesota's offensive machine in the 2000 conference championship game.
''I thought we'd have to win, 41-39,'' Accorsi said. ''My office was right next to John's. I was afraid to talk to him all week because I thought he'd give me bad news, but finally he said, 'We're going to win.' He was confident. And as you know, we shut them out. The final score was 41-0.''
Fox had accumulated such a great reputation that other clubs began nosing around. ''He couldn't get the Cleveland job because we were in the Super Bowl,'' Accorsi said, ''but I knew he'd get other offers. He asked me to administer a mock interview, and I asked him, 'What's your offensive philosophy?' His answer was perfect. He knew exactly what it would take to win.''
In 2002, Fox took over as head coach of Carolina. Accorsi said yesterday: ''He had already been a head coach for half a team. He was ready to coach a whole team. It broke our hearts to see him leave.''
Fox, with his gravelly voice and up-tempo demeanor, has a lot of admirers, particularly among fans who think the Giants made a mistake in letting him go.
''Jim Fassel went to the Super Bowl and then he was 7-9,'' Accorsi said. 'What were we supposed to do, fire Fassel? You can't do that.'' Fassel left after this recent subpar season -- and Fox was en route to the Super Bowl.
Giants fans need to get over this obsession with ancient history. The two assistants moved on as part of the normal rhythm of pro football, but that will probably not be much of a consolation over the next two weeks.
Sports of The Times
