Almost a year after the shuttle Columbia broke up on re-entry, NASA is making ''uneven'' progress in the steps required before it can fly another mission, and it is too soon to say when one of the three surviving shuttles could safely fly, an advisory group appointed by the agency said Tuesday.
The group characterized its interim report as positive, but said, ''Progress should not be mistaken for accomplishment.''
The 26-member group, whose chairmen are the retired astronauts Thomas P. Stafford and Richard O. Covey, was set up by NASA in June to measure the agency's compliance with recommendations made by an outside panel, the Columbia Accident Investigation Board.
President Bush called last week for phasing out the shuttle program by 2010, but NASA plans to return the remaining fleet to orbit for missions to maintain and expand the International Space Station until then.
NASA, which first spoke of resuming flights this spring, now hopes for September or October. As of Dec. 10, though, the advisory group said, NASA had not finished the technical responses to the recommendations.
A NASA spokesman, Robert Mirelson, said the group's contention that it was too soon to schedule the next flight was ''a good conclusion on their part.''
''We're not agreeing or disagreeing with them,'' Mr. Mirelson added. ''There is no red X on the wall that says you will launch in the first available September-October window. That's a thing that will be constantly evaluated.''
The timing of the next launching has become much more constrained since the Columbia accident last Feb. 1. In its report in August on the disaster, the accident board noted that video and still images shot during liftoff were of poor quality, limiting the ability of engineers on the ground to see the damage caused by a piece of foam that broke loose from the external tank and struck the shuttle's wing. So NASA has decided to launch only during the day.
NASA's administrator, Sean O'Keefe, has repeatedly promised to follow all recommendations of the accident board, which was led by Adm. Harold W. Gehman Jr. On Tuesday, the advisory group's report said the agency seemed on its way to accomplishing some of them.
For example, the board called for ''nondestructive inspection'' of parts made from a composite called reinforced carbon-carbon, like the wing panel that was smashed by the falling foam. NASA has picked three technologies; testing is under way.
Other recommendations by the Gehman board will be harder to follow, according to the report. For example, the board recommended that NASA ''adopt and maintain a shuttle flight schedule that is consistent with available resources,'' and ensure that ''any additional risk incurred to meet the schedule is recognized, understood and acceptable.''
But the task group said that while schedules were needed, ''at some indefinable juncture, schedule pressure can become a destructive force or become the primary objective.''
