Congress returned to work on Tuesday after an extended winter recess and picked up where it had left off -- with a partisan fight over spending in the Senate, where Democrats delayed approval of an $820 billion measure covering appropriations for more than a dozen federal departments and independent agencies.
Republicans fell 12 votes short of the 60 needed to block a Democratic filibuster, with 48 senators favoring cutting off debate and 45 opposing it. But the filibuster is mostly an empty threat: The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said he expected the omnibus measure, which wraps seven bills into one, to pass by the end of the month.
''Our desire isn't to kill this bill,'' Mr. Daschle told reporters. ''Our desire is to give them a chance to fix it.''
Democrats object to provisions in the bill on media company ownership, overtime rules and country-of-origin labeling for supermarket meat and produce. Republicans vowed not to alter the bill, a product of a conference report between the House and Senate that has already passed the House.
Republicans instead said that if Democrats blocked the omnibus bill, they would push through a resolution financing the affected departments and agencies at last year's levels. That move, they said, would be tantamount to cutting billions of dollars from medical research, veterans' health care and the president's global AIDS initiative, among other programs. It would also prevent lawmakers of each party from benefiting from scores of special interest projects in the legislation.
''We are not changing this bill, period,'' said Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, the third-ranking Republican in the Senate. ''This bill has passed. The conference is gone. It's either going to be voted up or down.''
The partisan fighting was a reminder that, in a presidential election year, it will be difficult for lawmakers to pass any bold laws. ''Very honestly,'' said Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the majority leader, ''I don't want people's expectations being sky high.''
But the vote against cutting off debate was not strictly along party lines. Three Republicans -- Senators Olympia J. Snowe of Maine, Ben Nighthorse Campbell of Colorado and John McCain of Arizona -- sided with the Democrats. Mr. McCain said the bill was studded with special interest pork-barrel spending.
''It's hard to pick the ugliest pig in this sty,'' he said.
The main sticking points, however, are the provisions to which Democrats object. One would allow the Bush administration to press ahead with new rules that Democrats say could strip millions of workers of their right to overtime pay.
Another would relax media ownership rules, allowing the major networks to extend their reach by owning television stations reaching 39 percent of the nation's audiences. Congress agreed last year to set the figure at 35 percent. But the White House, which had sought 45 percent, threatened a veto, prompting last-minute conference negotiations that resulted in the final figure. Those negotiations are drawing complaints from lawmakers, mostly Democrats, who say their authority has been usurped.
''I think the integrity of the process is at stake here,'' said Senator Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois.
Democrats also oppose a provision delaying by two years a requirement that supermarket meat and produce carry labels identifying them by country of origin. The meatpacking industry and the major organization representing cattlemen oppose the labels, saying they will impose an expensive regulatory burden without improving food safety. But consumer groups and independent ranchers support the labels.
In recent weeks, Mr. Daschle, who is facing a tough re-election race in South Dakota, where ranchers are among his constituents, has invoked the mad cow disease scare to make the case in the Senate for the labels. On Tuesday, he was joined at his usual weekly news conference by a collection of ranchers in cowboy hats, who stood silently behind him as he vowed to press the issue.
Some powerful Republicans also support the labels, including Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, the chairman of the Appropriations Committee, who inserted a provision in the omnibus bill that would require the labels for Alaskan salmon products, which face stiff foreign competition.
Another Republican, Senator Susan Collins of Maine, said: ''I think that the issue is not resolved. There is a lot of support on both sides of the aisle.''
The omnibus bill also includes a little-noticed amendment that has led to sparring between the gun industry and gun control advocates over the use of firearms records. The amendment, drafted in the House with the aid of the National Rifle Association, would require federal officials to destroy records on gun purchases within 24 hours instead of waiting 90 days, as is now required. It would also restrict public access to data on gun dealers tied to illegal gun transfers.
Gun control advocates see the measure as a major setback that would hurt the ability of law enforcement agents and the public to scrutinize suspect gun transactions and determine whether criminals -- and even perhaps terrorists -- are being allowed to buy guns.
But Chris Cox, who heads the legislative arm of the N.R.A., said the measure should correct abuses in the current system. ''Releasing records on law-abiding gun owners just for the sake of releasing them doesn't do anyone any good,'' Mr. Cox said in an interview.
After the vote delaying the bill, the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, an advocacy group, claimed victory, if only a temporary one.
''Despite three years of favorable political terrain, the so-called most influential lobby in America has been unable to win a single major legislative victory,'' said Joshua Horwitz, executive director of the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence. ''By rejecting this spending bill, the Senate put public safety above special interests.''
