Democrats in Congress and on the presidential campaign trail accused President Bush of ignoring the economic struggle of working-class Americans in his Tuesday night address and called him the architect of a flawed foreign policy.
Democratic presidential candidates, campaigning in New Hampshire, quickly weighed in after the speech ended, saying Mr. Bush has failed to deliver on earlier promises on medical care and education and was offering a picture starkly at odds with the experiences of Americans dealing with job losses and inadequate health care coverage.
''After four years in office, this president still doesn't understand what's happening in living rooms across this country,'' said Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, trying to build on his win Monday in the Iowa caucuses.
Gen.Wesley K. Clark called the speech ''nothing but special effects'' to hide policy shortcomings. Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, said the president's ''empty proposals do nothing to address the real problems facing working Americans -- problems his presidency has only made worse.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said Mr. Bush was trying to ''camouflage his irresponsible, divisive, right-wing agenda and repackage himself as a centrist compassionate conservative around election time.''
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina said the speech shows Mr. Bush ''believes that compassionate language and empty slogans will make working Americans forget the burdens they face every day.''
In their formal, nationally televised response, the House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi of California, and the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, staked out their policy ground for the new Congressional session as well as the campaign season. Mr. Daschle pointed to the president's call to make permanent a set of tax cuts already adopted Congress.
''Rather than a society that restricts its rewards to a privileged few, we need an 'opportunity society' that allows all Americans to succeed,'' Mr. Daschle said.
Ms. Pelosi, like several other Democrats, faulted Mr. Bush on his handling of the war on Iraq.
''The president led us into the Iraq war on the basis of unproven assertions without evidence,'' she said. ''He embraced a radical doctrine of pre-emptive war unprecedented in our history; and he failed to build a true international coalition.''
As they exited the House floor after the State of the Union address to give media interviews, Democratic lawmakers were provided a list of points comparing the president's claims with policy on a variety of issues including job training, the environment and retirement savings.
Democrats on Capitol Hill are bracing for a confrontational year, and party leaders see a benefit in the competitive Democratic presidential primary, saying the anti-Bush message delivered by the contenders helped amplify what Democratic lawmakers in Congress were saying.
''The fact that they are out there being critical of Bush and talking about problems with his domestic issues helps us,'' one senior Democratic Congressional aide said.
Democrats also raised contrasts between the president's space initiative and what they saw as unmet domestic needs. ''In education, we promised to leave no child behind, but this president now proposes going to Mars, where there is no education for children,'' said Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 Democrat in the House.
Ms. Pelosi, who previously sat on the House Intelligence Committee, praised American troops serving overseas but said Mr. Bush ''has pursued a go-it-alone foreign policy that leaves us isolated abroad and that steals the resources we need for education and health care here at home.'' She urged the president to work through international institutions.
''Instead of billions of dollars in no-bid contracts for politically connected firms such as Halliburton, and an insistence on American dominance in Iraq,'' Ms. Pelosi said, ''let us share the burden and responsibility with others, so that together we can end the sense of American occupation and bring our troops home safely when their mission is completed.''
Mr. Daschle, who faces a tough re-election fight in a state where Mr. Bush is popular, left most of the foreign policy critique to Ms. Pelosi and concentrated on economic and social issues. He said the nation's ''first challenge is to strengthen the economy -- the right way.''
He said Democrats would propose tax cuts intended to boost manufacturing companies as a way to create good-paying jobs in the United States. He also said Mr. Bush had not followed through on his commitment to education and that his economic policies were hurting states to an extent that was causing a steep rise in college tuition costs.
''Since President Bush took office, the average tuition at a four-year public college has increased by nearly $600,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''The America our parents gave us was a place in which everyone had a chance to go to a good school, and then to college, community college or vocational school, regardless of family income. Our children deserve nothing less.''
The themes of the Democrat response, which the two minority leaders first laid out in a speech last week, were struck by other leading Democrats on Capitol Hill and will be a persistent part of the exchanges between the two parties this year.
''I think what you're going to see is a contrast in priorities,'' Mr. Daschle said, discussing the coming session in a meeting with reporters. ''The president will talk tonight about going to Mars and the Moon. We think that there are challenges here at home that ought to be addressed.''
STATE OF THE UNION: OPPOSITION RESPONSE
