Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn yesterday unsealed a wide-ranging racketeering and murder indictment against 27 men they said were members or associates of the Bonanno crime family. The charges pulled back a veil on a crime family reeling from a vast investigation, which has turned mobsters against each other and left age-old Mafia rules in tatters.
Included among those charged were men the prosecutors said were the acting boss and underboss of the Bonanno family, who they said had quickly taken those roles because the family's top leaders are already facing charges or have recently been convicted. A major investigation of the family has been under way for four years.
The indictment provided a vivid picture of a crime family in crisis. Prosecutors said their pursuit of the Bonannos, which has included persuading more than a half dozen family members to break the mob's code of silence and become informants, has led to a fraying of many of the old rules that governed the mob.
''This has got to stop,'' the prosecutors quoted Anthony Urso, who was charged with being the acting boss, as saying in September.
The prosecutors said he ruminated about breaking a mob rule that generally bars the killing of the wives and children of mob members. The conversation was one of several recorded by investigators with the cooperation of a high-level Bonanno captain who went to family meetings .
To stop the hemorrhaging of the family, the prosecutors said, Mr. Urso proposed killing the children of mob informants. ''You turned, we wipe your family out,'' they quoted him as saying.
The prosecutors say Mr. Urso, 67, of East Meadow, on Long Island, continued that, ''if you take one kid, I hate to say it, and do what you got to do,'' informants would ''think twice'' about working with prosecutors.
Since 2002, more than 70 members or associates of the Bonanno family have been prosecuted. The family was famously infiltrated in the 1970's by an F.B.I. agent posing as a mob member, Donnie Brasco. But since then it had been insular and seemingly impenetrable.
The United States attorney in Brooklyn, Roslynn R. Mauskopf, said that as a result of yesterday's arrests, only a handful of Bonanno captains remained on the streets.
The investigation included an unprecedented number of inducted mobsters breaking the code of silence to cooperate with investigators, said Pasquale J. D'Amuro, the assistant director-in-charge of the F.B.I. in New York. "Instead of beating people up,'' Mr. D'Amuro said, ''they are beating down our doors in an effort to cooperate.''
The indictment included charges against Mr. Urso and Joseph Cammarano, 68, who the prosecutors said was the acting underboss. Mr. Cammarano's lawyer declined comment. Mr. Urso's lawyer, Edward Jenks, said the charges were based on an "avalanche of lies."
The indictment included allegations involving 15 murders or murder conspiracies over more than a decade, with the most recent in 1992. There were also loansharking, gambling and extortion charges.
Among those charged with mob killings was Vito Rizzuto, a Montreal man identified by the prosecutors as a Bonanno member, who has sometimes been called the "Godfather of the Mafia" in Canada. The prosecutors said they would seek his extradition.
In a filing yesterday, the chief prosecutor, Greg D. Andres, sketched out a crime family struggling with the extensive investigation, including murder and racketeering charges filed in January 2003 against Joseph C. Massino, the accused leader of the family who is in prison awaiting trial.
The filing said that Mr. Massino's importance to the organization is so great that some of its members have begun to describe it as the Massino crime family. It also said that Mr. Massino has continued to run the crime family from his jail cell at the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn.
''Massino has sent messages to members of the Bonanno family,'' the filing said, "through his wife and through one of his criminal defense attorneys.''
The lawyer was not identified and no charges were filed in connection with that assertion. David Breitbart, Mr. Massino's chief defense lawyer, said his client had been doing nothing but preparing for trial. He said the allegation about a lawyer carrying messages might be a tactic by prosecutors to undermine the defense, and added that no one on the defense team ''would cross the line.''
Prosecutors said that more than six family members are cooperating with them. The high-ranking Bonanno captain who took part in the recorded meetings helped the prosecutors capture something of a debate in the family about how to proceed in the face of the investigation.
When Mr. Urso suggested killing the children of Bonanno informants, the prosecutors said Mr. Cammarano answered that they needed to be careful about their handling of informants ''because anything they did now would be a reflection on their 'friend,''' which the prosecutors said meant Mr. Massino.
