Israeli warplanes bombed two Hezbollah bases in southern Lebanon on Tuesday in retaliation for a missile attack that killed an Israeli soldier along the border a day earlier, the Israel military said.
No casualties were reported from Lebanon. In the past, Hezbollah has evacuated bases when an Israeli attack has appeared imminent.
Witnesses said the strikes were directed at Hezbollah positions near Alman and Zibkin, two villages several miles north of the border, Reuters reported from Beirut.
Israel and Hezbollah still exchange artillery fire in the region despite Israel's withdrawal from southern Lebanon in May 2000. Israeli planes also make frequent reconnaissance flights, but airstrikes are rare. The strike on Tuesday was the first in several months.
Israeli military officials spent several hours on Tuesday discussing a response to the missile attack by Hezbollah, and the raid was directed at bases used for training and for attacks on Israel, said a military spokeswoman, Maj. Sharon Feingold.
''Israel will not allow Hezbollah to unleash terror against Israel with impunity,'' said David Baker, an official in the office of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. But the limited scale of the raid suggested that Israel did not intend to engage in a major confrontation.
In the attack on Monday, Israel said, Hezbollah guerrillas fired a missile that struck an armored military bulldozer that was trying to detonate roadside bombs.
Israel first said that the bulldozer had not left Israeli territory, but military officials acknowledged Tuesday that it had strayed just across the frontier. That did not justify the Hezbollah attack, the officials said.
Because of the rugged landscape, Israel has built a barrier inside its territory a few yards south of the border. The bulldozer went to the northern side of the barrier to detonate the roadside bombs, but because it was so large and could not easily maneuver, it crossed the border by one to two yards, Brig. Gen. Yair Golan said on Israel radio.
Milos Strugar, a spokesman with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which monitors the border region, said the Israeli bulldozer was on the Lebanese side when it was hit, Agence France-Presse reported.
After Israeli troops withdrew from southern Lebanon nearly four years ago, ending two decades of occupation, the border was marked by the United Nations. Hezbollah rejects the United Nations findings and says that Israel still holds a small patch of Lebanese land.
Israel complains that the Lebanese government has refused to deploy its army along the border, which is controlled by Hezbollah, a fundamentalist Shiite Muslim movement.
Israel says Hezbollah receives substantial support from both Syria and Iran. ''Israel considers Syria directly responsible for any terror activity emanating from Lebanon,'' Major Feingold said.
Last October, Israel bombed what it said was a Palestinian training base near Damascus, the Syrian capital. The strike came a day after a Palestinian suicide bomber killed 21 Israelis. Syria said the site was used by civilians but refused to let journalists visit.
Last month, President Bashar al-Assad of Syria raised the possibility of renewing talks on the Golan Heights, which Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 war. But Israel has shown little interest in such talks, saying it wants Syria to first take a number of steps, like reining in Hezbollah.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, speaking in Washington, blamed Hezbollah for the latest confrontation. ''We believe that all parties interested in peace should condemn that kind of action by Hezbollah,'' he said.
Also on Tuesday, Israeli forces destroyed or badly damaged about 25 homes in Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip, and knocked down the remains of a mosque that had been hit in a previous Israeli incursion, Palestinian residents said. Palestinian officials said that several hundred people were left homeless.
Israeli military officials said the soldiers were searching for a tunnel used to smuggle weapons from Egypt. No tunnel was found, but the soldiers came under Palestinian fire and tore down buildings being used by the gunmen, the military said.
A synagogue at Tapuah West, a West Bank outpost, was demolished by soldiers after they scuffled with dozens of radical settlers who had tried to block them. But the soldiers left untouched about 10 residential trailers at the outpost, several miles south of Nablus.
The synagogue, a simple structure of wood and tin, was singled out because it was built by followers of Rabbi Meir Kahane, who led an anti-Arab movement until his assassination in 1990 in New York. The movement, Kach, is outlawed in Israel.
The Middle East peace plan calls for Israel to take down all outposts erected since March 2001. To date, Israel has removed about a dozen, but more than 50 remain, according to Peace Now, a monitoring group.
