Martha Stewart entered the Old Federal Courthouse on Foley Square in Lower Manhattan yesterday surrounded by a horde of reporters and cameramen who shouted, ''Martha! Martha!'' and a supporter who cried, ''You go, girl!''
Ms. Stewart said ''Good morning,'' and briefly waved.
It was the most fun the news media would have all day and it might even have been a bright spot for Ms. Stewart, whose criminal trial began yesterday with the interviewing of prospective jurors.
Ms. Stewart, 62, is charged with conspiracy, obstruction of justice and securities fraud, all stemming from her sale of ImClone Systems stock in December 2001. She and Peter E. Bacanovic, her co-defendant and former stock broker, have both pleaded not guilty.
Outside, camera crews stamped their feet and shivered. When Ms. Stewart arrived at the courthouse at 9:20 a.m., in a hired black Lincoln, Centre Street was lined with a dozen white television trucks sprouting giant antennas, satellite dishes, or both. Ms. Stewart's blonde hair shielded her face as she exited the car, but she pushed it back as she climbed the steps, wearing a wrap-around coat, brown trousers and high-heeled brown boots.
Mr. Bacanovic arrived five minutes later, emerging from a black GMC Denali sport utility vehicle wearing a blue tie, charcoal suit and navy overcoat. After entering the courtroom, he stopped at Ms. Stewart's chair and was kissed on both cheeks by her.
Both had to be arraigned for the second time yesterday because the government revised its indictment earlier this month. Ms. Stewart responded ''Not guilty'' in hushed tones to each of the five charges against her. Mr. Bacanovic also pleaded not guilty to the five charges against him.
The case has drawn ''widespread and intense media coverage,'' as the judge in the case, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, noted last week when she barred reporters from the juror questioning, known as voir dire. Seventeen media organizations, including The New York Times, have appealed that decision; jury selection is likely to be completed before a ruling on the appeal is issued.
So the questioning of potential jurors occurred in a robing room behind an ornate courtroom on the first floor of 40 Centre Street. The judge, prosecutors and defense lawyers were in the room, along with Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic.
About 33 members of the jury pool were called, one by one, out of the courtroom at intervals that ranged from 5 to 30 minutes (they had already filled out an extensive secret questionnaire). Those waiting for their turn passed the time by reading books (one was ''The Goomba's Book of Love,'' and another was ''The Lost Girls''), dozing off, writing letters and staring at the gilded ceiling.
At least twice, court personnel called juror numbers but no one answered.
The jury selection process left about two dozen restless reporters to rattle around in the big marble-and-wood-paneled courtroom, along with some court officers and members of the jury pool (the number of prospective jurors and the number of reporters dwindled as the day wore on).
The questioning, which continued throughout the day, did not conclude until just before 6:30 p.m., making for an unusually long day.
''I can't tell you what the status is myself,'' said Robert Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lead defense lawyer, when asked whether a jury had been chosen. ''It's been a long day.'' Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, Richard M. Strassberg, did not reply when asked the same question.
Probably the most popular person in Lower Manhattan yesterday morning was John Small, who stood on the sidewalk outside the courthouse dressed in a chef's hat and apron and sign, all proclaiming, ''Save Martha!'' He is the creator of a Web site, www.SaveMartha.com, which he says is supported by the sales of items like aprons and coffee mugs.
How many interviews did he do? ''I lost track after about 8 or 10,'' Mr. Small said later. A marketing consultant, Mr. Small, 42, is something of a serial saver; he also created a Web site, www.saverosie.com, for Rosie O'Donnell when she had a court dispute with the company that once published her namesake magazine.
That is not the case for Linda Smith, 52, a housing inspector in Camden, N.J., who took a vacation day and made a two-hour bus trip to be at the courthouse yesterday. She stood in the cold wearing a hand-printed sign reading, ''Martha Is Being Persecuted For Who She Is.'' (The ''You go, girl!'' she said, just burst out.)
Ms. Smith said she was there because she is a fan of Ms. Stewart and her how-to television show, which among other things taught her to garden. ''People on my block call me Martha,'' she said. ''It sounds corny, but she brings beauty into my life. I just don't want her to go away.''
