A TYPICAL pantry in Sichuan, the province in south-central China known for its spicy food, would not be considered well stocked without the following items: dried chilies, Chinese black vinegar, soy sauce, sesame oil, Shaoxing rice wine, ginger, garlic, scallions and, of course, Sichuan peppercorns.
It is a relatively short list, and most of these ingredients can be found in an ordinary American supermarket. So why is the cuisine of Sichuan so sophisticated, so varied, so complex, so seemingly exotic and hard for Westerners to replicate?
Ah, says Fuchsia Dunlop, the author of ''Land of Plenty: a Treasury of Authentic Sichuan Cooking'' (W. W. Norton, 2003, $30), the challenge is in how those ingredients are handled and combined. The Sichuanese, she says, have 56 cooking methods, a long list of cutting techniques, and catalog their foods into 23 distinct flavors, like salt-sweet and scorched chili. Clearly, Sichuan food is about a lot more than ''spicy.''
Ms. Dunlop, an Englishwoman who had a grant to live and study in Sichuan, was the first foreigner allowed to attend chef-training classes in the provincial cooking school in Chengdu. Hers is an intelligent survey of Sichuan food, and her accessible recipes are suitable for Western kitchens.
She gives a short history of the province, offering a few theories to explain its liberal use of spice (its dank weather is high on the list). She also explains how it took to the introduction of chilies in the 18th century to complement the already numbing heat from the native dried prickly ash berries, which are what Sichuan peppercorns really are.
I was intrigued to learn that ''when the Sichuanese eat a great hearty dish of fish or rabbit in lashings of spicy sauce, they often send any remaining sauce back to the restaurant kitchen to be reheated with some bean curd.'' With food like this, who needs leftovers?
After reading the book cover to cover, I sharpened the cleaver and heated the wok. I tried more than a dozen recipes that displayed a panoply of flavors and sensations. I made the classic dan dan noodles topped with ground pork and slicked with a fiery, richly oily sauce; warm, still-crisp cucumber sticks briefly stir-fried and seasoned to a fare-thee-well; and Hot and Numbing Chicken, a study in elegance despite its wickedly forceful sauce.
I had to choose among many cold appetizers, which brought to mind a dazzling meal I had in Chongqing three years ago that began with 20 cold dishes spread on the table, like meze.
The sweet-and-sour pork, so often a vile concoction that panders to Western tastes, was a miracle of textural and flavor contrasts. Many of the dishes, like the dry-fried green beans tossed in a wok with just a little oil and a couple of seasonings, can be made in minutes.
Exotic dishes for kidneys, lotus root, pig's livers, duck eggs and the like have been kept to a minimum in the book. There was no recipe for spicy beef tendon, one of my favorite Sichuan dishes, but that did not diminish the value of this volume.
There is no better cuisine to add a little zest to the celebration of the Year of the Monkey, which begins with New Year's Eve festivities tonight. A book titled ''Land of Plenty'' has to augur well.
HOT AND NUMBING CHICKEN  Adapted from ''Land of Plenty'' by Fuchsia Dunlop (W. W. Norton)  Time: 1 hour
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken breasts  1 1 1/2-inch piece fresh ginger, peeled and lightly crushed  8 scallions, white parts only, trimmed  1 teaspoon Sichuan peppercorns  4 teaspoons sugar  3 tablespoons light (or thin) soy sauce  3 to 6 tablespoons Chinese chili oil  2 teaspoons Asian sesame oil  Salt.
1. Place chicken in a medium saucepan and add cold water to cover. Remove chicken and bring water to a boil. Return chicken and when water returns to a boil, skim surface. Add ginger and two scallions and reduce heat to low; cover and simmer for 10 minutes. Remove from heat and allow chicken to cool in pan.  2. Place a dry wok or a skillet over low heat, add Sichuan pepper and stir-fry for 5 minutes, until pepper is fragrant. Remove from wok, allow to cool, then grind in a mortar. Set aside.  3. Thinly slice remaining scallions on a sharp angle and set aside. In a small bowl, mix sugar and soy sauce until sugar dissolves, then stir in oils.  4. Drain chicken, pat it dry and slice it about  1/4-inch thick. Arrange slices on a platter. Season lightly with salt. Scatter scallions around. Dust chicken with ground Sichuan pepper. Mix sauce and drizzle on top, then serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
DRY-FRIED GREEN BEANS  Adapted from ''Land of Plenty'' by Fuchsia Dunlop (W. W. Norton)  Time: 20 minutes
4 tablespoons peanut oil  10 ounces green beans, ends trimmed  8 dried chilies, preferably Sichuan, cut in half with scissors
1/2 teaspoon Sichuan peppercorns  3 cloves garlic, thinly sliced  2 scallions, white parts only, thinly sliced at a sharp angle  Salt to taste.
1. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a wok or a skillet over medium heat. Add beans and stir-fry about 6 minutes, until they are tender and have become slightly shriveled-looking. Remove and set aside.  2. Wipe out wok, place over high heat and add remaining oil. Add chilies and Sichuan pepper and stir-fry about 10 seconds, until fragrant. Add garlic and scallions and stir-fry until fragrant. Add beans, stir-fry briefly, dust with salt and serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
Correction:  February 4, 2004, Wednesday  A picture on Jan. 21 with a recipe for dry-fried green beans from ''Land of Plenty,'' a book on Sichuan cooking, was published in error. It showed a version of the dish with ground pork.
