With the Republican National Convention coming to New York City, Gov. George E. Pataki is not looking for a budget fight this year like the battle that nearly crippled him politically last year.
So he has put a $99.8 billion budget on the table that does not make deep cuts to education or health care. At the same time, he has tried to relieve counties and cities from some of the crushing burden of rising Medicaid and pension costs, which have inspired a revolt among property tax payers and local politicians.
The governor even promised to set aside $325 million from the expansion of gambling to pay for improving the schools in New York City, as the state's highest court has ordered, though Democrats immediately said it was too little and questioned whether it was wise to milk gambling addicts to help students.
On balance, however, Mr. Pataki appeared to be presenting the kind of budget one might expect in an election year, even though he is not running for election. The plan has a healthy 3.5 percent increase in spending, despite a $5.1 billion shortfall between revenue and expenses.
His remarks on Tuesday were a far cry from last year, when he declared he would never allow increases in ''job-killing taxes'' and proposed slashing the education budget by $2 billion. That plan led to a rebellion among lawmakers on both sides of the aisle, who passed tax increases over his veto.
This year, the governor stressed togetherness and optimism in his 55-minute budget address. Gone was his hard-line stance against raising taxes or spending. He talked of striking a balance between fiscal restraint and the need to improve education and provide health care. He spoke rosily of how the state was ''beginning to emerge from a period of economic uncertainty to the dawn of a new era of hope and optimism.''
''It's a different tone,'' said Assemblyman Alexander B. Grannis, a veteran Manhattan Democrat. ''I don't think he wants to fight the Legislature. The Legislature doesn't want a fight. It's not in anyone's interest to repeat last year's slugfest.''
Edmund J. McMahon, a conservative analyst with the Manhattan Institute, put it more cynically. ''He's greased it up for passage,'' he said. ''The way to get it passed is you spend up to levels the Legislature expects. It's an election year budget for them and he's tried as hard as possible to make it something they can pass easily.''
Some lawmakers said the governor was trying to be all things to all people and wondered if this would be possible to pull off when all the numbers were tallied up.
For beleaguered county executives, he promised a constitutional amendment banning laws that force local governments to pay for new programs without providing any money for them, a practice he has not been shy about endorsing in the past. He also pledged a state takeover of the cost of nursing homes over the next 10 years.
For labor, he promised no new layoffs or further cuts to staff, ignoring the fact that he has not laid off anyone during the fiscal crisis of the last three years but instead employed a hiring freeze to trim the work force. For college students, he said he would not raise tuition this year, as he supporting doing last year, though he failed to mention that he wanted to save $227 million by making scholarship recipients forgo a third of their grants until after graduation.
For the elderly, he said he would yoke state rebates for school property taxes to inflation. For farmers, he said he would create new tax benefits for agricultural businesses. For fiscal conservatives, he said he would raise the state's emergency reserve fund to $800 million. He also proposed a constitutional amendment to limit debt.
He threw a bone to manufacturers, promising to cut their taxes in five years by unifying the three taxes they now pay into one lower payment.
Mr. Pataki even offered what looked very much like an olive branch to Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, who controls his chamber's Democratic majority. Every year since 1997, the governor has purposely cut money for preschool and for reducing class sizes, knowing these are two of the speaker's priorities. He has then forced the Assembly to buy back the programs with other concessions. Not this year.
The governor also tried to be diplomatic about the dust-up with lawmakers over this year's budget, which has ended up costing about $98.2 billion even though legislative leaders predicted it would only cost $92.8 billion. Asked if the Legislature was to blame for the steep rise in spending, the governor replied, ''I don't want to look backward.''
The governor also made some promises he might not be able to keep. For instance, there is his plan calling for a cap on the contributions the state and local governments make to the state's Common Retirement Fund, in a bid to save cities and counties about $800 million. But the comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat, has said the plan is not constitutional.
Playing their usual loyal-opposition role, the Democrats immediately poured cold water on many parts of the governor's plan. Mr. Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, pounced on the governor for not putting more money in the budget for improving New York City schools and for relying on uncertain gambling revenue to pay for that court-ordered task.
Mr. Silver also criticized Mr. Pataki for extending sales taxes on clothing and raising taxes on nursing home and hospital bills, to collect more than $723 million, while talking about preserving tax cuts passed in previous years. ''Once again the governor's rhetoric does not match the reality of his actions,'' he said.
Even Mr. Pataki's Republican colleague, the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, who had little but praise for the governor's plan, said taxes on nursing home bills and the proposed expansion of gambling to pay for schools were ''very troubling, very troubling.''
But these are minor disagreements in comparison with last year. This year's budget was more notable for what the governor did not do. Overall he allowed spending to grow $3.4 billion, even though many of the federal grants the state received last year for antiterrorism measures and health care are disappearing. He did not propose rolling back the temporary tax increases the Legislature passed last year to weather the fiscal storm. He even put a $147 million increase in education aid on the table, which will be a starting point for negotiations with legislative leaders, rather than the whopping reduction he started talks with last year.
In short, Mr. Pataki is not spoiling for another showdown. Senator Bruno noted that the governor had balanced the budget ''in a way that really is not extremely hurtful or painful.'' And Senator Stephen M. Saland, a Republican from Dutchess County, said that the budget address ''was far less confrontational than last year.''
''You can sense a different attitude, you just cannot sense a different budget,'' said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat. ''Clearly they want a less contentious process.''
THE GOVERNOR'S BUDGET PLAN: THE MESSAGE
