In the great Nascar makeover of recent years, the effort to turn this tobacco-sponsored, Southern-based racing circuit into a premier national sport has been unprecedented.
From its $2.4 billion television deal in 2001 to its new sponsor, Nextel, which replaces Winston cigarettes, Nascar has viewed every change with an eye toward expanding the sport beyond its traditional base.
So it is little surprise that Nascar has made the most significant adjustment since 1975 in the points system that has been used to determine the yearly champion. Starting this season, which begins with the Daytona 500 on Feb. 15, Nascar will use a runoff in the final 10 races of the 36-race schedule to decide the overall winner in the Nextel Cup.
''With Nascar having one of the longest seasons in all of professional sports, it became obvious we needed a different approach to enhance the interest and excitement over the course of the season,'' Nascar's president, Mike Helton, said Tuesday at a news conference at the Nascar research and development center here. ''The modifications will focus more attention on our sport during the fall season when we're in competition with other major sports.''
But driver Matt Kenseth, who won the points title last season, issued a statement criticizing the move.
''Honestly, it's worse than I thought,'' he said. ''I understand the need to keep people interested and understand there has to be entertainment value, but from my vantage point as a competitor I'm disappointed.''
Since 1975, Nascar's overall champion has been determined by a points system that rewards consistency over the course of a season. A driver who wins a race receives a minimum of 175 points for the victory, with each driver receiving a smaller number of points down to 34 for the last-place driver. A driver who finishes among the leaders each race will have a better chance of winning the season-long title over a driver who is inconsistent.
That is why Kenseth captured the title despite winning just once in 36 races. Kenseth led all drivers with 25 finishes in the top 10. He took over the lead in the points race in March, and by September there was little doubt he would win the title. Ryan Newman had eight victories, better than any other driver, but ended up sixth in the points race because of several low finishes along the way. The final months of the season were little more than a formality rather than a build-up to the last race.
This year, the season will have two parts. Through the first 26 races, all drivers will compete to finish in the top 10 in the points standing. After 26 races, those drivers who are in the top 10, along with any other drivers within 400 points of the leader, will have their point totals altered for what Nascar is calling the Chase for the Championship.
The No. 1 driver in the points race will automatically start at 5,050 points. The No. 2 driver will have 5,045 points, the third driver 5,040 points and so on. Last season, Kenseth had 3,864 points through the first 26 races, and 785 points separated him from Michael Waltrip, who was in 10th place. At that point, Waltrip had little chance of winning the overall title.
This season, the gap from first place to 10th will be 45 points when the final 10 races begin, so more drivers will be in contention. Nascar expects to be attracting greater interest even against the baseball playoffs and pro and college football. Nascar's chairman, Brian France, acknowledged that Nascar had usually had a drop in television ratings in the fall.
France was quick to point out that this is not a playoff system. No driver will be eliminated; each race will continue to have a 43-car field in which all competitors have a chance to win. But only the top 10 after 26 races, along with any others who were within 400 points of the leader, will continue to be eligible for the overall points championship.
Nascar also announced that winners will receive 180 points for a victory instead of the previous 175, a slightly greater reward for winning that still forces drivers and teams to emphasize consistency over the season. The points champion will receive a minimum bonus of $5 million this season.
The idea of changing the points system has drawn criticism not only from drivers but also from fans online. There has also been concern that corporate sponsors of various drivers who are not in contention will back out of their commitments after the 26th race because the focus will be on the top 10 drivers.
Waltrip, who attended the news conference, said he supported the change. Kenseth, however, said the new system took away emphasis from winning races.
''I think a lot of the guys will have the feeling of not wanting to make a mistake and just concentrating on getting a good finish to make sure they're in the top 10,'' he said.
Nascar officials say they hope drivers, sponsors and fans will wait to see how it plays out.
''We know that our drivers and everybody else, when all the details are understood and as it unfolds, they are going to love it,'' France said. ''They are going to love it because drivers are going to have an opportunity to compete for a championship late in the year.''
AUTO RACING
