What did Chopin admire most of all in the music of Bach (for admire it he did)? I suspect it was the fearless adventure: the courage and knowledge -- the second breeds the first -- to take traditional harmony to the brink of chaos and have it all make sense. One hundred years later, and in a very different way, Chopin did much the same thing. Piotr Anderszewski put the two great men side by side in a piano recital at Alice Tully Hall on Sunday.
It is easier to be original when one has no boundaries, and when one answers to self-created rules. On the other hand, pieces like Bach's extraordinary A-minor Prelude and Fugue from Book 2 of the ''Well-Tempered Clavier'' and the densely written and physically difficult D-minor English Suite ride along the outer edges of possibility with a confidence that seems to dwarf all other composers.
The effect of this music is made more vivid because we rarely hear it in public. Its wonders come to us almost fresh. This is not usually the case with Chopin, whose own fearless adventures have been repeated so often that we are nearly numb to them. Mid-level virtuosos do not become famous playing Bach in public (if it was originally intended for the public at all).
Such career tactics have also spared Chopin's Mazurkas, including the three from Opus 59 that Mr. Anderszewski played on Sunday. Small scale, technically easy, like little laboratories for experimentation, the Mazurkas have been of less use to career-building performers, and thus retained their color.
Mr. Anderszewski is not a mid-level virtuoso but a musician in his mid-30's good enough to play anything he wants and still attract a nearly full house on a bad-weather afternoon. His technique was sharp enough to bring Bach's complicated inner life to light, and he gave the Chopin pieces the simplicity they deserved.
Mr. Anderszewski played Bach as if the composer had had a modern piano in front of him, but he makes use of period practices: ornaments added to repeats or, as in the B-Flat Partita at the end, changes of octave aping the old two-manual harpsichords.
He also played the three pieces of Szymanowski's ''Metopes.'' There is an essential delicacy in this music yet at times an overfondness for virtuoso flourishes. Szymanowski, who died in 1937, likes to send quivers of trills and tremolos through semi-transparent clouds of sound, giving a removed, almost remote quality to these pieces. The gestures recall Scriabin but replace Scriabin's sensuality with something chaste, almost innocent.
MUSIC REVIEW
