It was a breathtakingly beautiful spread, 6,000 acres for cattle and crops on one of southern Colombia's most fertile plains, and the family that owned it had no plans to move. But when, late last year, shadowy men arrived and proposed a sale -- and set a bargain-basement price -- the owners felt it was an offer they could not refuse, said one of the family members, asking for anonymity.
The buyers, after all, were paramilitary bullies, swaggering, armed members of one of Colombia's right-wing armies, who along with drug traffickers have been gobbling up land across Colombia, either by forcing farmers off their plots or using intimidation to prod owners to sell.
''You have to give it up or they will kill you or kidnap you,'' said an urbane Bogotá intellectual, a member of the family that lost the farm. ''You take what they offer and that is it. What can you do?''
President Álvaro Uribe's government, with strong support from the Bush administration, is tackling urgent security problems, hoping to give the state control of its historically lawless countryside. Talks aimed at disarming right-wing paramilitary squads, an antiguerrilla movement long involved in drug trafficking, are advancing, and American-financed spraying efforts are hitting coca fields hard. A top commander of the left-wing rebels is under arrest.
But partly as a result of these successes, an older, festering crime that lies at the root of Colombia's 40-year conflict is stepping up -- the illegal seizure of Colombia's most fertile land, according to United Nations officials, land experts in the government and human rights groups. As the government negotiates demobilization with the 15,000-member paramilitary force, its leaders are quietly laundering accumulated drug money by taking control of huge tracts, often at the point of a gun. Most of the victims are poor, voiceless farmers, but the officials say even some big landowners have lost their prized farms.
The only solution, say diplomats and land use experts, is an aggressive effort to root out corrupt owners, return stolen property to the rightful owners and parcel out untitled land to the landless. It is an undertaking that would work far more smoothly if the United States -- which traditionally focuses primarily on drugs -- were more involved.
Land reform, as it is called, may sound like an outmoded 1960's-era ideal in a country that appears to have land to spare. Colombia, after all, is twice the size of France, and a majority of its 40 million people live in towns and cities.
But Colombia remains a nation rooted in agriculture, with two million people displaced by conflict and in need of a place to live. The country has long been destabilized by lawlessness in the countryside, which drives a never-ending stream of impoverished farmers off the land and into the cities, where they live as internal refugees in shantytowns that breed crime and violence.
''The land problem is at the center of the armed conflict in Colombia,'' said Jorge Rojas, a leading advocate here for refugees. ''And the armed conflict is Colombia's principal problem.''
The government's own estimation of who controls Colombia's land is sobering: 40 percent of the best lands are in the hands of drug traffickers, including paramilitary forces.
Of Colombia's arable land -- an area equivalent in size to North Dakota -- only about 20 percent is even used for agriculture. Various studies also show that Colombia's farms are increasingly consolidated in fewer and fewer hands, with 30 percent of property owners controlling about 95 percent of the best lands.
And it isn't just drug traffickers. Scores of wealthy families control large tracts but produce nothing and employ no one -- holding land simply to sell it when the price is high.
It is obvious what Colombia needs to do. It already has a far-reaching asset forfeiture law passed in 1996, and the government is now in control of a collection of properties equivalent in size to the state of Rhode Island, said Luis Alfonso Plazas, director of the government's antinarcotics office.
The president has told judges to be swift about seizing illegally obtained properties, and officials insist that they will crack down on the paramilitary groups.
''All those lands can be expropriated by the state,'' Luis Carlos Restrepo, Mr. Uribe's top negotiator with insurgent groups, said in an interview.
But experts say that actually resolving this messy, complicated state of affairs will be an uphill battle.
Even determining the legality of a piece of property is often impossible, since drug traffickers and paramilitary groups often register newly purchased properties in the names of third parties. There is little chance that any properties will be found registered in the names of such paramilitary warlords as Carlos Castaño , Salvatore Mancuso or Diego Fernando Murillo, three top leaders of the organization who are said to control wide swaths of territory.
Some leading political analysts believe that progress on land reform will depend on the United States, which has spent $25 billion on the Andean region in the past 20 years, most of it in Colombia and most in the form of military hardware and military training for the drug war.
Not just in Colombia but throughout the Andes region, governments suffer from weak institutions, shoddy education, corruption and lax tax collection. In a recent report on the region, the Council on Foreign Relations said the United States can help by providing guidance and, where necessary, pressing governments to carry out difficult reforms.
Tolerating the status quo could be self-defeating for American policy. Consider the case of Pedro Alberto and his wife, Piedad, who found out how fast they could lose their eight acres one day last year when paramilitary men arrived in their town, Viotá. The gunmen killed several people and forced hundreds of people to flee. The couple had owned two small farms, raising chickens and fish and growing plantains, manioc and coffee.
''We lived there 35 years and now we have nothing,'' Pedro Alberto said Tuesday morning at a Catholic relief agency in Bogotá. He asked that his last name not be used, for fear of retribution. ''That land was priceless to us. Everything you could plant there grew.''
LETTER FROM THE AMERICAS
