Senator John Kerry's victory in Iowa may have been a big surprise, but it was Howard Dean's guttural, concession-speech battle cry that was the talk on Tuesday of the political world.
The question that bounced around television, radio, the Internet and even the Des Moines airport -- bursting Tuesday morning with departing journalists and political operatives -- was whether the speech would prove to be a defining political moment for Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, just as voters began to pay close attention to the Democratic race.
''He looked hysterical,'' Howard Wolfson, a Democratic consultant, said on ''NBC Nightly News.''
''Howard Dean scared a lot of children last night,'' Tucker Carlson, a Republican political commentator, declared on CNN. Like the other cable news networks, CNN played the image of Dr. Dean, his sleeves rolled up, neck bulging, pointing at the crowd, over and over.
Republican officials could not have been happier. ''That's six ads,'' one party official said, referring playfully to the number of advertisements that might be mined from that appearance to reinforce efforts to portray Dr. Dean as angry and nonpresidential.
Dr. Dean made his address late on Monday before a room of supporters, declaring: ''We're going to South Carolina and Oklahoma and Arizona and North Dakota and New Mexico. We're going to California and Texas and New York!'' After listing still more states and finally Washington, he punctuated the speech with a throaty howl.
Even some of Dr. Dean's supporters said the speech had affected their perception of the candidate.
Dan Goldberg, a marketing executive with a film distribution company in New York, said he had been planning to volunteer for Dr. Dean in New Hampshire. After watching the speech, Mr. Goldberg said, he changed his mind.
''Any chances I would vote for Dean were completely erased by that speech last night -- scary,'' he said. ''I thought mirrors in my apartment would shatter.''
Dr. Dean and his staff said the focus on his speech was another instance of unfair treatment at the hands of the news media, which they accused of turning a surprisingly upbeat address after a third-place finish into a negative.
But political experts and some Democrats said the speech could be for Dr. Dean what Dan Quayle's famous misspelling of the word ''potato'' was for Mr. Quayle in 1992: a reinforcement of a perceived character flaw. In Mr. Quayle's case, the misspelling went to questions about his intellect.
Even before Monday night, opponents were trying to portray Dr. Dean as the angriest man in politics, prompting ''Saturday Night Live'' last weekend to depict him as a cursing egomaniac.
Darrell West, a professor of political science at Brown University, said of Dr. Dean's appearance, ''I think many people watching it would have thought he was just losing it, big time.''
''It's a moment that provides a window into the soul of the man,'' Professor West added. ''And it reinforces many of the fears that people have expressed about Dean: that he's angry and that he doesn't have the proper temperament to be president.''
Then again, other presidential candidates have had similarly low moments televised and still went on to win or retain the White House.
After erroneously concluding that the Rev. Jesse Jackson had endorsed Senator Tom Harkin in the 1992 primary campaign, Bill Clinton, believing a camera trained on him had been turned off, called the move a ''dirty, double-crossing, back-stabbing thing to do.'' It was a rare glimpse of one of Mr. Clinton's now-famous flares of temper.
But that was before the age of three cable news networks and heavy Internet use, and it did no apparent damage to Mr. Clinton's campaign.
Dr. Dean and his aides played down the attention on the speech. Answering questions from reporters in New Hampshire, Dr. Dean said he was simply trying to rally Iowa volunteers gathered at a party in West Des Moines to see him off on Monday night.
''Last night there were 3,500 people there who had worked for weeks in Iowa,'' he said. ''And I thought I owed them the reason they came to this campaign, which was passion.''
Responding to characterizations of the speech as a ''meltdown,'' Dr. Dean's media strategist, Steve McMahon, said: ''It was not a meltdown. It was an acknowledgment that Senator Kerry had won a primary but the people in that room had changed politics forever.''
And in a telephone interview, Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, vented frustration with the coverage of the address. ''I think it's being mischaracterized,'' Mr. Trippi said. ''That's another thing that we're used to. I kind of thought that the news of the night was that, when he walked on the stage, the party was more energized than any victory party I have ever been to.''
David Doak, a Democratic political consultant in Washington, said he did not think the speech would cause any lasting damage.
''It would have been worse if he had come out there and looked like a big hangdog,'' Mr. Doak said. ''I'm not saying it's a plus. But I don't think it's a big minus.''
Even so, some supporters raised questions after the speech on Dr. Dean's campaign Web site.
A message from someone with the e-mail title AtlDem wrote, ''I hate to say it, but the Gov looked downright scary tonight.''
But consultants and experts said one thing could turn it all around for Dr. Dean: a good showing in New Hampshire.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: RHETORIC
