Srey Neth and Srey Mom were stunned when I proposed buying their freedom from their brothel owners.
''It's unbelievable,'' Srey Mom said, smiling with an incandescence that seemed to light the street. ''There's no problem with taking pictures and telling my story. I want to tell it. But I'm a little afraid that if my mother sees it, she'll be heartbroken.''
After I decided to buy the two teenage prostitutes, as recounted in my column on Saturday, I swore them to secrecy for fear that the brothel owners would spirit them away, rather than let them tell their stories. But the first purchase, of Srey Neth, went smoothly.
I woke up her brothel's owner at dawn, handed over $150, brushed off demands for ''interest on the debt'' and got a receipt for ''$150 for buying a girl's freedom.'' Then Srey Neth and I fled before the brothel's owner was even out of bed.
But at Srey Mom's brothel, her owner announced that the debt was not $70, as the girl had thought, but $400.
''Where are the books?'' I asked. A ledger was produced, and it purported to show that Srey Mom owed the equivalent of $337. But it also revealed that the girls were virtually A.T.M.'s for the brothels, generating large sums of cash that the girls were cheated out of. After some grumpy negotiation, the owner accepted $203 as the price for Srey Mom's freedom. But then Srey Mom told me that she had pawned her cellphone and needed $55 to get it back.
''Forget about your cellphone,'' I said. ''We've got to get out of here.''
Srey Mom started crying. I told her that she had to choose her cellphone or her freedom, and she ran back to her tiny room in the brothel and locked the door.
In my last column, I described the sex trafficking in places like Cambodia as a modern form of slavery, and I believe that. But the scene that unfolded next underscored the moral complexity of a world in which some girls are ambivalent about being rescued and not all brothel owners are monsters. Some brothel owners use beatings and locked rooms to enslave their girls, but most use debts and ostensible kindness to manipulate them -- and the girls are often so naïve, so stigmatized by everyone else and so broken in spirit that this works.
With Srey Mom sobbing in her room and refusing to be freed without her cellphone, the other prostitutes -- her closest friends -- began pleading with her to be reasonable. So did the brothel's owner.
''Grab this chance while you can,'' the owner begged Srey Mom. But the girl would not give in. After half an hour of hysterics about the cellphone, I felt so manipulated that I almost walked out. But I finally caved.
''O.K., O.K., I'll get back your cellphone,'' I told her through the door. The tears stopped.
''My jewelry, too?'' she asked plaintively. ''I also pawned some jewelry.''
So we went to get back the phone and the jewelry -- which were, I think, never the real concern. Srey Mom later explained that her resistance had nothing to do with wanting the telephone and everything to do with last-minute cold feet about whether her family and village would accept her if she returned. The possibility of rejection by her mother was almost as frightening as the idea of finishing her life in the brothel.
On our return with the phone and jewelry, the family of the brothel's owner lighted joss sticks for Srey Mom and prayed for her at a Buddhist altar in the foyer of the brothel. The owner (called ''Mother'' by the girls) warned Srey Mom against returning to prostitution.
Finally, Srey Mom said goodbye to ''Mother,'' the owner who had enslaved her, cheated her and perhaps even helped infect her with the AIDS virus -- yet who had also been kind to her when she was homesick, and who had never forced her to have sex when she was ill. It was a farewell of infinite complexity, yet real tenderness.
So now I have purchased the freedom of two human beings so I can return them to their villages. But will emancipation help them? Will their families and villages accept them? Or will they, like some other girls rescued from sexual servitude, find freedom so unsettling that they slink back to slavery in the brothels? We'll see.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com
