The National Basketball Association removed several dozen sweatshirts made in Myanmar from its Fifth Avenue store yesterday after a labor rights advocate accused the league of violating federal law by selling goods made in that country.
The advocate, Charles Kernaghan, director of the National Labor Committee, an anti-sweatshop group, accused the N.B.A. yesterday morning of selling ''I Love This Game'' sweatshirts that had tags saying they were made in Myanmar, formerly known as Burma. Last July, President Bush signed the Burmese Freedom and Democracy Act, which barred imports from Myanmar. Congress enacted it because of displeasure with the military junta there and repression of the democratic opposition and its leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize.
Mr. Kernaghan said, ''You have the N.B.A. and its contractor knowingly flying right in the face of what Congress and the president have done to help 50 million people suffering under this brutal dictatorship.''
At lunchtime yesterday, dozens of red, blue, black and gray hooded sweatshirts made in Myanmar were displayed on the first floor of the N.B.A.'s store at 52nd Street and Fifth Avenue, 25 feet from the front door. Two and a half hours after receiving an inquiry from The New York Times about the sweatshirts, Matt Bourne, an N.B.A. spokesman, announced that the league was pulling those items off the sales floor.
''We're removing the sweatshirts from the shelves immediately,'' Mr. Bourne said. ''We inspected all items from the store -- that is the only piece that was manufactured in Burma.''
Mr. Bourne said the manufacturing contractor that the basketball league had used violated the N.B.A.'s code of conduct by failing to tell the league that it was using a factory in Myanmar to make the sweatshirts. ''The sweatshirts could have been imported from Burma months or years before the sanctions were enacted,'' Mr. Bourne said.
Mr. Kernaghan made records available that showed that the contractor had rushed in shipments of the sweatshirts last August, after the import ban was enacted, but before the ban took effect on Sept. 1.
Mr. Kernaghan, whose group receives funds from foundations and labor unions, said that in Myanmar many apparel factories pay workers just 7 cents an hour and less than $3.50 a week.
He said the failure of the sweatshirt contractor to tell the N.B.A. that it was using a factory in Myanmar showed how ineffectual the league was in enforcing its code of conduct.
''It was a good step that they're taking these sweatshirts out of their store, but it's unconscionable that they were there in the first place,'' Mr. Kernaghan said. ''The fact that these sweatshirts entered the store with the label 'Made in Burma' and the fact that they were prominently displayed on the first floor speaks volumes that the N.B.A. is not on top of their code of conduct and not on top of their suppliers.''
Mr. Bourne maintained that the N.B.A. worked hard to enforce its code of conduct, saying that the league required all factories that made apparel for the league to post it prominently.
