Snarled traffic, long shadows and noise -- a decade's worth of noise -- will be the inevitable byproducts of the redevelopment of the World Trade Center site, according to a 2,000-page study approved yesterday by the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.
The data came in a draft environmental impact statement that was approved unanimously by the corporation board. Part of its purpose is to identify potential problems and recommend ways to avoid or lessen them.
But it could find no way to fully mitigate the worsening traffic expected at 18 key intersections and crosswalks. Nor could it envision dispelling the shadows that would be cast by the Freedom Tower and four other skyscrapers on Washington Market Park in TriBeCa and other open spaces nearby.
Further, the statement conceded that the neighborhood would be very noisy for an entire decade, during the almost simultaneous construction of the office towers, the trade center memorial, cultural and retail buildings, the permanent PATH station and the Fulton Street Transit Center -- while Route 9A-West Street is under reconstruction.
As for air quality, the statement acknowledged that ''there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the long-term health impacts'' of Sept. 11, 2001. Because ''significant adverse impacts have been predicted in the vicinity,'' special attention will be given to air quality, the corporation said. It cited a policy of significantly reducing diesel emissions from construction equipment, which it identified as a major source of new pollutants.
It also outlined measures like worker training, protective and monitoring equipment, physical isolation and treatment systems to deal with materials like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, metals, asbestos and dust at the site. ''Because hazardous materials would be abated, managed or remediated during construction,'' the statement said, ''no significant adverse impacts are expected.''
Ultimately -- and not surprisingly -- the impact statement concluded that the project would have far more benefits than drawbacks. The goal, it said, was ''to revitalize Lower Manhattan as a center of commercial, residential and cultural activity,'' with ''a memorial at its heart to honor and remember the victims of the attacks.''
The document, required by state and federal agencies financing the project, compares the effects of the proposed construction with existing conditions, alternate development approaches and conditions that might have existed had the attack not occurred. It sets two milestones: 2009, when the first phase is finished, and 2015, for total completion.
Conditions studied in the document often represent the maximum that might be expected, said Irene Chang, the vice president for legal affairs and counsel at the development corporation. And because revitalization is a goal, certain increases -- say, in pedestrian traffic -- are not unwelcome.
The draft will be available by the end of the week at three New York Public Library branches downtown, at the Humanities and Social Sciences Library on Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street and at the offices of Community Boards 1, 2 and 3 in Lower Manhattan. It will also be posted on the corporation's Web site, www.renewnyc.com.
Two public hearings on the document are scheduled for Feb. 18 at Pace University, and public comments will be accepted until March 15.
After revisions are made, the document will be voted on again by the board, probably in April. It is sure to be mined in the months ahead for the detailed information it provides. And it is certain to be criticized for impacts that it does not consider.
Parallel reviews now under way include a study required by the National Historic Preservation Act to determine whether the World Trade Center site is eligible for listing on the state and federal registers of historic places. That determination ''appears likely,'' Ms. Chang told the board yesterday.
Depending on the outcome, it could affect the design of the memorial and of the permanent PATH terminal, which share the site where the twin towers stood.
At the bottom of the 70-foot-deep foundations are many steel column footings defining the full outline of the north tower and much of the south tower.
Far older historical artifacts may be found, the impact statement noted, on what were once waterfront lots. Remnants might include parts of wharves or timber cribbing, as well as privies, cisterns, wells and cesspools from before the 1850's.
At the end of 2009, by far the largest use on the site in square footage will be the commercial office space controlled by Larry A. Silverstein: 2.6 million square feet in the 70-story Freedom Tower, which will also have a 400-person viewing deck, a 600-seat cafe, a 400-seat restaurant and 41,500 square feet of retail space on three levels. The 65-story second tower, the 62-story third tower and the 58-story fourth tower will not yet have risen, but their retail bases will be in place, on three levels, with a total of 310,000 square feet among them. An underground retail area will bring the total to 1 million square feet.
The memorial will be 4.2 acres, or 182,670 square feet, and is expected at first to draw up to 9 million visitors in 2009, declinng to 5.5 million by 2015. There will also be an underground memorial center, other cultural space and a performing arts center.
Since the impact statement was compiled, a winning design, ''Reflecting Absence'' by Michael Arad and Peter Walker, was chosen for the memorial. ''We will have to do some adjusting of analyses as the design continues,'' Ms. Chang said.
Open space completed by 2009 will total 211,350 square feet, or 4.9 acres, the largest being the 1.3-acre Wedge of Light along Fulton Street and the 1.3-acre Liberty Park South on the south side of Liberty Street. There will also be an 18,965-square-foot galleria along the route of Cortlandt Street.
There will be room in the underground roadway network for about 80 trucks to service the buildings above. An underground garage for 100 buses will be built nearby in Battery Park City or on the Deutsche Bank site south of Liberty Street.
