President Bush warned Americans on Tuesday night that there could still be a terrorist attack on the United States and then presented a choice between his continued leadership and a return to the ''dangerous illusion'' that the threat had ended.
In a 54-minute State of the Union address, Mr. Bush showcased the extent to which he will use his administration's fight against terrorism in his re-election campaign. He then moved on to a variety of domestic issues and forcefully questioned court cases that have opened the door to same-sex marriage.
The president said that if activist judges pressed the issue, ''the only alternative'' would be a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage, a move that would endear him to his conservative supporters. ''Our nation must defend the sanctity of marriage,'' Mr. Bush said.
Addressing the central domestic issue this election year, Mr. Bush said that the economy was ''growing stronger'' and that his recipe of permanent tax cuts, trade promotion and added oil and gas drilling would further strengthen the recovery.
''We have not come all this way, through tragedy and trial and war, only to falter and leave our work unfinished,'' he said. ''Americans are rising to the tasks of history, and they expect the same from us.''
Mr. Bush offered a panoply of smaller domestic proposals like promoting sexual abstinence among teenagers, increased financing for drug testing in schools and a call for athletes to stop using steroids.
Reflecting the restrictions imposed on him by the growing budget deficit, many of the proposals carried relatively little or no cost. He never discussed one of his most potentially costly new proposals, his declaration last week that Americans would return to the Moon by 2020 and use that as a launching pad to Mars.
Mr. Bush cast himself as the steady commander in chief of what he portrayed as a nation at war, seeming to suggest that changing the leader midbattle was risky.
''Twenty-eight months have passed since Sept. 11, 2001, over two years without an attack on American soil, and it is tempting to believe that the danger is behind us,'' he said in the somber tones he reserves for his most important speeches. ''That hope is understandable, comforting and false.'' [Transcript, Page A18.]
Mr. Bush put forth no major new foreign policy or domestic initiatives in an address that was as much about political drama as substance and that served as the president's grandest stage until his party's nominating convention in New York in September. Speaking to an estimated audience of 60 million people in an address that the White House scheduled a day after the caucuses in Iowa and a week before the primary in New Hampshire, Mr. Bush defended himself against the attacks by the Democratic presidential candidates on a wide range of foreign and domestic matters like tax cuts, Iraq and whether the war on terrorism is, as he put it, ''a war at all.'' Mr. Bush most directly took on his critics over Iraq and the question of banned weapons.
''Some in this chamber, and in our country, did not support the liberation of Iraq,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Objections to war often come from principled motives. But let us be candid about the consequences of leaving Saddam Hussein in power.''
Had his administration failed to act, Mr. Bush said, ''the dictator's weapons of mass destruction programs would continue to this day.''
Mr. Bush did not mention that American inspectors had found no unconventional weapons, the major stated reason that the administration went to war with Iraq.
There was an excited mood in the chamber of the House of Representatives, as there almost always is when a president delivers a State of the Union address. But the response to the remarks reflected the deep divisions between the two parties. Democrats sat silently at many points, particularly when Mr. Bush discussed the economy and his domestic initiatives.
The audience applauded 71 times, including sustained applause for one of Mr. Bush's guests, Adnan Pachachi, president of the American-selected Iraqi Governing Council. A year ago, Mr. Bush used his State of the Union address to make the case for military action against Iraq and devoted large sections of that speech to ''a serious and mounting threat to our country'' posed by Mr. Hussein's illicit weapons.
This year, Mr. Bush only briefly mentioned the continuing search by David Kay, the chief American weapons inspector in Iraq, but did not promise, as he had in the past, that the weapons would eventually be found.
The president began his talk with a discourse on what he called his administration's achievements in national security, an area where polls show that he has an enormous advantage over the Democrats. Mr. Bush cited as a prime accomplishment Mr. Hussein's capture in December. ''The once all-powerful ruler of Iraq was found in a hole and now sits in a prison cell,'' Mr. Bush said, prompting one of the biggest rounds of applause of the evening.
He devoted the second half of his speech to an area where he is far more vulnerable, the economy, which has lost 2.5 million jobs since he took office.
In contrast to the celebratory partisan energy generated by speeches on Monday night by Senators John Kerry and John Edwards in Iowa, Mr. Bush's demeanor was one of sober gravitas as he sought to portray a mature, experienced leader who had guided the nation through the 9/11 attacks -- an accomplishment that no Democratic would be able to claim.
In a chamber missing the three senators who are seeking the Democratic nomination for president -- Mr. Kerry of Massachusetts, Mr. Edwards of North Carolina and Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who were all in New Hampshire -- Mr. Bush made no mention of the Democratic races that were consuming the nation and his own political advisers. His goal, his aides said, was to portray himself as so immersed in the serious business of running the nation that he was little concerned with the Democratic fistfights playing out in a frigid corner of the Northeast.
On health care, an issue that has become a centerpiece of the Democratic campaigns, Mr. Bush offered an expansion and repackaging of plans that he has previously introduced, tax credits to help pay for insurance and health savings accounts that would encourage people to set aside money tax free for unreimbursed medical expenses.
''Our goal,'' he said, ''is to ensure that Americans can choose and afford private health care coverage that best fits their individual needs.''
Democrats said the proposals fell far short of what was needed to help the 43 million Americans who lacked insurance and the additional millions whose household budgets were strained by health costs.
On immigration, Mr. Bush repeated his proposal to give legal status to millions of illegal immigrant workers, a plan that the White House hopes will appeal to Hispanic voters critical to Mr. Bush's re-election.
Mr. Bush repeatedly stressed that he had signed into law a new Medicare bill that provides a prescription drug benefit for retirees, a step that his party hopes will neutralize a traditional Democratic advantage. Similarly, Mr. Bush appealed to the political center by reminding the nation that he had signed a broad overhaul of education policy, the No Child Left Behind Act.
Mr. Bush's State of the Union address last year focused heavily on the impending Iraq war. In making his case for why Mr. Hussein posed a threat, the president said Iraq had failed to account for large stocks of biological and chemical weapons and appeared to be pursuing a nuclear weapons program. To bolster his case last Jan. 28, Mr. Bush uttered these 16 words that haunted him for months: ''The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa.''
Last summer, the White House acknowledged that intelligence behind the assertion was flawed, exposing Mr. Bush to criticism that he had deliberately exaggerated the threat.
On Tuesday night, Mr. Bush offered no specific evidence to back up his more general and much less disputed statement that ''terrorists continue to plot against America and the civilized world.''
Mr. Bush said criticism about unilateral action in Iraq was misplaced, noting that at least 34 nations had contributed assistance to the United States. He mentioned in passing that the United Nations was participating in his efforts to restore sovereignty to Iraq. But he also made clear that there were limits to the United States' willingness to await international approval for military action against terrorists and nations that help them.
''America will never seek a permission slip to defend the security of our people,'' Mr. Bush said.
Mr. Bush called for added spending on programs to help promote democracy in the Mideast, but did not mention his stalled plan for peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
In a Democratic rebuttal, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California and Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota attacked Mr. Bush on foreign and domestic policy. Ms. Pelosi, the House minority leader, said Mr. Bush had pursued ''a go-it-alone foreign policy that leaves us isolated abroad and that steals the resources we need for education and health care here at home.''
Mr. Daschle, the Senate minority leader, said the ''massive'' tax cuts championed by Mr. Bush had not created the jobs the administration promised and had ''instead led to an economic exodus.''
Mr. Bush appeared well prepared for what is sure to be a year of intense partisan warfare. Alluding to the presidential race, Mr. Bush drew a distinction between his stewardship and his challengers.
''We have faced serious challenges together, and now we face a choice,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We can go forward with confidence and resolve or we can turn back to the dangerous illusion that terrorists are not plotting and outlaw regimes are no threat to us. We can press on with economic growth and reforms in education and Medicare or we can turn back to old policies and old divisions.''
With many crucial provisions of the Patriot Act set to expire on Dec. 31, 2005, Mr. Bush stepped into a potential minefield by calling for renewal of the law. Attorney General John Ashcroft has been leading the charge for the act as it has come under increasing attack from liberals and conservatives, who say it impinges on civil liberties. Democrats have promised to oppose renewing many important sections of the law, particularly those broadening government surveillance powers. Some critics in Congress applauded enthusiastically on Tuesday night when Mr. Bush noted that the law was scheduled to expire.
STATE OF THE UNION: THE OVERVIEW
