Psychoanalysis, Janet Malcolm once wrote, is the wary (ultimately weary) examination by patient and analyst of the patient's behavior toward the analyst. Out of this absurdist collaboration -- the tireless joint scrutiny of the patient's reactions and overreactions to the analyst's limited repertory of activity in the sphere of fees, hours, waiting-room etiquette and above all absences -- come small, stray self-recognitions that no other relationship yields, brought forward under conditions of frustration (and gratification) that no other relationship could survive.
At its best ''Empathy,'' a curious hybrid of documentary, fictional feature and graduate school seminar paper written and directed by Amie Siegel, elaborates on this insight with something like Ms. Malcolm's skeptical reportorial sensibility. It does not quite reverse her emphasis on the patient's experience of transference but rather points its scrutiny in the other direction, toward the mysterious figure of the analyst himself. And I do mean him.
The most interesting sections of ''Empathy,'' which opens today at Film Forum, are interviews with analysts, all of them white, male and over 55. Their own musings on the therapeutic relationship -- variously coy, candid, thoughtful and self-justifying -- are prompted by Ms. Siegel's questions, which are by turns self-consciously sophisticated and deliberately naïve. Do they ever lie to their patients? Have they ever fallen in love with patients? Have the patients, who seem to be as normatively female as the analysts are male, ever fallen in love with them?
These sessions are layered with the story -- as meandering and inconclusive as analysis itself -- of Lia (Gigi Buffington), a voice-over actress who is being treated for depression. We follow Lia through her desultory routines, which include recording the narration for a documentary within the film on the intersection between psychoanalysis and modern design, with special attention to the shrink-beloved Eames chair. We also see Ms. Buffington and other actresses auditioning for roles in the movie.
Saying that ''Empathy'' combines fictional and documentary techniques is a bit misleading, since it deliberately confuses them. In one very funny deadpan scene, Ms. Siegel confronts Lia's analyst (David Solomon, who really is one) in the garage outside his office and starts peppering him with questions, which he refuses to answer on ethical grounds. When the director reminds him that Lia is a fictional character, he replies that it makes no difference; the rules of doctor-patient confidentiality still apply.
One wishes that Ms. Siegel had held that strictly to the traditions of intellectual rigor and narrative coherence. They also are part of the psychoanalytic tradition, in Freud's case studies for instance, and also in Ms. Malcolm's journalistic observations of his legacy. ''Empathy'' sometimes feels like a long exercise in free association, wandering from one notion to another without bothering to explicate its ideas or to dramatize them.
The director's seriousness and intelligence are evident, but so is her satisfaction in displaying them, and the movie has a self-indulgent, undisciplined tone that nearly obscures its provocative ideas about how ordinary life, even at its most banal, is made up of a series of intricate performances and highly complex relationships. I would say more about this, but unfortunately our time is up.
EMPATHY
Written, directed and edited by Amie Siegel; director of photography, Mark Rance; produced by Mr. Rance and Ms. Siegel. At the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Sixth Avenue, South Village. Running time: 92 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Gigi Buffington (Lia), Dr. David Solomon (Psychoanalyst), Aria Knee (Anne), Maria Silverman (Rachel) and Jennifer Scott James (Gigi Buffington).
FILM REVIEW
