President Bush hinted at big plans on Tuesday about overhauling Social Security and restated demands to make the last rounds of tax cuts permanent, but he made only fleeting references to new initiatives.
Alluding to his oft-stated goal of privatizing Social Security, Mr. Bush said that ''younger workers should have the opportunity to build a nest egg by saving part of their Social Security taxes in a personal retirement account.''
But the president is not expected to propose an immediate shift from Social Security in his pending budget. Rather, administration officials say they plan to recycle a proposal from last year to expand tax-advantaged savings accounts.
Mr. Bush's limited agenda reflects pressure from conservative Republicans as well as Democrats to rein in a budget deficit that could approach $500 billion this year.
Though Mr. Bush demanded that Congress make last year's tax cuts permanent, he repeated recent pledges to reduce the deficit by half over the next five years and hold the growth in discretionary spending to 4 percent a year.
And though he promised an initiative called ''Jobs for the 21st Century,'' which included extra help to schools and community colleges, Mr. Bush provided no hint of how much money he would spend.
Mr. Bush previously proposed a $3 billion program to help unemployed workers pay for job training, but the proposal never passed Congress and he did not allude to it again this year.
The administration's proposals for big new tax-advantaged savings plans -- one for retirement, another for savings for any purpose -- have the virtue of allowing Mr. Bush to think big without spending much money, at least over the course of the next few years. As proposed last year, a married couple would be able to set aside up to $15,000 a year in a ''lifetime savings account'' and thousands more in so-called retirement savings accounts.
People would still have to pay taxes on money they contribute, but not on any investment income that accrues after that. Besides allowing people to set aside more money than before, the proposal would allow people to withdraw money from the ''lifetime'' accounts whenever they want and for whatever purpose.
The problem, some economists say, is that the proposals would do little in themselves to solve the basic long-term problem of Social Security, which is that the so-called trust fund faces eventual insolvency as the nation's 75 million baby boomers reach retirement age over the next several decades.
And over the longer term, they say, the proposed savings accounts could cost tens of billions of dollars a year as more and more of the nation's investment income becomes entirely shielded from taxation.
Many experts, Republican and Democratic, predict that Mr. Bush will make only limited progress on major tax initiatives this year.
Making the tax cuts permanent would cost more than $1 trillion over the next decade, according to estimates last summer by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office, and none of the recent tax cuts expire in the next year.
''I don't see them pushing on anything hard except possibly a half-hearted effort to make the tax cuts permanent,'' said Bruce Bartlett, a longtime Republican tax expert who is now a senior fellow at the National Center for Policy Analysis, a policy research group.
Economists at the Brookings Institution estimated that, 25 years from now, the new savings accounts could cost the United States Treasury $50 billion a year in lost tax revenue.
Under the proposals first put forward one year ago, a married couple would have been able to set aside up to $15,000 a year in a ''lifetime savings account'' and as much as $15,000 more in the ''retirement'' accounts.
Last year, Congressional Republicans persuaded the White House to back away from the proposals, largely because they were trying to push Mr. Bush's big tax-cutting plan at the time.
This year, administration officials are fine-tuning the ideas and shifting the emphasis from the extremely liberal ''lifetime'' accounts to the more restrictive ''retirement'' accounts that could be used only once a person reached retirement age.
Many Republican proponents of the idea see them as a back-door approach to a much more fundamental overhaul of Social Security itself.
''You never actually mention Social Security, but you build up these big private retirement accounts and then at some point it's much easier to cut the growth in Social Security benefits,'' said Kevin Hassett, an economist at the American Enterprise Institute who supports the proposals. Mr. Hassett said costs over the first 10 years have been estimated at about $7 billion, which is almost pocket change in the context of tax politics.
President Bush campaigned for president four years ago in part on the idea of privatizing Social Security by allowing people to invest in their own private investment accounts rather than contribute to the government's program.
To truly privatize Social Security, as Mr. Bush and many Republican lawmakers want to do, experts say the government would face up to $1 trillion in ''transition costs.'' These are the costs to cover payments to existing retirees at a time when the next generation of retirees is no longer contributing to the Social Security trust fund.
Representative Benjamin L. Cardin, a Maryland Democrat who has worked at length on a bipartisan plan to modernize tax-advantaged savings accounts, said the administration's proposal last year amounted to more of a tax shelter for current earnings than a way to promote retirement savings. ''I'm pleased that the president is raising the issue of savings, but the focus needs to be on retirement savings,'' Mr. Cardin said Tuesday, before the president's speech.
STATE OF THE UNION: RETIREMENT
