It was one of those days when it was indeed advisable to walk on the sunny side of the street. After a spate of winter weather, many sidewalks and roadways -- especially those the sun could not reach -- were covered with a thick layer of ice, making them more suitable for curling than for walking or driving.
Shady stretches along walkways, particularly around bus shelters and parks and in front of abandoned property, were treacherous, as temperatures that never went higher than 27 degrees sealed in the icy precipitation that had fallen over the last week. People were slipping, sliding and falling.
''Orthopedists have been very busy,'' said Bruce Lander, a spokesman for St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan. Methodist Hospital in Brooklyn reported treating twice the number of ice-related slip-and-fall cases yesterday as on a typical day.
In several neighborhoods, whole blocks were covered with ice from end to end.
The ice on one of those stretches, in front of a shopping center parking lot on Broadway between 234th and 235th Streets in Kingsbridge, the Bronx, made reaching the bus shelter on the corner a challenge.
''With boots or without boots, you can go skating,'' said Massimo Grullon, 55, who was wearing boots and sliding his way to a nearby park for an afternoon walk.
Cesar Morales, 23, a student at Manhattan College in Riverdale, slipped about midway through the block but smiled when he got up. ''I'm used to pain,'' he said, showing off his tattooed arm. His bottom lip and ears were pierced and, he said, both arms and his back are covered with tattoos.
Several wobbling pedestrians on an ice-covered block of Ninth Avenue in Hell's Kitchen were hoping to cash in on the situation, joking about taking a dive and filing a lawsuit. But whom would they sue? In September, a new city law went into effect that shifted the liability for many slip-and-fall cases from the city to property owners.
''You have a responsibility to the people that are walking in your building, in front of your building,'' Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday. ''You know, the city can't do everything. People have to be responsible for themselves.''
Some business owners were being extra careful. Jose Luis de Los Angeles, 38, whose sister owns Botanica San Lazaro in Washington Heights, which sells statues of saints and other religious objects, was hacking the ice off the curb in front of the store. ''If I don't clear it, I'll get a ticket,'' he said.
There are certain positions that can prevent falls, said Milton Feher, 91, a former Broadway dancer and head of the Milton Feher School of Dance and Relaxation, which offers a course on walking on ice and snow: ''Bend your knees, bend forward, so that if you fall, you don't fall back and hit your head. On every stride, make sure there's a moment where you feel both feet are grounded,'' he said.
But Marcy Dupree, 50, who was navigating an icy patch on 145th Street in Manhattan, put it more simply: ''You just pray if you're walking -- pray that you don't fall.''
