'Road House'  Barrow Street Theater
A ridiculous movie is reincarnated as a ridiculous stage show at 27 Barrow Street in Greenwich Village, where the cast of ''Road House'' will be bashing bottles, hurling chairs, stabbing heroes and villains, ripping out throats, indulging in murder and arson and baring backsides and breasts through Feb. 8.
This 80-minute intermissionless excursion into irreverent mayhem, country music and broad comedy draws its inspiration from the violent and ludicrous 1989 film of the same title, which starred Patrick Swayze as a New York University philosophy graduate turned fabled barroom bouncer.
Known only as Dalton, this bouncer is given to busting heads, stitching up his own wounds and emitting profundities like ''Pain don't hurt.''
This stage version, directed by Timothy Haskell (better known as a Broadway and Off Broadway publicist) with mordant affection and some deliciously cheesy special effects, has its moments of humor.
But while the actors bring high spirits and energy to their multiple moronic roles, ''Road House,'' belaboring the obvious, is not in the end top-flight entertainment.
The chief pleasures of this show are its projections and other special effects: toy cars manipulated by visible hands and sticks, a miniature model of the town where the action unfolds, ropes attached to belts to send combatants flying through the air when blows are struck, and bits of fan-blown colored cloth to simulate flames.
The show, best reserved for audiences familiar with the film, laughs at the movie, a tale of how Dalton is hired to clean up the sleazy Double Deuce bar in Jasper, Mo., wins the affections of the blond doctor who stitches him up, and puts an end to Brad Wesley, the wealthy extortionist who has been bleeding Jasper's businesspeople with the aid of his vicious little army of henchmen.
Playing Dalton is the muscular Taimak Guarriello. He wears a blond mullet wig and keeps his tongue firmly in his cheek as he goes about his business of knocking out teeth and ripping out throats. He is notably abetted by Giuseppe (Ago) Agostaro as the grizzled Wade Garret, his brave though barely comprehensible sidekick.
But with a property as dopey as the ''Road House'' movie, why tamper with imperfection?
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER
THEATER IN REVIEW
