A federal appeals court panel in Manhattan ruled yesterday that a state law banning the wearing of masks at public gatherings is constitutional, a decision that reverses a lower court's ruling in favor of Ku Klux Klansmen who were barred from wearing masks at a 1999 event.
The lower court's ruling, by Judge Harold Baer Jr. of Federal District Court in Manhattan, had found that the city enforced the mask law selectively against the Church of the American Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. The American Knights had argued that anonymous expression was a protected right, and that the hooded masks linked members to Klan history and were expressive of certain beliefs.
In the decision released yesterday, a three-judge panel ruled that ''New York's antimask statute does not, however, bar members of the American Knights from wearing a uniform expressive of their relationship to the Klan. The statute only proscribes mask wearing.''
The judges, Dennis G. Jacobs, Jose A. Cabranes, and Sonia Sotomayor, continued, in the decision written by Judge Cabranes: ''The masks that the American Knights seek to wear in public demonstrations does not convey a message independently of the robe and hood. That is, since the robe and hood alone clearly serve to identify the American Knights with the Klan, we conclude that the mask does not communicate any message that the robe and the hood do not. The expressive force of the mask is, therefore, redundant.''
The decision ends a case that had been meandering through the court system since 1999, when the American Knights applied for a parade permit from the Police Department and were denied it on the basis of the anti-mask law.
In October 1999, the American Knights sought a preliminary injunction to force the Police Department to allow its members to wear masks wile demonstrating. Judge Baer issued an injunction. But the following day, an appeals court panel stayed part of the order. The Klansmen demonstrated on October 23, 1999, as planned, but without masks.
After the demonstration, the American Knights went back to court, seeking declaratory relief and a permanent injunction. They were denied a permanent injunction, but were granted a favorable judgment on First Amendment grounds.
But in the decision yesterday, Judge Cabranes wrote: ''A witness to a rally where demonstrators were wearing the robes and hoods of the traditional Klan would not somehow be more likely to understand that association if the demonstrators were also wearing masks. The American Knights offers no evidence or argument to the contrary.''
The American Civil Liberties Union represented the Klan from the outset of the case and was disappointed at the outcome yesterday, an official with the group said.
''Our societal commitment to free speech is often tested by the claims of unpopular groups and those who convey offensive ideas,'' said Arthur Eisenberg, the legal director of the A.C.L.U. ''This case presented such a test. Judge Baer courageously recognized the group's First Amendment rights in this case and we are surprised that the Court of Appeals did not affirm.''
The issue, at its core, Judge Cabranes wrote in the decision, did not involve the First Amendment. He wrote that the court rejected the view ''that the First Amendment is implicated every time a law makes someone -- including a member of a politically unpopular group -- less willing to exercise his or her free speech rights.''
He continued: ''While the First Amendment protects the rights of citizens to express their viewpoints, however unpopular, it does not guarantee ideal conditions for doing so, since the individual's right to free speech must always be balanced against the state's interest in safety, and its right to regulate conduct that it legitimately considers potentially dangerous.''
Correction:  January 24, 2004, Saturday  An article on Wednesday about a federal appeals court's upholding of a New York State law that bans masks at public demonstrations misidentified the organization that handled the Ku Klux Klan's challenge. It was the New York Civil Liberties Union, not the American Civil Liberties Union. The article also misstated a word in a quotation from Judge Jose A. Cabranes. He wrote, ''The mask that the American Knights seek to wear in public demonstrations does not convey a message independently of the robe and hood'' -- not ''masks.''
