The state budget that Gov. George E. Pataki proposed on Tuesday calls on New York City to extend a sales tax on clothing and shoes that both Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and the City Council had pledged to do away with this June.
Governor Pataki's proposal to keep the sales tax in place, coupled with some other tax changes, would net the city an estimated $162 million next year, more than a third of the $400 million in state assistance that Mayor Bloomberg called for when he unveiled his own budget proposal last week.
It was one of a number of proposals in the governor's budget that sparked a small debate over prepositions: whether the governor's budget could be said to do something for the city, as his aides described it, or to the city, as some city officials would have it.
''Aiding New York City on the backs of the poorest New Yorkers is not exactly a bonanza,'' Council Speaker Gifford Miller, a Democrat, said of the governor's proposal. Mayor Bloomberg called for ending the tax on time when he delivered his State of the City address earlier this month. ''The mayor's position has not changed,'' said Jordan Barowitz, a spokesman.
All told, Mr. Pataki's proposal contained enough savings and revenue to be close to the $400 million in budget assistance that Mr. Bloomberg was seeking, but some elements of his plan, like extending the sales tax, came in a very different form from what the mayor was seeking.
The governor's budget does not come close to giving the city the $6.5 billion over the next five years that Mayor Bloomberg requested to build new schools. It also leaves unresolved one of the thorniest issues from last year's budget wars: whether the state will take over the city's remaining debt from the 1970's, saving the city $500 million a year.
Mr. Pataki is battling in court to undo the law the State Legislature passed requiring the state to take over the debt, and his budget counts on winning the lawsuit and calls for saving the $170 million that had been earmarked to pay off the city's debts. His administration is proposing an alternative plan that would spread the debt out over 10 years instead of 30, and pay it off with a combination of state sales tax revenue and additional fines generated by installing more hidden cameras to catch drivers running red lights.
The governor said the state should take over Medicaid costs for long-term care, as the city requested, but he called for phasing in the change very slowly. His proposal would save the city $32.5 million next year, not the $116 million that the city had hoped. Instead of taking over the local share of Family Health Plus, an insurance program for low-income families, he called for eliminating dental and vision services and requiring a co-payment. Altogether, his plan calls for $141 million in Medicaid cost containment savings.
BUDGET PLAN: NEW YORK CITY
