LOWE &amp; PARTNERS WORLDWIDE in New York is facing renewed questions about its ability to thrive and survive in the increasingly competitive agency marketplace. The doubts are arising as Lowe's parent, the Interpublic Group of Companies, battles difficulties in its finances and operations that could be aggravated if Lowe loses more prominent clients.
Lowe, the third largest of the four global Interpublic agency networks, is under scrutiny because in the last week, three of its biggest clients all placed in review major assignments now being handled by the agency. The clients -- the Braun division of the Gillette Company; HSBC, the financial services company; and Verizon Wireless -- account for an estimated combined $500 million in billings at Lowe, out of an estimated total of $5.5 billion.
Even before word of the three reviews, Advertising Age, in an annual report last week on the performance of the world's major agencies, gave Lowe the lowest rating of any agency surveyed, one star out of four. In the United States, the critique asserted, ''Lowe still has a pulse, but not a strong one.''
In an unusual agencywide memo, sent yesterday to all 7,000 Lowe employees, Jerry Judge, the chief executive, acknowledged how ''unfortunate'' it was ''that these three client decisions converged within a matter of days.''
''Be assured that our management team is currently focused on the twin goals of improving the quality of our work and growing our business base,'' Mr. Judge wrote in the memo. ''If anybody asks you about the strength of your company, tell them that adversity makes us stronger than ever.''
Lowe's blue-chip clients include General Motors, Johnson &amp; Johnson, Nestlé and Unilever. Lowe is ranked third at Interpublic, behind McCann-Erickson and Foote Cone &amp; Belding, and ahead of Draft, a direct marketing agency that has an alliance with Lowe named Lowe Plus Draft.
''Lowe remains among the very few top-flight global creative networks,'' said David Bell, who became the Interpublic chairman and chief executive almost a year ago as part of the efforts by Interpublic to right its listing ship.
A new leadership team at Lowe installed last year ''has begun moving the business in the right direction,'' Mr. Bell said, ''in terms of both new business and financial performance.''
The woes at Lowe are indicative of the growing pressure large agencies find themselves confronting as marketer clients continually demand more effective and efficient ways to reach consumers. Making matters worse is a change in the Madison Avenue landscape centered on a significant shift in behavior among executives at companies responsible for hiring and firing agencies: They are far more likely than before to leave their agencies when other clients announce reviews, setting off a domino effect that has recently doomed shops like Earle Palmer Brown and Harris Drury Cohen.
''I do genuinely believe it's an unfortunate confluence,'' Mr. Judge said in a telephone interview yesterday from London.
''My concern is that it will be perceived as some kind of deficiency in our offering,'' he added, which would obscure the progress that Lowe has made recently, particularly in adding 71 new assignments worldwide last year from current clients like Johnson &amp; Johnson and Nestlé and 205 new clients like Cablevision Systems, Carfax, Electrolux and the Macy's division of Federated Department Stores.
Those positives, however, have been overshadowed by extended periods of turmoil that followed two mergers of Lowe with other Interpublic agencies meant to beef up the Lowe operations. In 1999, Lowe absorbed Ammirati Puris Lintas, and four years later it absorbed Bozell in New York. Both times there were client losses and departures of senior managers; last year, Lowe lost clients like Bank of America, Dell Computer, Fujitsu, Andrew Jergens, Valvoline and Verizon Communications.
And now 2004 begins with the loss of Verizon Wireless, a joint venture of Verizon Communications and Vodafone that had been a client of Bozell's inherited by Lowe. Since October, Verizon Wireless had been considering Lowe and its Interpublic sibling, McCann-Erickson, for the assignment to create additional campaigns featuring the character who asks, ''Can you hear me now?'' (The character was created at Bozell.) On Friday, Verizon Wireless declared that it was ''not completely satisfied'' with the creative ideas from Lowe and McCann-Erickson and would open the review to agencies not owned by Interpublic.
Though a Verizon Wireless spokeswoman, Brendy Raney, did not rule out Lowe's further participation in the review, executives at Lowe and Interpublic are declaring it a lost cause.
''It's unfortunate Verizon Wireless has decided to leave because we're proud of everything we've done,'' Mr. Judge said. ''Though the Verizon Wireless business has grown dramatically under the stewardship of Bozell and then Lowe, we respect the fact they didn't choose Lowe, that Lowe was chosen for them by the merger.''
''It's a truth of the modern advertising business that the clients like to feel they have an active role and not a passive role,'' he added, ''and that may have been a factor.''
The Braun and HSBC reviews involve different circumstances. Braun, which sells shavers and other appliances, asked Lowe to take part in a review for the creative part of its account along with other agencies that work for Braun or its parent, Gillette, including BBDO Worldwide and Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide.
As for HSBC, which also uses Lowe for creative tasks for its banks and other financial services, that review is being held on the parent-company level rather than the agency level. As a result, Interpublic will compete against the three parents of other agencies that work for HSBC: the Omnicom Group, the Publicis Groupe and the WPP Group.
With two mergers already in the recent Lowe history, there is widespread speculation that Mr. Bell and other Interpublic executives are seeking to address the agency's challenges with a third merger, combining Lowe with Draft, the direct marketing agency. Already, the two collaborate around the world on work for shared clients, with Lowe focused on traditional advertising and Draft on direct marketing and similar tasks. In Brazil, the Lowe operation for nontraditional ads has been renamed Draft.
''Stateside, bringing Lowe and Draft together seems inevitable,'' the Advertising Age critique of Lowe concluded.
Walter Petersen, a spokesman for Draft, said, ''We are as committed as ever to maintaining Lowe and Draft as separate and independent brands.''
Besides, imagine the problems if there were a merger. Who would want to work at an agency named Lowe Draft? Or Draft Lowe?
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
