The former chief of Peru's intelligence service went on trial in Lima on Tuesday to face charges that he had provided rebels in neighboring Colombia with 10,000 assault rifles purchased from Jordan in a complex transaction involving Brazilian drug lords and a Ukrainian flight crew.
The spy chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, is accused of having orchestrated a plan in which the rifles were air-dropped in 1999 to rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
At the time, Mr. Montesinos was a close ally of the United States, and the Clinton administration was pushing through a $1.3 billion aid package to support Colombia's war against Marxist guerrillas.
Mr. Montesinos, 58, has been in custody since 2001 and is facing dozens of trials on charges ranging from drug trafficking to authorizing assassinations. He had been a paid informant of the C.I.A. beginning in the 1970's, providing intelligence used in the fight against drugs and terrorism in the Andes, according to the Peruvian authorities. At the same time, Mr. Montesinos was involved in drug trafficking, prosecutors charged.
''These facts destroy Vladimiro Montesinos's reputation as a fighter of terrorism,'' Ronald Gamarra, the special prosecutor in the case, said in a telephone interview on Tuesday night. ''He did not fight terrorism. He instead gave arms and support to Colombian guerrillas.''
Through his spy apparatus and close ties to former President Alberto Fujimori, he also controlled congressmen, newspaper editors and government agencies.
Videotapes he took of government officials taking bribes ensured their fealty.
With the help of an international arms dealer, Sarkis Soghanalian, prosecutors say, Mr. Montesinos purchased AK-47s that were sold to the Colombians in four shipments in 1999.
The guns were dropped into Vichada State from a Ukraine-registered cargo plane. The rebels paid more than $750,000 in cash, Mr. Gamarra said, with the money coming from an $8 million cocaine deal they cut with Brazilian traffickers.
Mr. Gamarra said there was no proof that the C.I.A. knew beforehand that the arms would wind up in the hands of the rebels. He said the tribunal would seek additional testimony from the director of central intelligence, George J. Tenet, and the C.I.A. officer in Lima at the time, Robert Gorelick. United States officials did not immediately comment.
American intelligence officials have said that Jordanian officials told the C.I.A. in Amman that the government was planning to sell rifles to the Peruvian military. The agency signed off on the sale, only to learn later that the rifles had been smuggled into Colombia.
After the C.I.A. learned of the arms smuggling, Mr. Fujimori and Mr. Montesinos, trying to shield themselves, announced that they had ''uncovered'' the deal and blamed Lt. José Luis Aybar and his brother and fellow officer, Luis Frank Aybar.
Officials in Colombia and Jordan, however, challenged the Peruvian government and the truth was soon revealed.
Investigators later learned that Mr. Soghanalian, a Lebanese citizen who lives in the United States, had brokered the transaction after being contacted by the Aybars through an intermediary in Miami. Mr. Soghanalian, who maintains that he did not know the weapons were bound for Colombian rebels, is being tried in absentia.
