Seeking to meet a court mandate to improve the quality of education for New York schoolchildren, one of the most politically explosive and challenging issues facing the state, Gov. George E. Pataki has turned to an old standby: gambling revenue.
In his budget address on Tuesday, Mr. Pataki proposed creating a new fund ''to meet the cost of a sound basic education,'' using money from video lottery terminals, devices similar to slot machines, which are now planned for eight racetracks and up to eight other new sites across the state. The first terminals are scheduled to start operation this month at the Saratoga Raceway.
The governor forecast that receipts from the machines would total $325 million in the 2004-05 school year. As new machines are installed over the next several years, the total revenues would rise to $2 billion annually, according to his proposal.
The state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, ruled last June that the state had failed in its obligation to schoolchildren in New York City, saying the schools were underfinanced, and demanded a solution by this July.
The new fund would be dedicated to New York City and other needy school districts. ''We have an historic opportunity, indeed a responsibility,'' to ensure every child has an ''opportunity to succeed,'' Mr. Pataki said.
But Democrats reacted quickly to what many viewed as a flawed scheme to meet the court order. ''This is a very bad bet for public education,'' Assemblyman Steven Sanders, chairman of the Education Committee. ''Clearly the governor is hoping to avoid and delay any real investment.''
Mr. Sanders, like other members of his party, questioned how much of the administration's revenue estimates would actually be generated by the lottery terminals. Even if those estimates were realized, Democrats said that would not be enough.
Democrats also objected to what they viewed as an only minimal increase to general school aid in the budget. Governor Pataki's plan calls for $14.6 billion in school aid -- an increase of $147 million, $56 million of which would go to New York City. The Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, called that amount ''unacceptably low.''
The governor also urged, as he has for several years, that the state revamp its school aid system, putting $10 billion of the money into one account called Flex Aid.
But using gambling revenue as a means of addressing the court mandate is likely to cause the most political difficulty for Mr. Pataki.
In part because New York has long relied on lottery money to help finance education, starting in 1966 with the creation of the state lottery, few lawmakers expressed moral qualms on Tuesday about raising money from gambling, except to say that it essentially functioned as a regressive tax, hitting the poor.
The Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, said the Legislature would try to find alternative revenue sources, but called Mr. Pataki's fund proposal a ''lock box'' that offered ''a really strong beginning.''
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who has voiced concerns about past attempts to expand gambling to help the city, was cool to the proposal.$(6$)
''I've never been a big fan of gambling,'' he said. But if New Yorkers choose to gamble, he said, the state might as well collect the taxes rather than lose out to neighboring states.
''The trouble with depending on gambling as a revenue source is it's highly unpredictable,'' he said. ''The city's problems are always that we have fixed costs, and if you have a variable income stream, you find yourself in the kind of situation we were in the last couple of years, with enormous deficits.''
Educators around the state reacted to the governor's proposal with ambivalence, pleasantly surprised that he put aside extra money to meet the court's demands, but concerned that it would not be enough.
''Given the size of the estimated budget shortfall, we would have anticipated worse,'' said Robert Lowry, associate director of the New York State Council of School Superintendents. ''We were not ruling out the possibility of him proposing something like a $500 million cut.''
The Campaign for Fiscal Equity, which brought the lawsuit that resulted in the appellate ruling, also expressed mixed feelings.
Indeed, the very phrase the governor used to describe the initial $325 million installment from such a fund -- a ''down payment'' toward the guarantee of a decent education -- was the same one the plaintiffs had used for months. But the plaintiffs had demanded a $2 billion payment next year, and the State Board of Regents had called for $880 million.
''Unfortunately, this down payment is only a wobbly baby step when a giant leap is needed,'' said Michael A. Rebell, the campaign's executive director.
Many educators worried about relying on lottery terminals to meet the court order. ''This is what we refer to in the vernacular as 'if come' money, and that bothers us,'' said Timothy G. Kremer, executive director of the New York State School Boards Association.
THE GOVERNOR'S BUDGET PLAN: EDUCATION
