JUNG  A Biography  By Deirdre Bair  Illustrated. 881 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $35.
Carl Gustav Jung was an insufferable egotist, cruel to his family, a womanizer, with bad table manners to boot. He was a founder of psychoanalysis, but today his teachings have little importance in the treatment of mental illness.
His writings on flying saucers, astrology and parapsychology read like those of someone on the edges of sanity himself. He is remembered mostly for his psychological autobiography, ''Memories, Dreams, Reflections,'' and for terms he used: ''New Age,'' ''the Age of Aquarius,'' ''archetypes,'' ''anima'' and ''animus.''
Deirdre Bair's new biography exercises a kind of appalled fascination. It has the thoroughness one has come to expect from this author of works on Samuel Beckett, Simone de Beauvoir and Anaïs Nin. It was written with the cooperation of members of the Jung family, who, as beneficiaries of his royalties, have refused access to his papers to authors they deem unfavorably disposed to him.
One feels sorry for Ms. Bair, having to wade through Jung's lectures on the alchemist Philippus Aureolus Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim or Paracelsus, for instance, or his ''Mysterium Coniunctionis'' and ''Aion.'' Nevertheless it is unlikely that another biography can ever equal this in its scrupulousness and the depth of its research.
Jung, born in 1875 in Switzerland, was said to be the illegitimate great-grandson of Goethe. His mother, Emilie, claimed she saw ghosts. His father, Paul, was an impoverished country pastor who eventually got a job at a mental institution. Jung was an odd child. As a boy he experienced two personalities, which he referred to as ''No. 1'' and ''No. 2,'' and which his mother had also known.
After studying psychiatry, Jung worked at the Burghölzli Mental Hospital in Zurich and developed a method of word associations to study patients' mental processes.
Like generations of Jungs before him, he married a wealthy woman, Emma Rauschenbach, relieving him of the need to earn a living. They built a grand house near Zurich, where Emma became housekeeper, secretary and kept the children quiet so he could think. Jung played sadistic pranks on them, setting a firecracker off between a daughter's legs, rendering her deaf in one ear.
Sometime around the birth of his fifth child, in 1914, Jung began a relationship with a young patient, Toni Wolff, that lasted for decades. Ms. Bair describes Emma bearing up nobly as Jung insisted that Toni become part of their household, saying Toni was ''his other wife.'' He frequently attended professional functions with one on each arm.
In 1907 Jung met Freud. Freud, anxious that psychoanalysis not be a ''Jewish science,'' designated the Christian Jung as his crown prince. Almost immediately the two began squabbling about the nature of the unconscious, Freud saying it was sexual, and Jung insisting it was not.
Hoping to spread their beliefs, they visited New York together in 1909. Once, when they were arguing, Freud urinated in his trousers. Jung bundled him into a cab and as they drove down Broadway, cried: ''This is a psychogenic neurosis because you, -- you -- you have the wrong attitude! I will get around it, I will analyze you!''
The relationship reached a crisis in what is called the ''Kreuzlingen gesture.'' In 1912 Freud went to Kreuzlingen, near Zurich. Signals crossed, he neglected to visit Jung. Jung felt slighted. Their break became final in 1913, when Jung published ''The Psychology of the Unconscious.''
Meanwhile Jung was developing his theories of the collective unconscious. In 1901 a patient was admitted to Burghölzli with hallucinations in which he saw the sun with a gigantic phallus. Jung's student Johann Honegger kept notes on the patient, but Honegger was insane himself and committed suicide.
Jung saw similarities between the patient's hallucinations and rituals of pagan sun worshiping cults and used them as proof of the existence of the collective unconscious. He was accused of stealing Honegger's research, but Ms. Bair sides with Jung. ''Objectivity should allow him to take credit,'' she writes.
Jung grew famous. Ms. Bair describes patients waiting like wraiths in the Hotel Sonne in Zurich for appointments. He treated Herman Hesse; briefly James Joyce's daughter, Lucia, and members of the McCormick, Rockefeller and Mellon families, who became his supporters.
Meanwhile the Jungs lived in a hothouse of repression and introspection. His daughters reported having visions. Jung said he heard voices and worked himself into a trance building miniature villages, which unleashed his fantasies.
Jung has been accused of being be anti-Semitic and a Nazi sympathizer during the 1930's. Ms. Bair defends him against this, too, though she points out that he did write of differences in the ''racial'' psychology of Germans and Jews. Freud and Alfred Adler ''created specifically Jewish doctrines,'' Jung wrote, ''thoroughly unsatisfying to the German mentality.'' He became president of the Nazi-dominated International General Medical Society for Psychotherapy, but said his purpose was to aid endangered Jewish colleagues, which he tried to do.
Ms. Bair relates that one of Hitler's doctors begged Jung to come to Germany, to observe Hitler and declare him insane in order to encourage opponents to oust him. Jung refused. But in 1943, she reveals, Allen W. Dulles, a spy for the Office of Strategic Services, recruited Jung as agent 488, to analyze German leaders for the United States.
Ms. Bair says that at the end of Jung's life he acknowledged his indebtedness to Emma, and when she died he carved a stone in her name, ''She was the foundation of my house.''
His children seem to have become devoted to him, too. In 1961, as Jung lay dying, his daughter Marianne who was herself fatally ill, with cancer, kept a constant vigil by him.
Ms. Bair quotes Jung: '' 'Life was something that had to be lived and not talked about.' This he did, and on his own terms and in his own time.''
Perhaps to justify her work's thoroughness and the years she spent writing this book, Ms. Bair tries valiantly to make Jung sympathetic. In the end it's a losing proposition.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
