It takes an exceptionally limber mind to be a true creator, and only a handful of designers are free enough in their imaginations to drive fashion to another level. The rest are just keeping up or running artfully in place. But Karl Lagerfeld has that power to project beyond what you can see, and so do John Galliano and Christian Lacroix, whose shows have addled rational minds at the spring 2004 haute couture collections.
Nowhere in the list of female attributes mentioned in Mr. Lacroix's press notes was the word ''strength,'' an intriguing omission at a time when modern women are presumed to be, above all, strong. But in a superb show on Tuesday that drew on color and ethereal lightness, Mr. Lacroix exposed a more subtle range of emotions. He suggested extroverted personalities with a patchwork coat peeling open to reveal a white lace minidress worn with brightly colored stockings whose soles were encrusted with rhinestones. He evoked the bedroom type, coy in her filmy chiffon layers and chemise drizzled with stones. Then he cleared your head with a simple column of inky blue with straps of turquoise, and on a blond model with a headful of Norman Parkinson hair.
It's curious that so many designers are going for a leaner, more elongated silhouette -- Mr. Galliano on Monday at Dior with his streamlining corsets and mummy-wrapped dresses that fell away from the body in wispy bands of organdy, and Mr. Lagerfeld on Tuesday at Chanel with his dreamy white blouses foaming over long, slender skirts.
One of Mr. Galliano's inspirations was the swept-back allure of 1950's fashion photographs. For Mr. Lagerfeld, it was a woman named Jacqueline Torzane, a beauty who created her own look around 1915, and may have inspired Coco Chanel to combine female softness with masculine toughness.
In any case, both designers successfully blurred their references so that all you sensed was something that pitched fashion forward. Mr. Lagerfeld offered severe jackets with exploding skirts in embroidered tulle, but far more captivating were his many white blouses worn with simple skirts.
There was something boyish and unaffected about the way a silk charmeuse blouse lapped open over a camisole flecked with stones.
Donatella Versace returned to the pool room of the Ritz Hotel on Monday night, after an absence, bringing with her that strangely rewarding sight of photographers and Sequoia-like bodyguards pursuing a very tiny celebrity -- in this case, the petite Christina Aguilera -- to her front-row seat. Ms. Versace doesn't possess the farsighted judgment of a couturier; the unknown is not a place she is willing or even tempted to visit. But she has a great sense of scale -- the scale of the flash-bulb entrance. Each of her 24 dresses (or pantsuits), nearly all lathered in crystals and slit to reveal illusion winks of naked flesh, exploded with a neat brilliance. Her most effective technique was to use seams and slender bands of suede fringe or beadwork to trace around the body, so that long dresses in peach and sky-blue satin seemed almost lacquered on.
She opened the show with a boss pantsuit in tight white satin with lace-cut leather across the back, an Elvis-size crystal belt, and exaggerated belled trousers. Get the idea? Ms. Versace concentrates on one or two celebrity/sex bomb gestures and blows them up big.
So, satin pants are perforated with holes and rimmed with stones and worn with a slinky top, or a lilac dress is ventilated diagonally from the collarbone to the hipbone and exaggerated even more with contouring strips of jeweled leather. Ms. Versace may confine herself too readily to what she does best. Yet, at the same time, she knows how to take a tiny particular of glamour and magnify it. And that's all that most people will ever see in this over-illuminated era.
Fashion people are a stern lot, one moment dining at the trough of Caviar Kaspia and the next shivering under blankets at a fashion show in a cold gymnasium. ''I feel like we're sitting on the deck of the Titanic,'' said Michael Roberts, the fashion editor of The New Yorker, as he sat bundled under his blanket at the Yohji Yamamoto show, cap and gloves on. And all down the front row the sight of covered knees did resemble a scene in advance of the iceberg, mostly from the steerage perspective.
There were moments, too, in Mr. Yamamoto's show when one caught a whiff of something brave and nostalgic: a long black belted coat with satchel pockets that seemed a blend of wartime spy and messenger rider. Another coat had a wide, spreading collar with white piping, like a sailor's. And the models wore their hair in loose pompadours, as if undone by a sharp wind.
Mr. Yamamoto has hitched himself onto the couture season; the clothes he showed on Sunday night were ready-to-wear for this fall. He evidently senses a change in the air, for he caught that elongated line with charcoal tailcoats fastened with black velvet ribbons and a riot mix of flower prints shown in layered pants ensembles. But at times he also seemed to have his feet planted too firmly on earth, favoring the sober over the insane. And what is the point of being in such high company if you can't let yourself get drunk on a little madness?
