'Doña Rosita the Spinster'  Bouwerie Lane Theater
''Doña Rosita the Spinster'' is a rarity among Federico García Lorca's plays: one that got away from him. He first talked about a comedy on this theme around 1924.
But it was 1935 when ''Rosita'' finally appeared. By then his imagination dwelled in shadowy depths -- ''Blood Wedding'' and ''Yerma'' had appeared in the previous two years, and the last act of ''Rosita'' clearly predicts the desolate fate of women in ''The House of Bernarda Alba,'' which he completed in 1936.
The stylistic gulf between the first two acts of ''Rosita'' and the last suggests they were written years apart.
All that makes it problematic for many producers. The Jean Cocteau Repertory's new staging, at 330 Bowery, at Bond Street, in the East Village, proves it needn't be.
Ernest Johns, the director, and a dozen members of the company in 15 roles, exploit the occasional poetry (these actors know how to let you feel its rhythms) and a couple of lovely songs in Acts I and II to cast an enchantment on the bewilderment of some middle-class people in Granada a century ago.
At the center are a dreamy couple in their 40's with an earthy and mercilessly witty housekeeper whose effrontery is a lash to the backside of a lazy world.
The couple's ward, a niece, is engaged to a cowardly cousin who, she continues to believe even after he is absent for 25 years, will marry her. But her situation does not seem painful when she has the distractions offered by young female friends: two who hang around the Alhambra at all hours to be seen, and perhaps desired, by strangers, and a pair of sisters, daughters of a formidable widow, who seem unbearably virtuous and who, we discover, have admirable musical gifts and the voices needed to show them off.
There are also a gloriously ignorant suitor, an otherworldly schoolmaster virtually enslaved by his students, and other Granadan oddballs who give García Lorca a chance to mock their oddities lovingly even as he revels in the beauty of his native city.
He lets us feel that this world is collapsing, but most of these people don't notice and the few who do don't understand.
If Rosita, her newly widowed aunt and the noisy housekeeper come to know how grim the collapse is in Act III, they do not banish our memory of how warm and pleasurable they were for us before.
García Lorca said this act might be the most tearful in all his work, but he produced the play as he wrote it, and that seems justification enough for the Cocteau to do it.
Emotionally its discontinuity is a bit jarring, but these two hours reveal so much about this protean playwright's range of reference and his personality that the production seems a generous gift.
D. J. R. BRUCKNER
THEATER IN REVIEW
