A German woman married to a Brooklyn schoolteacher had been told that she had all her papers in order when she took a quick trip to show off her infant daughter to her parents in Germany.
But her return home in late December turned surreal and terrifying when Homeland Security officials at Kennedy Airport rejected her travel documents, confiscated her passport, then detained her and the 3-month-old overnight in a room with shackled drug suspects. They let her go only after ordering her to leave the country no later than tomorrow.
After a month of desperate efforts by her American husband, their lawyers and legislators, late yesterday a spokeswoman for the Homeland Security Department said that the woman, Antje Croton, 36, would be granted a last-minute reprieve. But Mrs. Croton said she had received no written notification. ''I'm in a nightmare,'' she said as she packed yesterday afternoon, having abandoned hope of straightening out the problem. ''I feel like I'm in the wrong movie.''
Her husband, Christopher Croton, said the couple was not convinced their ordeal was over. ''The experience has been like trying to open a door to a room that does not exist,'' Mr. Croton said. ''That's the irony here. My German-born wife has to come here to experience this wall of, just The State.''
He pointed out that other foreigners with fewer resources have been caught in the same kind of bureaucratic confusion ever since the Immigration and Naturalization Service was absorbed by the Department of Homeland Security last year.
Mrs. Croton has lived in Park Slope for five years, and her application for a green card has been pending for nearly two. When her sister urged her to visit Germany, she wanted to take no chances. So in October, she said, she asked immigration officials at 26 Federal Plaza about getting a new travel permit.
According to her account, an immigration official, C.E. Herndandez, insisted that her old permit was still valid, though it had a July expiration date, because it bore a stamp saying ''April 2004.'' Reassured, Mrs. Croton departed on Dec. 9. ''I did everything by the rules,'' Mrs. Croton said.
But on Dec. 22, when she returned to Kennedy Airport at 9 p.m., exhausted after a 10-hour trip alone with her baby daughter, Clara, front-line border security officers barred her way. They said the immigration official had been wrong: the July 2003 expiration, not the April 2004 stamp, applied, and she could not enter the United States.
They interrogated her until 2 a.m., she said, as she wept, tried to nurse her baby and pleaded with officials to call her husband, who was waiting without word in the terminal.
Mrs. Croton, who has worked for an ad agency in Hamburg and as a journalist in New York, and who recently started her own Internet business as a handbag designer, said she was astonished that the official questioning her had to struggle to enter her replies in an archaic computer, hunting and pecking and calling for help to save the document file.
''Then this man says, 'We are going to put you on the next plane going back home.'''
''I said, 'This is my home,''' recalled Mrs. Croton, who has lived in the same apartment with her husband since before they were married in 2001.
She was then taken from the airport's terminal 1 to terminal 4, she said, to a fluorescent-lit room where a dozen detainees included a man who had been carrying an illegal gun and several suspected drug couriers in shackles.
''I couldn't even spell my name anymore,'' Mrs. Croton said. ''Nobody who hasn't had a little infant and traveled on a long-distance flight can understand. I said, 'I need to lie down. I'm shivering, I'm exhausted, I'm nursing.''' But she said an officer retorted: ''Stop crying. There were other people here with kids, and it's not going to get you anywhere.''
The most humane response, Mrs. Croton added, came from the low-level worker who had driven her from one terminal to the other. Learning that the mother had no diapers left for her baby, the driver returned with three toddler-sized disposable diapers, the only ones she could find.
In the morning, a supervisor told Mrs. Croton that she had to board a plane to Germany, but she refused, fearing for her health and the baby's. She was then offered another option: to buy a ticket for a flight to Germany leaving within 30 days, with no guarantee she could ever return.
The couple hoped to straighten out the mess before her forced departure, but the red tape seemed impervious. Two weeks ago, the couple went back to see Ms. Hernandez at Federal Plaza, and she again told Mrs. Croton that her travel document was still valid until April.
When told what had happened at the airport, other officials said that without Mrs. Croton's confiscated passport and file, their hands were tied. They were at an impasse until an inquiry by a reporter for The New York Times to Janet Rapaport, a spokeswoman for the Border Security section of Homeland Security.
That resulted in a flurry of activity. Ms. Rapaport said yesterday that a decision had been reached by Susan T. Mitchell, director of New York field operations for Customs Enforcement and Border Security, based on a review of Mrs. Croton's file. Mrs. Croton would be allowed to stay and pursue her green card application. ''I guess for humanitarian reasons,'' Ms. Rapaport said.
''I want to believe it,'' Mrs. Croton said. ''But they tell me I can stay, and then I stay, and then what if they tell me I'm a real lawbreaker?''
