Any president delivering a State of the Union address in an election year is a little like a newly minted divorcé -- suddenly vulnerable to comparative appraisal.
Television viewers who had spent the previous 24 hours being bombarded with images of the Democratic winners of the Iowa caucus had a chance on Tuesday night to compare those faces with that of their rival, President Bush. The president spoke live for just under an hour, a performance that was calculated to upstage his opponents but that also brought him down into their turf.
The yearly ritual always begins with the president striding into the chamber, shaking hands, slapping backs and nodding at familiar faces. This year, Mr. Bush also stopped to hug the 3-year-old daughter of Representative Jesse L. Jackson Jr. of Illinois dressed in a tartan party dress and beribboned cornrows, adding a classic campaign trail move to the the pomp and pageantry.
The State of the Union address turned out to be a more suspense-filled television event than the White House had anticipated when it scheduled the speech for right after the Iowa caucus. At the time of that decision, Howard Dean seemed the most probable winner, and his volatility could have been used as a foil to show off Mr. Bush's experience and steadiness and reserve.
Instead, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, a decorated Vietnam veteran, came in first, followed by Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, an articulate Southern populist. And, adding to the pressure, a New York Times/CBS Poll taken last week showed that when given a choice between an unnamed Democrat and Mr. Bush, 43 percent of the registered voters polled said they would vote for Mr. Bush, while 45 percent said they would vote for the Democrat.
Mr. Bush still does not enjoy delivering impromptu public remarks, but he has mastered the art of teleprompter reading. Looking confident, and more comfortable at a podium than usual, Mr. Bush used much of his time to rebut his Democratic opponents' most pressing attack points, like the war in Iraq, tax cuts and the economy. And he pushed hard with what Republicans say is his strongest suit, the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
''I know that some people question if America is really in a war at all,'' Mr. Bush noted before asserting that ''after the chaos and carnage of September 11th, it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers.''
Perhaps mindful of his father's failure to focus quickly enough on domestic affairs after his Iraq war, Mr. Bush also gave a preview of his major domestic campaign points, including the issue of gay marriage.
''Activist judges, however, have begun redefining marriage by court order, without regard for the will of the people and their elected representatives,'' he said, referring to the recent decision of the Massachusetts Supreme Court.
The president defended the tougher testing provisions of the No Child Left Behind Act by saying, ''This nation will not go back to the days of simply shuffling children along from grade to grade without them learning the basics.'' (He made his point: his speechwriters seemingly did not learn the rule that the possessive precedes a gerund; the president should have said ''without their learning the basics.'')
The sense that Mr. Bush was engaging in a political debate with his Democratic opponents was sharpest on NBC, which put Mr. Kerry on the air, live from New Hampshire, as soon as Mr. Bush had finished his speech and before the designated Democratic rebutters, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, and Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the party's leader in the Senate.
Mr. Kerry, the Democratic front-runner of the hour, said he thought Mr. Bush's optimism about the war in Iraq was ''wishful'' thinking.
Babies are a part of political campaigns, and so are sports. Among the servicemen and women Mr. Bush invited as his guests on Tuesday night was Tom Brady, quarterback for the New England Patriots, the football team from Mr. Kerry's home state. But it could have been that Mr. Bush invited him to set a good example for his campaign against the use of performance-enhancing drugs in professional sports. This prompted Jon Stewart, host of the ''Daily Show with Jon Stewart,'' on Comedy Central to comment on NBC that he wished the president had been a bit bolder and had spoken out against ''the instant replay and artificial turf.''
STATE OF THE UNION: TV WATCH
