Fourth-quarter profit at Citigroup nearly doubled on the strength of its credit card business and lower litigation costs.
The results, released yesterday, included a $242 million after-tax charge for loan and trading losses tied to Parmalat.
''Our results were a record even with dealing quickly with Parmalat and with some pretty important investments in growth,'' said Charles O. Prince, chief executive of Citigroup, the nation's largest financial services company, in a conference call with analysts. ''We have very good momentum going into 2004.''
Mr. Prince, who succeeded Sanford I. Weill as chief executive in October, said the company would look to make niche acquisitions this year and sell divisions that were not crucial to its overall profits. Mr. Weill remains chairman.
Citigroup reported net income of $4.76 billion for the quarter, or 91 cents a share, up 96 percent from $2.43 billion, or 47 cents a share, in the same period a year earlier. The figures reflect a $1.3 billion after-tax charge the company took in 2002, largely to cover regulatory settlements and lawsuits tied to analyst conflicts. Excluding that charge, earnings rose 27 percent, the company said.
Revenue for the quarter rose 13 percent, to $20.2 billion, the bank said. Citigroup also announced a 14 percent dividend increase, to 40 cents a share.
Citigroup earned nearly $18 billion last year, more money than any other United States company has reported or is expected to earn, according to Thomson First Call.
Expenses at the bank rose 4.4 percent from the third quarter, outpacing the rise in revenue. The increase was noteworthy, analysts said, because Mr. Weill was known for being obsessive about cutting costs.
''There appears to be a change in attitude toward expenses,'' said Richard Bove, an analyst with Hoefer &amp; Arnett, an independent research firm. But some of that, he said, could be explained by the improved business environment, as stronger revenue allowed Citigroup to spend more on technology and other areas.
''We are entering more of a growth environment, so at this point making these investments is appropriate,'' said Todd S. Thomson, Citigroup's chief financial officer, in an interview yesterday.
Citigroup benefited from acquisitions it made last year in its credit card business, where profits rose 23 percent, to $1.14 billion. The company completed its acquisition of the Sears card portfolio in November, on the heels of its purchase of the Home Depot credit card portfolio in July.
Consumer finance profits fell 17 percent from a year earlier, as Citigroup continued to suffer from losses in Japan. Profits in consumer banking increased 24 percent, helped by its acquisition of Golden State Bancorp, completed in 2002, and continued strength in mortgages.
Still, profits could slow in mortgages this year, with pending financings down 40 percent from the third quarter, Mr. Thomson told analysts.
Profits at Citigroup's corporate lending and investment banking division were $1.28 billion for the quarter, in contrast to a loss of $326 million a year ago, reflecting the charge taken by the company to cover the analyst investigation. Revenue from stock offerings was up 42 percent from the prior quarter, but demand for advice on mergers and other transactions remained weak, down 9 percent.
The bank said it had been owed as much as $689 million by Parmalat, but after taking write-downs and reserves on that amount its exposure is now $317 million.
Mr. Prince said the merger between J.P. Morgan and Bank One, announced last week, ''validates our business model.'' The two banks said that the combination would result in a company, like Citigroup, with strong consumer and corporate banking businesses. Still, Mr. Prince added, ''we're bigger and have a more diversified earnings base.'' The two banks would still lack a substantial presence overseas unlike Citigroup, analysts have said.
The company remains interested in expanding its consumer banking business, Mr. Thomson said. Citigroup still lags behind Bank of America in this area, and would rank behind the combined J.P. Morgan and Bank One, in banking deposits, according to SNL Financial, a research firm.
Citigroup shares fell 21 cents, to $49.29.
