A revitalized Senator John Kerry touched down here before sunrise on Tuesday, sleepless but confident, his line of attack pointed straight at the White House.
''One week from tonight, New Hampshire can set the country on the course of beating George Bush,'' he told hundreds of howling supporters who turned an airplane hangar into an earsplitting early morning echo chamber. ''One year from today, a new president will raise his hand and take the oath of office.''
''One week. One year. One chance to change America,'' he said.
Mr. Kerry alighted on political terrain that had been radically altered overnight by his upset victory in the Iowa caucuses. One candidate, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, had withdrawn, but the field in New Hampshire is wider than in Iowa because it includes Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who did not compete in the caucuses. More to the point, Mr. Kerry now occupies the spot held until Monday by Howard Dean: in the crosshairs of every other Democratic candidate.
''I'm here in New Hampshire as an underdog,'' Mr. Kerry insisted.
Yet Mr. Kerry, bouncing from six months in the political cellar, returned to New Hampshire with nearly everything he could have hoped for: momentum, buzz, a fired-up campaign staff and Democratic delegates to boot.
Even the burden of fund-raising, which caused Mr. Kerry to borrow $6.4 million against a mortgage on his house and opt out of the public finance system, appeared to lighten overnight. His campaign said that since his victory speech Monday night, it had received more than $300,000 in contributions.
Mr. Kerry also brought back to New Hampshire, where he has trailed Dr. Dean but is now drawing nearly even with General Clark, an object lesson in how to turn a flagging candidacy into a winning one at the last minute.
''This is the slowest blooming rose I've ever seen,'' said Billy Shaheen, who leads the Kerry campaign in New Hampshire and has been with the senator since a minivan constituted his entire caravan.
While his aides still speak of Dr. Dean, the third-place finisher in Iowa, as the greatest threat, Mr. Kerry made clear he was also braced for battle with General Clark, who has planted himself in New Hampshire and overtook Mr. Kerry in the polls here weeks ago.
''I know what it's like to stand up to a president who's leading our nation in a radically wrong direction,'' Mr. Kerry said at the morning rally, singling out two Republicans General Clark has said he supported.
''There are veterans here who stood up to Richard Nixon and his war in Vietnam,'' Mr. Kerry said, pointing to supporters arrayed behind him. ''There are veterans here who stood up to the illegal war that Ronald Reagan was conducting secretly in Central America.''
''I'm a lifelong Democrat,'' Mr. Kerry shouted, emphasizing each syllable as his audience roared.
Mr. Kerry's first day as the official leader in the race to the nomination was one of growing pains and adrenaline flameouts. Before the candidate and his advisers made it to a hotel here after their heady all-nighter, they rolled up to a car-repair shop for an unwieldy meet-and-greet. As Mr. Kerry made small talk with a few managers and workers, some 50 photographers, sound engineers and reporters jostled one another to catch every word and facial expression, while campaign aides struggled futilely to corral the many-headed amoeba with a yellow nylon cord.
Mr. Kerry, who flew here straight from his Des Moines victory party, eventually caught two hours' sleep, in between calling members of Congress to seek their support. Before even arriving at his hotel, Mr. Kerry reached out to Representative James E. Clyburn, an influential South Carolina lawmaker who had endorsed Mr. Gephardt.
Mr. Clyburn said he had told Mr. Kerry, whom he admires, that he would nonetheless ''be chilling out for a while.'' But Mr. Kerry's New Hampshire office reported it had recruited 25 local Democrats from Mr. Gephardt's team in the state.
Less than 24 hours later, Mr. Kerry's advisers were still absorbing the dimensions of their victory in Iowa, but there was almost uniform agreement on what factors gave rise to it.
Several cited Mr. Kerry's television commercials in the final two weeks of the caucus fight, in particular an advertisement in which one of his Navy crewmen from Vietnam said Mr. Kerry's decisions in combat ''saved our lives.'' They pointed to a collapse in Dr. Dean's standing in Iowa that led his supporters to look elsewhere.
A crucial element was Mr. Kerry's underestimated field operation, led by Michael Whouley. In an airless closet known as the Blue Room for its constantly updating color-coded precinct maps, Mr. Whouley and a team led by Jonathan Epstein zeroed in on areas where support needed bolstering. Phone banks of war veterans called other veterans at home, teachers called teachers, and so on, an aide said, ''building relationships'' in conversations of 20 minutes or more, rather than just counting votes as many campaigns do.
But John Norris, Mr. Kerry's Iowa campaign manager, said the most important factor was Mr. Kerry's improvement on the stump.
''If it were a couple of points,'' Mr. Norris said of the six-point victory margin, ''I'd say it was organization. But he really just connected. When he went to his extensive Q and A's, people said, 'This guy just gets it.' He won them over with that.''
Mr. Kerry's aides in New Hampshire are picking up where the Iowa group left off, by putting the candidate in front of as many voters as possible. On Tuesday night, he spoke to about 400 people at a school in Pembroke, N.H.
Mr. Shaheen, who leads the campaign in New Hampshire, said: ''We need to seize the momentum, and try to make sure every veteran, every firefighter, every member of every family gets a chance to listen to John Kerry. And when we do, it's done.''
Early Tuesday, as about 400 bleary-eyed supporters swilled coffee and waited for Mr. Kerry to materialize, activists in the crowd could barely conceal their glee at the shift in the New Hampshire race.
''Clark's leveled off in the past week,'' said Maggie Hassan, a Kerry stalwart and State Senate candidate. ''He had the stage to himself, but people have some of the same concerns about his experience -- not just domestic, but political experience -- that they've had about Dean.''
Dan Calegari, one of several Kerry activists who played important roles in Gary Hart's 1984 New Hampshire victory, played down the competition from Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, the second-place finisher in Iowa. ''He doesn't have much of a message except 'I'm the best Southern candidate,' '' Mr. Calegari said. ''I don't really think we have to make much of an argument.''
Upstairs, Mr. Kerry was telling a morning-show interviewer, ''I think people want a champion and want a fighter.''
Downstairs, minutes later, he was facing a wild-eyed mob in a hangar that throbbed like an arena during a Saturday night wrestling show. ''Bring it on!'' the Kerry crowd was chanting. ''Bring it on! Bring it on!''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
