Gov. George Pataki asked legislators to make budget reform a priority yesterday. He also presented his own budget for the next fiscal year. Mr. Pataki's plans and the legislative response made the best possible case for the need to fix things, quickly.
Because there is a political culture that calls for everything to stay fuzzy until the last possible moment, and no independent agency estimating state revenue, Mr. Pataki's budget was hazy on details. For example, although the governor says the state faces a $5.1 billion shortfall on a $99.8 billion budget, both of those figures are in dispute elsewhere in the Capitol. The budget-making process will mainly consist of months of political arguments about how much money the state has to spend.
The Senate majority leader, Joseph Bruno -- a Republican, like Mr. Pataki -- quickly challenged all the numbers, noting that the whole budget business is ''not a science, more an art form.'' The deficit is probably closer to $4 billion, said Mr. Bruno, who has sponsored his own budget reform package. The total budget, which the governor has nestled just under the magic figure of $100 billion, is probably off as well. When it comes to budget numbers, the majority leader said philosophically, it just ''depends on how you count it.'' Finally, the often-candid Mr. Bruno chided the journalists trying to cover the opening of the budget process in Albany: ''I wouldn't get caught up with the numbers. That's very unbecoming of you.''
Eventually, after legislative committees take turns doing virtually nothing, the budget will be hammered out by Mr. Pataki and the two legislative leaders. History suggests that won't happen until weeks -- or months -- after the legal deadline, April 1. By then, the amount of money available for the state to spend will have been decided not by fiscal experts but through political trade-offs.
Meanwhile, in the airy debate that substitutes for a genuine budget process, the governor made a welcome proposal for the state to gradually begin taking over Medicaid costs, which are soaring because of programs the Legislature was happy to pass without fully paying for. And the governor came up with a Dickensian way to pay extra for urban schools: expanding the number of video lottery terminals around the state. Thus, the state's poor gamblers will finance the state's poor schools.
