Flush with his surprise second-place showing in the Iowa caucuses, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina quickly tried to rally undecided voters here to join his ''movement to change America.''
Hoarse, and with a word or two garbled from fatigue, Mr. Edwards began a one-week race toward the primary on Tuesday with a rally after landing at 3 a.m. in Concord, bellowing to a rowdy group of supporters, ''Can you feel it?'' Their cheers left little doubt that they did.
But the challenges he faces to capitalize on his strong showing in Iowa were underscored as he cut short his celebratory lap of New Hampshire in the afternoon to shift to the nitty-gritty of raising money with fund-raisers in Boston and New York, including one billed as a ''State of the Union address watching party'' at a home in Manhattan.
Mr. Edwards, who surged in Iowa with a campaign based on optimism and a promise to fight for working-class Americans, began as a fund-raising leader, only to lag as the campaign continued. Mr. Edwards's press secretary, Jennifer Palmieri, said his showing in Iowa had generated ''the most intense infusion of money since our campaign began.'' Aides said he had raised $250,000 on his Web site overnight.
Though Mr. Edwards said he would campaign strenuously and began speaking of his candidacy as ''a national campaign,'' as he put it to reporters on the library steps here, he has pinned many of his hopes on South Carolina, the gateway to the South and one of the seven states that hold primaries on Feb. 3. He planned to campaign there part of Wednesday and Friday.
It is a state that Mr. Edwards's advisers say he must win, and most polls show him with a modest lead, though polls also show many undecided voters. Throughout Tuesday, Mr. Edwards stuck to his message of optimism and hope.
Just as in Iowa, he sought to criticize President Bush as having helped create ''two Americas,'' one for the haves and one for for the have-nots, in an effort to undercut Mr. Bush's State of the Union address.
''I expect him to say the state of the union is strong,'' Mr. Edwards said, repeating to a scrum of reporters on the steps of the library here what he had just told the audience inside. ''The question is which union? The union of special interests and insiders is strong. The problem is there are a lot of Americans who are struggling every single day, and they are the people who need our help.''
Mr. Edwards also quickly set out to woo supporters of Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. Mr. Edwards, along with his rivals, called a major backer of Mr. Gephardt in South Carolina, Representative James E. Clyburn, an influential African-American leader in a state where black voters are expected to make up 30 percent to 40 percent of the turnout in the primary. Mr. Clyburn, however, said he might not endorse anybody, given that family members, friends and aides were working for different candidates.
''It may be in everybody's best interest for me to remain on the sidelines and to do what I can for the party,'' Mr. Clyburn said. ''But that remains to be seen. I'm not leaning anywhere.''
Another backer of Mr. Gephardt, State Representative Peter H. Burling, the Democratic leader of the New Hampshire House, endorsed Mr. Edwards. He said he chose Mr. Edwards in part because of his strong showing in Iowa.
''I was stunned by the quality performance he put on there,'' Mr. Burling said.
Mr. Burling, as well as Mr. Edwards's strategists, said that the senator would not tamper with a message that seemed to gather momentum as his campaign progressed. Yet, Mr. Edwards has generally drawn smaller crowds here than in Iowa, though the nearly 200 people at his event in Manchester exceeded organizers' expectations.
Mr. Edwards's aides say he has a solid foundation, citing the support of a popular state senator, Lou D'Allesandro, whose endorsement had been coveted by all the candidates. In addition, his campaign manager, Nick Baldick, who ran Vice President Al Gore's campaign in New Hampshire in 2000, has flown up for the week from his headquarters in Raleigh, N.C.
Mr. Edwards, when asked to address his middle-of-the-pack showing in polls here, has said that former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, as better-known New Englanders, had a clear advantage.
Even so, Mr. Burling said on Tuesday, ''Have we not learned a lesson on how American democracy can turn a static situation on its head?''
Mr. Edwards and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, a fellow Southerner who skipped the Iowa caucuses but is campaigning aggressively here, are showing signs that they may go head to head.
Although he keeps his stump speech positive, Mr. Edwards showed a willingness when speaking with reporters to contrast himself with other candidates by name, including General Clark.
As he did on Monday night, he suggested on Tuesday that General Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman had turned tail when faced with a tough election.
''Remember,'' Mr. Edwards said, ''when General Clark and Senator Lieberman withdrew from Iowa, we were all roughly in the same place in the polls. But I decided to stay and fight.''
Kris Schultz, a former executive director of the State Democratic Party who said she had not decided whom to back, listened to Mr. Edwards at the Manchester library as he discussed financial insecurity for middle-class families, the 35 million people who live in poverty and the attacks among some presidential contenders.
''He's obviously energized and he has done a terrific job with a positive message,'' Ms. Schultz said. ''I think it's just a matter of getting in front of the right New Hampshire voters. He should keep doing what he is doing.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
