Is the job market improving more quickly than most people realize?
Even though the government recently ignited new talk of a jobless recovery by reporting a measly gain of 1,000 jobs in December, nearly every other measure of the labor market offers a more encouraging picture. The gap suggests that President Bush may be running for re-election with a stronger economy than is widely understood and that the Federal Reserve might raise interest rates more rapidly than many investors now expect, economists say.
Since September, the number of people receiving state jobless benefits has fallen by almost 500,000, or over 13 percent. A survey of executives suggests that companies in the service sector are increasing their employment at the fastest rate since 2000.
The amount of help-wanted advertising being placed across the country has risen more than 10 percent since May, according to an index compiled by the Conference Board, a research company in New York. In early January, Americans reported being more confident about the economy than they had been in more than three years, according to a University of Michigan survey that often moves in tandem with job-market changes.
''We've seen a clear pickup,'' said Linda S. Paulk, the president of Snelling Personnel Service, a national employment agency based in Dallas that is placing about 19 percent more workers in jobs than it was a year ago. ''And we've seen consistency in the pickup, which we hadn't seen in the three years prior.''
The Labor Department's survey of tens of thousands of businesses, which showed the gain of 1,000 jobs, is one of the most widely respected economic indicators, and few analysts are willing to dismiss it. It could prove correct, while the other signs ultimately look ephemeral. Even if the job market is improving, it remains well short of healthy by almost any measure.
But for all of the payroll survey's strengths, it often underestimates job growth at economic turning points because it misses numerous start-up businesses, many economists say.
When the economy was emerging from a recession and a jobless recovery in the early 1990's, the Labor Department initially reported weak employment gains, only to revise the numbers when more complete data became available. For the last three months of 1992, for example, the department initially reported average monthly gains of 65,000 jobs; it now says the economy was adding 177,000 jobs a month at the time, based on jobless-claims records and other information.
''I'm not saying there's going to be an upward revision'' again, said Robert J. Barbera, chief economist of ITG/Hoenig, an investment firm, ''but it's a reasonable notion.'' Mr. Barbera said he thought the economy was creating in the range of 50,000 jobs each month that were not being captured in the government's survey of businesses.
Ian C. Shepherdson, the chief domestic economist at High Frequency Economics in Valhalla, N.Y., said he thought the gap could be closer to 100,000. ''It is striking in the last couple of months how far apart the payroll numbers have been'' from other indicators, like jobless claims and consumer confidence, he added.
The government has reported that the economy added an average of about 55,000 jobs a month between August and December.
At that pace, the job market appears to be improving at only a slightly better rate than it was in late 1991 and early 1992, when Bill Clinton and other Democrats used the economy's weakness as a bludgeon against the first President Bush. If the economy is in fact adding 100,000 to 200,000 jobs each month, it would still be limper than it was when Mr. Clinton or Ronald Reagan ran for re-election, but considerably better than it was a dozen years ago for the current president's father.
The uncertainty over the job market also seems to be one factor causing Fed officials to suggest that they plan to keep their benchmark interest rate at a 45-year low despite the brisk economic growth of recent months. ''An accommodative monetary policy is needed, in my view, to support the ongoing recovery, particularly in the labor market,'' Ben S. Bernanke, a Fed governor, said in a speech in San Diego this month.
Investors expect the Fed to raise the benchmark rate, now at 1 percent, in August, based on the price of a futures contract tied to Fed policy.
Unless the government reports accelerating job gains in the coming months and revises the numbers for late 2003, making them look better than they now do, the Fed is unlikely to act sooner, analysts say. The Fed typically raises the rate when officials are worried that inflation is rising.
The Labor Department's other main measure of the job market -- a survey of households, the results of which create the unemployment rate -- also offers a rosier picture than the business survey. Since June, the jobless rate has fallen to 5.7 percent, from 6.2 percent.
But most economists consider the unemployment rate flawed in the other direction. Even N. Gregory Mankiw, who as the chairman of Mr. Bush's Council of Economic Advisers has obvious motivation to look on the bright side, has said the rate understates the job market's current problems.
The recent disappearance of millions of jobs, replaced by technology or relocated to other countries, appears to have led many workers to stop looking for new jobs and instead to rely on a spouse's salary or government benefits like disability pay. The Labor Department does not consider people unemployed if they are not seeking new work.
''I would love to believe the household survey'' and the optimistic view it offers, Mr. Shepherdson said. ''But, hand on heart, I can't say that I do.''
Many economists say they believe that the truth probably lies somewhere between the surveys' results. But they also acknowledge that if hiring and wage increases remain as tepid as the business survey now suggests, households are unlikely to spend enough to keep the economy humming.
''Either the employment data improves,'' Mr. Barbera said, ''or the widespread consensus of 4.5 percent growth this year is wrong.''
Correction:  January 28, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day last Wednesday about the mixed picture for job growth misstated the unemployment rate last June. It was 6.3 percent, not 6.2 percent.
