Bruce C. Ratner and Charles Kushner raised their bids modestly yesterday in their competition to buy the Nets, and officials involved in the negotiations said the process was moving rapidly toward a conclusion that could come as early as today.
Ratner wants to move the team to downtown Brooklyn, and Kushner's intent is to keep the Nets playing in New Jersey. It was not known how far beyond $300 million Ratner ventured, or how much more than his longstanding $267.5 million bid Kushner went.
Two officials involved in the negotiations said Kushner's new offer was two-tiered: for an all-cash purchase, the officials said, he raised his bid by a small amount, and for one that would include a longer payout to the sellers, he raised the gross amount by a somewhat larger figure. Officials provided no specifics for Ratner's increased bid.
A spokesman for Kushner, Bob Sommer, said, ''Charlie had productive discussions today with Nets ownership and investment bankers, and remains confident that his aggressive pursuit of the Nets will be successful.''
Kushner may be hoping that he has gone high enough to match a reduction in the actual value of Ratner's bid based on factors like projected losses during the years the Nets would still play at Continental Arena before the Brooklyn arena would be built. During that lame-duck period, it is expected that attendance and revenues would decline because many New Jersey fans would be unhappy about the pending relocation.
Although the bidding process may be close to ending after four months, Edwin Stier, president of Community Youth Organization, the owner of the Nets, said last night that it was not over. ''We're talking to all of the prospective purchasers and are trying to refine all their proposals to the point where we can make a decision,'' he said.
The victorious bid will require approval from C.Y.O. and YankeeNets, the holding company that has voted to dissolve.
Kushner, a Florham Park, N.J., real estate developer, whose primary partner is Senator Jon S. Corzine, is negotiating a financing deal with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, the arena's landlord, that would pay for up to $150 million in renovations to the aging Continental Arena, including 1,900 club seats and additional luxury boxes.
If Kushner were to get the team, his bid would still need the approval of three-quarters of the N.B.A.'s teams, or 22 votes.
Ratner, whose partners include the hip-hop entrepreneur Jay-Z, would need the same three-quarters approval from the N.B.A. to own the team, but he would also need a simple majority to move it.
He has numerous hurdles to overcome before he can build his $2.5 billion commercial and residential complex, of which the arena would be the centerpiece, in downtown Brooklyn. The league would defer voting on moving the team until Ratner has all the city and state approvals to build the arena. By the time Ratner can build the complex, the addition of the Charlotte Bobcats, an expansion franchise that begins play next season, will almost certainly require positive votes from 16 of 30 owners.
A move from East Rutherford to Brooklyn, while not very far in distance, is a transfer between states that would bring the Nets closer to the Knicks. The potential move has prompted opposition from community groups in the areas around where Ratner would build. It also evokes the possible return of a major league team to the borough for the first time since the Dodgers abandoned Brooklyn in 1957 for Los Angeles.
PRO BASKETBALL
