Flushed from strong showings in the Iowa caucuses, Senator John Kerry on Tuesday joined in a conference call with 250 of his largest fund-raisers, and Senator John Edwards traveled to Boston and New York to raise money.
In the hours after the two finished first and second in the caucuses, they moved from counting voters to courting donors in hopes of capitalizing on their performance. Aides to Mr. Kerry said the Iowa results had pumped life into his wheezing fund-raising. Mr. Edwards's lieutenants said they voting had given him renewed credibility.
''What has happened is that John Edwards has become a much more public candidate,'' Fred Baron, a financial co-chairman for Mr. Edwards's campaign, said. ''When you are doing fund-raising and no one knows your candidate and his message, it's difficult to do.''
Though they were fund-raising leaders early in the race, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry saw contributions slow substantially in recent months as Howard Dean's momentum and Internet-based fund-raising network made him the financial leader.
Fund-raisers and campaign strategists say Iowa shifted that momentum for the moment, helping Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards's prospects and handing Dr. Dean's machine a major test of strength and loyalty.
''It's been tough to raise money, because people want to see a wind at your back,'' Mr. Kerry's campaign treasurer, Bob Farmer, said. ''Suddenly, we've got a typhoon at our back, and it's exciting.''
Moving quickly to revitalize his traditional fund-raising network, Mr. Kerry and his financial aides reached out to major fund-raisers, ran phone banks in several states and prepared a mailing, Mr. Farmer said.
The campaign also had high hopes for the Internet, which, though not Mr. Kerry's primary strength, raised more than $300,000 in the hours after the caucuses.
The vote also offered Mr. Edwards, whose second-place showing in Iowa far exceeded expectations, a similar opportunity. He headed to Boston and New York to attend fund-raisers Tuesday. His campaign declined to say how much would be raised, but added a second event in New York. Mr. Edwards also raised $250,000 online since the caucuses.
''We couldn't be happier with the surge of support,'' a spokesman for the campaign, Roger Salazar, said.
The Democratic presidential campaign is moving into a phase where ballot box results -- not polls and spin -- drive fund-raising, finance experts said. Candidates who can point to strength among real voters are apt to see the most money, which is critical as they spend millions on early primaries.
Because voting in New Hampshire is a week away and ballots will be cast in seven states a week after that, the emphasis is on attracting money quickly.
''There's no question that a lot of people had given up John Kerry's candidacy for dead,'' Mr. Kerry's finance chairman in Massachusetts, Alan Solomont, said. ''But a lot of us stuck with it, as did the candidate, and today is the first step toward winning the nomination.''
For Dr. Dean, who raised more money than any other Democrat last year, his third-place showing in Iowa will test his Internet-based financial support. Campaign officials declined to say how much money arrived online after the vote. In an e-mail message after the caucuses, Dr. Dean challenged donors to send in $1 million by the primary next Tuesday.
''We'll now find out how real that support is,'' Tony Coelho, a Democratic consultant, said.
Some traffic on Dr. Dean's Web log, a popular diary where supporters interact, was critical of the Iowa campaign.
''Stop talking about the campaign and start talking about health care, success-by-six, malpractice driving doctors out of the profession, the environment, balanced budgets, homeland security, bringing the troops home,'' a supporter from Pennsylvania wrote. ''Give people a reason to vote for Howard Dean. They are electing a man to be president, not a campaign.''
She also took issue with Dr. Dean's advertising. ''Get some good ads,'' she wrote. ''We have given so much money, more than some of us can afford. So use it.''
If contributors grow angry, that could mean trouble for Dr. Dean, who has built his campaign on a network of small donors solicited through the Internet. A decline in that support could be critical, because Dr. Dean has shunned federal matching money.
Dr. Dean's Internet contributors have traditionally supported their candidate in all weather, though they have never had to endure an upset like his Iowa showing.
''They have caught us every single time and held us up,'' Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Joe Trippi, said. ''They let us know exactly how they feel, good or bad. But under adversity, they really respond.''
Because campaign finance reports that show activity last year will not be filed until Jan. 31, it is not clear how much cash campaigns have on hand. All say they have enough money to compete in early primaries next month.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: FUND-RAISING
