THERE is every reason in the world to believe that if a chef's supply of fresh ingredients is always at hand, his restaurant can serve simple, well-executed food. No need for carved vegetables or a dozen different components on the plate.
And that is what one expects at Taste, the restaurant and wine bar carved out of Eli's, the expensive fancy-food emporium on the Upper East Side that sells organic ingredients grown on the roof of the building; top quality meat and fish; and, naturally, foie gras and caviar.
Of course, if this restaurant, with immediate access to the best of everything, is going to charge a fair amount of money for simple food, patrons have a right to expect surroundings commensurate with the cost of the meal. Most people don't want to lay out $65 or more for dinner with a glass of wine for the chance to dine in a space that looks like a 1950's cafeteria, which is true of Taste's side room, hidden on slow nights from the rest of the dining room by shutters.
The surroundings make a difference. On two different nights, sitting in the restaurant's main dining room, where low lights and tablecloths disguise that cafeteria look, we had some respectable though very uneven food; another night, sitting in the side room, the food was either over- or undercooked and generally underseasoned. And this meal was all the more painful for the sparse feel of the room.
What Taste has going for it is an excellent wine list whose prices are far more reasonable than the food's, with a fine selection of 25 wines by the glass that can be enjoyed at the wine bar in the front room. What it doesn't have is consistency.
Eli's bread can never be faulted, and the baguettes served with dinner here are hard to resist. Nantucket Bay scallops were cooked perfectly in sweet brown butter, with watercress adding just the right sharp contrast. An unusual caponata made with artichokes instead of eggplant was quite savory, served with tomatoes and golden raisins.
Boneless fried chicken was amazingly juicy and tender, topped with a lovely tangle of sautéed mushrooms. But the tiny brussels sprouts that accompanied it had been cooked long enough to turn to mush. A dish advertised as fresh wild salmon intrigued me, because fresh wild salmon is the best salmon there is. I ordered it medium rare and got it overcooked. But I loved the mashed potatoes and the cauliflower that accompanied it.
A shellfish minestrone in a tomato base was rich and flavorful, the shellfish in it tender and sweet.
And a plate of grilled sardines was delightful. Grilled swordfish, though, overwhelmed by the sweet cabbage it came with, was dry and tasteless. The tomato bisque tasted just like Mom's; she bought hers in a can.
But I could have eaten a complete meal of the onion pudding that accompanied the pork chop on the two nights I ordered it. At one meal, the chop was wonderfully thick and meaty but had a surprise waiting in the middle: it was raw. That is not the kind of surprise you want in pork. As if to overcompensate, the next time I had it, the pork was cooked to a fare-thee-well.
As to my meal in that cafeterialike side room, first I'll tell you about the good things. The oysters were briny and sparkling, though their mignonnette sauce was so sharp it overpowered them. There was a well-cooked risotto with turnips, and braised lamb shanks that were quite properly falling off the bone, as well as a side order of fried zucchini sticks that were gone in a minute.
Otherwise we were out of luck. The heirloom tomatoes from the roof were good, but not flavorful enough to serve with house-made mozzarella. That mozzarella, which should have been soft and creamy, was very firm, more like something that had been made a few days before. (When it was served with peppers at another dinner it was no better.)
And a bit of beluga caviar, served with root vegetable fritters, wasn't fresh; it was mushy (and the fritters were far too sweet). Roasted beets in the salad were overcooked. Porcini with gremolata lacked flavor.
Asked if I wanted my branzino -- whole sea bass -- boned before it was served, I said yes. When it returned, it looked as if it had been boned with a hacksaw. A halibut dish was overcooked, and the cauliflower purée that came with it was devoid of flavor.
I am a sucker for lemon meringue anything, and the restaurant's signature dessert is a many-layered cake topped with a tall, perfect meringue. Delicious. An apple crisp with rum-soaked raisins had wonderful bits of crisp topping; the Concord grape and clementine sorbets were deeply flavored. Caramelized persimmon pudding was watery, but Eli's hot chocolate sure wasn't.
Lunch, which is simply a selection of the hot and cold food that is sold by the pound downstairs in the store, was so devoid of flavor, we left it and went to another restaurant. The fellow with the salt shaker must have been taking a coffee break when they prepared those dishes. Maybe if we had stuck with the toasted panini it would have been better. I loved one made of eggplant and cheese.
A lot of Upper East Siders like the idea of a wine bar and bistro for grown-ups. If this one were more reasonably priced, it would make a fine neighborhood restaurant. I think maybe the best way to enjoy Taste is to sit at the bar and try out some of the wines by the glass with some of the excellent potato chips.
Taste
Satisfactory  1413 Third Avenue (80th Street); (212) 717-9798
ATMOSPHERE -- A comfortable front room and a side room resembling a 1950's cafeteria.  SOUND LEVEL -- Compatible with conversation.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Nantucket Bay scallops; artichoke caponata; boneless fried chicken; shellfish minestrone; raw oysters; risotto with turnips; braised lamb shanks; layer cake with meringue; apple crisp; sorbets.  SERVICE -- Professional.  WINE LIST -- Excellent, well-priced, with 25 wines by the glass.  HOURS -- Lunch (which is self-service) Monday through Thursday 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Brunch Saturday and Sunday 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Dinner Sunday through Thursday 6 p.m. to 10 p.m., Friday and Saturday 6 p.m. through 10:30 p.m.  PRICE RANGE -- Dinner, appetizers $8 to $15; entrees $19 to $30 (steak is $39); desserts $8.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major credit cards.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Enter through store, restrooms are accessable.
WHAT THE STARS MEAN:
(None) Poor to satisfactory  * Good  ** Very good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
PAST REVIEWS from The Times, with additional capsule reviews by Times critics: nytimes.com/dining
RESTAURANTS
