Daniel B. Brewster Jr., the chief executive of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing who was brought aboard in 2000 to transform the company into a major magazine publisher, will soon find himself without a job after his bold plans faltered, according to two company executives.
Mr. Brewster met with the company's staff yesterday morning and acknowledged that he believed he was about to be fired, the executives said. Mr. Brewster's boss, Axel Ganz, a member of the board of Gruner &amp; Jahr in Germany and its head of international publications, was flying to New York last night and could be meeting with Mr. Brewster as soon as this morning, they said. Mr. Ganz is expected to serve as interim chief executive of the division, which publishes Family Circle, Parents and Fast Company, among other magazines.
News of Mr. Brewster's imminent ouster was first reported in Der Spiegel, the German newsmagazine. Gruner &amp; Jahr is based in Hamburg and is owned by Bertelsmann, the giant German media company.
In the last year, Mr. Ganz has expressed support for Mr. Brewster, despite several public black eyes for the company, including a legal dispute with Rosie O'Donnell, a former business partner, and news that it had inflated circulation figures for several of its magazines.
Top executives at Bertelsmann have become increasingly uncomfortable with the negative press coverage of the company, according to the two executives at Gruner &amp; Jahr. Mr. Brewster has also been involved in heated divorce proceedings, which also made Mr. Ganz and other members of the board uncomfortable, according to the two executives, who insisted on anonymity.
But it was Gruner &amp; Jahr's poor financial results for 2003 that convinced the board it was time to make a change. After a significant turnaround in profits in 2002, the company failed to match that performance last year, falling far short of expectations, according to an executive.
Reached at home, Mr. Brewster, who is three and a half years into a five-year contract, said he had been assured by Axel Ganz that there had been ''no determination of any change'' in his job responsibilities.
Mr. Brewster, 48, developed a reputation as a strong publisher when he was chief executive of American Express Publishing, a partnership with Time Inc. He was seen as something of a savior for Gruner &amp; Jahr when he was hired in 2000 by Thomas Middelhoff, then the chief executive of Bertelsmann. Mr. Brewster said then that he would double Gruner &amp; Jahr's revenue within five years.
The company acquired Inc., a magazine for small-business owners, for about $200 million just before Mr. Brewster arrived, and then bought Fast Company, a magazine focused on the new economy that had been growing at a rapid pace. But the purchase price of $360 million, along with the subsequent bursting of the Internet bubble and a plunge in advertising revenue, caused many to question the timing of the deal.
Other magazine industry executives speculated that Gruner &amp; Jahr might sell its holdings in the United States. The company sold its British holdings to the National Magazine Company, the British division of the Hearst Corporation, in 2000. And Bertelsmann has become a less aggressive company since Mr. Middelhoff left in 2002.
But the company has a major new venture planned here -- a celebrity picture magazine called Gala -- and Mr. Ganz, who now lives in Paris, has told the board that he will personally oversee its development.
