The board of Hollinger International stopped short of taking action yesterday against its former chairman and chief executive, Conrad M. Black, instead setting up a review committee consisting of all the company's directors except for Lord Black; his wife, Barbara Amiel Black; and Hollinger's vice chairman, Daniel Colson, who is seen as an ally of the Blacks.
The committee, whose formation was announced after a long meeting in Manhattan, will examine Hollinger International's options in light of Lord Black's deal over the weekend to sell his controlling stake in the company to the Barclay brothers of Britain for $178 million.
Lord Black and Hollinger International have been at odds since November, when he stepped down as chief executive and agreed to repay the company about $7.2 million in what restive shareholders said was excessive compensation not approved by the board. He failed to make an initial repayment of $850,000 on Dec. 31. And he has since disputed that he owes the company any money, maintaining that he has found documents showing that the payments had board approval.
Hollinger International, based in Chicago, publishes The Chicago Sun-Times, The Daily Telegraph of London and The Jerusalem Post.
Some investors and analysts had expected Hollinger's board to take stronger action at its meeting yesterday, by either filing a lawsuit to block Lord Black from selling his stake or insisting that any proceeds from a sale be put in escrow until the dispute is resolved.
But the board apparently wanted more time to evaluate the complex choices offered by the Barclay bid.
A previously existing special committee of Hollinger's board, advised by a former Securities and Exchange Commission chairman, Richard C. Breeden, had initially investigated $32 million of funds that the company said were paid to Lord Black and his colleagues without board approval. But the committee later suspected that more than $200 million in questionable payments had been made, and it filed suit last week to recover the money.
Lord Black, apparently fearful that the special committee might try to block the deal with the Barclays, asked a Canadian court on Monday to issue an injunction that would prevent the board of Hollinger International from trying to stop it.
Late yesterday, Hollinger Inc., the company that holds Lord Black's stake, filed with the S.E.C. its agreement with the Barclay brothers. Herbert Denton, an adviser to several institutional shareholders in Hollinger, said that the document appeared to give the Barclays an out if the special committee's accusations that the payments to Lord Black were not properly disclosed are accurate. A spokeswoman for Hollinger International said the company was reviewing the material.
For the board, weighing the prospects of a Barclay deal is complicated. Among the drawbacks, a sale of the controlling stake to the Barclay brothers would eliminate the chance to conduct an auction that might fetch a higher price. And if the proceeds ended up in Lord Black's control, it could make it harder for Hollinger to recover the money it says it is owed.
On the other hand, the cash from a Barclay deal could give Lord Black the ability to repay Hollinger International -- if that is his intention, or if he is eventually forced to do so by a court.
In acquiring voting control of Hollinger International, the Barclays would actually be buying a 78 percent stake in Hollinger Inc., which is based in Toronto and is owned by Ravelston Management, a private company controlled by Lord Black.
Hollinger Inc. owns 30 percent of Hollinger International but has 73 percent voting control. The Barclays also plan to make an offer for the remaining shares of Hollinger Inc., which are publicly held and traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange.
Hoping to protect Hollinger International against any effort by Lord Black to sell his stake, the S.E.C. said on Friday that it had obtained a federal court order. Among other things, if there was any attempt to impede an investigation into any misuse of corporate funds, Mr. Breeden would be named a court-ordered special monitor with the task of protecting the interests of Hollinger International shareholders.
But it was not clear how much authority the special committee and the monitor would have with Hollinger Inc., a Canadian company.
There are signs that Lord Black does not have entirely secure relationships even within Hollinger Inc. In November, the four independent members of its audit committee quit. And one of two new committee members whom Lord Black appointed is now leaving.
Then yesterday, days after Hollinger Inc. announced a new director, André Bisson, a Canadian investment adviser and former banking executive, Mr. Bisson said in a statement that he had decided not to join the Hollinger Inc. board. He declined to offer an explanation. Earlier in the day, Hollinger Inc. issued its own statement, which characterized Mr. Bisson's action as a resignation, citing an unspecified dispute.
MEDIA BUSINESS
