Auditors have uncovered hundreds of millions of dollars in previously unreported accounting fraud at HealthSouth, the embattled chain of hospitals and clinics, the company said yesterday.
HealthSouth said a forensic audit by PricewaterhouseCoopers found additional fraudulent entries to raise the total to a range of $3.8 billion to $4.6 billion, up from $3.5 billion, the government's estimate last year.
The fraud included $2.5 billion in fraudulent accounting entries from 1996 to 2002, $500 million in incorrect accounting for goodwill and other items involved in acquisitions from 1994 to 1999, and $800 million to $1.6 billion in ''aggressive accounting'' from 1992 to March 2003, said Bryan P. Marsal, the company's chief restructuring officer.
For example, accounts receivable on money owed to HealthSouth was booked as income, he said. ''The victims of the fraud were the security holders, the equity holders,'' Mr. Marsal said in an interview before briefing investors in New York.
Doug Jones, a lawyer for HealthSouth shareholders and bondholders who are suing the company and its previous auditors and investment bankers, Ernst &amp; Young and UBS Warburg, said the report yesterday was ''a candid admission about the value of this case.''
Fraud against Medicare, the government program for the elderly and disabled, an important revenue source, was only about $6 million, the auditors found. If massive Medicare fraud had been found, the company might have lost its Medicare business, health care analysts said.
Mr. Marsal said HealthSouth expected to name a chief executive by the middle of the year to succeed Richard M. Scrushy, its founder, who was indicted in November on 84 counts of fraud.
A trial date for Mr. Scrushy has been set for August. He has denied any knowledge of the fraud. So far, 15 former HealthSouth employees, including 5 former chief financial officers, have pleaded guilty in the case.
Mr. Marsal said the company had turned over the forensic audit results to Justice Department prosecutors. He said it was in discussions on ''a global settlement'' that would cover whistleblower lawsuits accusing HealthSouth of overcharging Medicare as well as contested charges for expenses the company paid for Mr. Scrushy and other executives, including costs for the fleet of company planes that he sometimes piloted.
HealthSouth's revenue was $3.99 billion last year, and cash flow was $645 million. Mr. Marsal said he expected HealthSouth to issue audited financial results for four years, 2000 through 2003, in the first quarter of next year. It will report a profit for 2005, he said.
The company plans to spend $45 million to add two rehabilitation hospitals and three or four long-term-care group centers next year and $80 million more on capital maintenance of facilities, Mr. Marsal said.
The four-year audit, which is being conducted by the Grant Thornton auditing firm, has been delayed while it reconstructs balance sheets based on more than 350 appraisals and the examination of 800,000 accounts, Mr. Marsal said.
Although it has not published audited numbers since the fraud became known, HealthSouth was able to obtain a $355 million seven-year loan at 10.375 percent on Friday from its current banker, Credit Suisse First Boston. The proceeds from the new bonds, which were trading above par yesterday, went to pay off convertible bonds overdue since April. The deal included warrants for 10 million shares of HealthSouth common stock at a strike price of $6.50 a share.
HealthSouth, whose stock rose to $30 briefly in 1998 and fell to 11 cents in March, closed at $5.93 yesterday in over-the-counter trading. Damages to shareholders are ''increasingly difficult to measure'' because of the rebound, Mr. Marsal said.
Eli Radinsky, a high-yield bond analyst at Jeffries &amp; Company, said some investors had a tepid reaction yesterday to the HealthSouth numbers. He said the company was on a solid footing but cash flow was running slightly below HealthSouth's earlier projections.
A spokesman for HealthSouth, Andrew Brimmer, said that operations were expected to generate $650 million in cash flow this year, in line with its projections.
