Saying New York had turned the corner economically, Gov. George E. Pataki on Tuesday proposed a $99.8 billion budget that would significantly increase state spending and change the way the state pays for education and health care for the poor.
At the same time, under court order to address the state's chronic shortchanging of New York City's schools, the third-term Republican governor proposed expanding video gambling to create a new fund that will be used to educate the neediest children around the state.
If passed by the State Legislature, the budget would increase spending by $1.5 billion over last year's final tally, bringing it close to a benchmark of $100 billion.
But the budget also calls for $600 million in belt-tightening by state agencies; $283 million in borrowing; the use of one-time revenues; and $972 million in new fees and targeted taxes, including extension of the tax on clothing and shoes under $110, to close a projected budget shortfall of $5.1 billion. It includes no broad-based tax increases on income or property, which the governor has in the past labeled job-killing taxes.
The governor's proposal, which is his plan for the budget to take effect on April 1, contains something for everyone, leading some legislators and budget watchdogs to predict that it will have an easier time passing the Legislature this year than in the past; it has been late for 19 straight years.
Some, however, said it is too good to be true. ''In the end, I think it is fantasy to a certain degree,'' said State Senator David Patterson, a Manhattan Democrat. Although he said it was workable, he added: ''It is almost as if there has to be an incredible synchronization of events, and the most speculative optimism, for all of these elements to come to fruition, for this budget to be successful.'' For New York City, the budget would provide much of the aid Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg requested in his budget proposal last week, though not in all the areas he wanted.
More than $160 million worth of Mr. Bloomberg's $400 million request, for instance, would come from extending the sales tax on clothing, a tax that the mayor had promised -- and the City Council had insisted -- would be phased out in June.
The proposal also includes pension reforms that the governor said would save the state $500 million next year and satisfy a request by localities to curb their shared costs as well. However, the state comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, has already labeled the actions unconstitutional, something the governor disputes.
Supporters of more money for New York City's schools lauded the proposal to create a separate fund for enhancing the education of poor children. But critics of the governor said that counting on revenues from video lottery terminals at eight horse racing tracks and at eight new sites, including up to five in New York City, could be financially risky.
But even as critics found fault with portions of the budget, many legislators said they detected a conciliatory note in the governor's tone. Last year's budget was crafted by the Legislature, vetoed by the governor and then passed in a bipartisan override for the first time in a generation. After that embarrassing political defeat, Mr. Pataki presented a far less contentious budget, one that satisfies a broad array of interests, budget watchdogs said.
Indeed, while the governor condemned the Legislature's $92.8 billion budget last year, calling it a fiscal train wreck, this year he built that amount into his proposal. He also built in $5.4 billion more in spending and revenues that quietly drove up the actual budget during the current year. He then added $1.5 billion in additional spending.
The governor acknowledged his new mood this year, but attributed it to a strengthening economy.
''New York's economy is coming back,'' Mr. Pataki told legislators in a 50-minute speech on Tuesday morning. He finished the speech by saying: ''It is not in our character to look backward. We have endured tough economic times, but we are working our way forward, not back to our successes of the past, but straight ahead to a future of opportunities we have yet to discover.''
The budget reflected the state's improving fiscal picture. While New York faced an $11.5 billion budget deficit last year, set off a surcharge on income taxes for the state's highest earners and an increase in the sales tax, this year's deficit was $5.1 billion, about $1 billion less than had been predicted earlier in the year. Mr. Pataki, like Mr. Bloomberg last week, said revenues were rising thanks to improvements on Wall Street and the financial services sector. However, he predicted deficits of $2.85 billion and $4.34 billion in the next two years.
During his address, the governor repeatedly spoke of the need to grow New York's economy and, several times, cited his goal of creating one million new private jobs in the next decade. Some of the loudest applause greeted his proposal to relieve local governments of the cost of Albany's mandates -- an issue that has become politically charged since a study last fall concluded that New Yorkers pay more of their income in local taxes than anywhere in the nation.
Mr. Pataki proposed that the state take over the local governments' share of Medicaid costs for long-term care. He said it would save localities $1.8 billion a year in the next 10 years.
Assembly Democrats, however, were quick to point out that savings to localities next year amount to little -- $173 million in New York City's fiscal year and $24 million worth of counties' $1 billion annual long-term care costs.
The governor proposed to increase education aid by $147 million, to $14.6 billion, including $56 million for New York City schools. As he did in 2001, he called for scrapping the current system of school financing formulas in the state and put forward a Flex Aid program, essentially consolidating seven separate categories of aid totaling $10 billion into a single fund.
But aides to the Assembly Speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat, said that by applying the new formula in this budget, Mr. Pataki actually reduced, by $250 million, the amount of education aid more than 700 school districts would have received this year under the current education aid formulas.
What the governor did was set aside revenues from video lottery terminals at eight horse racing tracks as a special pot of money to address the court mandate. He said $325 million of that money would be available during next school year. Up to eight other sites with the terminals would be established around the state, and the combined revenue of the 16 would amount to $2 billion annually over the next five years, he expects. Michael Rebell, the executive director of the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, which brought the lawsuit that led to the Court of Appeals decision, said he was encouraged.
"We wanted at least $2 billion. We think that setting up a sound basic education fund is a good step forward, but it is a wobbly baby step when we need a giant leap," he said.
On the cost-cutting side, the governor likely faces some battles and the possibility that this budget could ultimately pass the $100 billion mark.
For instance, he faces resistance to a plan to have college students forgo a third of their scholarships until they graduate, though he proposes no tuition hikes for city university or state university students. Also, he has included a new assessment on hospitals and nursing homes, to raise $323 million next year, that many in the Capitol said would not be well received. He is also proposing to cut $186 million out of money for trade schools, school construction and school buses that will anger lawmakers, especially upstate.
"Very quickly, this adds up to serious money," one fiscal analyst said.
In not allowing the sales tax exemption on clothing and shoe purchases of under $110 to sunset in June, the governor hoped to raise $440 million next year. The governor proposed instead allowing for four tax-free weeks during the year. Assembly Democrats called it the most regressive tax available and said it would drive customers out of the state.
''It is clear that the reality of this proposal does not move this state on to better things,'' Mr. Silver said, adding, however, that he was committed to working with Mr. Pataki ''to craft a better budget for New Yorkers.''
THE GOVERNOR'S BUDGET PLAN: OVERVIEW
