Almost every guy has a favorite Super Bowl, one that, for whatever reason, holds a special place in his heart. Mine was Super Bowl XXIX, which was played on Jan. 29, 1995, at Joe Robbie Stadium in Miami.
No, I didn't go to the game. Truth be told, I didn't have plans at all that year. I was simply going to hang out at home, order a pizza, call some friends, then curse the six hours of my life that I had thrown away watching a blowout. But then I got the call.
It was my friend Ivan, fellow struggling stand-up comedian. ''What are you doing for the big game?'' he said.
''I'm just playing it low key this year,'' I said, trying not to sound pathetic.
''Are you interested in writing for the Super Bowl?''
Come again?
Ivan went on to tell me that an investment bank in Midtown Manhattan had hired Howie Long, Roger Staubach and Walter Payton to do a private, in-house Super Bowl party for its employees. And Ivan knew the producer, who needed someone to write jokes for the hosts.
Sure it sounded crazy, even for Ivan, who had developed this habit of calling me up every once in a while to offer me jobs that turned out not to exist. Once it was a writing job on a VH-1 show that he was ''developing,'' unbeknownst to anyone at the network. Another time it was a role in a studio-financed film that he was to write and direct, but which lacked, so far as I could tell, a cast, a crew, a camera and a script. Hey -- at least he always kept me in mind.
Hoping for the best, expecting the worst, and with nothing better to do, I showed up at the bank on Sunday. There was Ivan at the door to greet me, a giant bag of Cheetos in hand. He gave me a big high-five and ushered me up to the studio.
There was Long, getting his game face slathered on. On the couch a few feet away were Staubach and Payton, waiting their turns. As I shook hands with these three gods of the gridiron, I started to get lightheaded and a little nauseous. Then the paranoia set in. Did I have some disease, and was this the Make-a-Wish Foundation's way of telling me?
Turns out I had nothing to worry about, with the exception of my job, which was to write funny, off-the-cuff jokes about the game between the 49ers and the Chargers, one of the most boring in Super Bowl history.
How boring? It was so boring that the 49ers were up by 14 points with 10 minutes to go -- in the first quarter. It was so boring that midway through the second quarter, Payton asked if anything else was on. It was so boring that my best joke of the day was: ''The president should just call Steve Young at halftime. That way he'll avoid using nighttime minutes.''
But the great thing about a bad game is that you have time to schmooze, which is exactly what I wanted to do with the living legends surrounding me. Since we had to do only a pregame, halftime and postgame ''broadcast,'' we had the rest of the time to sit around a table, moan about the game and play paper football.
Watching a Super Bowl with three Hall of Famers is a surreal experience. I mean, we all talk to our TV sets during games. But when Roger Staubach tells the quarterback to sell the fake, you take notes. And there are certain things you can say with your friends watching the game that you simply don't say in front of N.F.L. players, like, ''I could have caught that pass!''
I like to think that I know a bit more about the game than the average fan, having played ball in college for the mighty Jumbos of Tufts University. (Stop snickering.) Since Long and I shared the same position (defensive end), I was excited to compare notes. He told me about his famous five-sack performance against the Redskins, and I told him about the time I showed up at 7 a.m. for an away game, only to be told there wasn't room on the bus because they hadn't accounted for the bathroom.
By the fourth quarter, I actually started to feel comfortable around these guys. I fantasized about us all becoming friends, of us playing golf together as a foursome. I pictured one of my high school buddies calling me up and asking me to hang out, and me saying, ''I'd like to, but Howie and I are going to the mall, and you know how upset he gets when I break a date.''
But, like all fantasies, it couldn't last forever. When the postgame show ended, we all said our goodbyes. I thanked Ivan profusely, and then walked into the frigid Manhattan night. I was still giddy. And I knew I had a Super Bowl story to top all Super Bowl stories. The icing on the cake? I actually got paid for it.
I made $100 for the jokes and an extra $20 from my friend Dave the Cowboy fan. I had managed to call Dave right before kickoff and said, ''Hey, you want to do any side bets this year?''
''Like what?'' he said. ''Total combined score? Over-under?''
''How about this?'' I casually shot back. 'I'll bet you that before this game is over, Roger Staubach will call you to ask how you're enjoying the game.''
Pause. ''Are you high?'' came the response.
''No. Just lucky.''
Back Talk Gary Greenberg, a writer and comedian, is the author of ''Be Prepared: A Practical Handbook for New Dads'' to be published in June by Simon &amp; Schuster.
