Looking Beyond The Ballroom
WHEN they walk on stage to address their cheering supporters this Tuesday night, the Democratic presidential candidates might want to consider a new mantra: It's the living room, stupid.
After Howard Dean's speech the night of the Iowa caucuses, he was widely criticized for violating the first rule of election night speeches. Why, the critics asked, hadn't he remembered that the only audience that matters is in the living room, not the ballroom?
Yet in New Hampshire last Tuesday, the candidates were still spending their precious moments on national television thanking aides and volunteers. Just when they could finally stop pandering to voters, they went on rhapsodizing about the locals' hospitality for so long that the networks cut them off in midspeech.
Even Dr. Dean had not learned the lesson. He started off fine in New Hampshire, speaking about his dreams for a better America. But just as he was hitting his stride, he spotted some campaign workers from San Francisco and hailed their dedication for crossing the country. The mood was broken and the networks cut away.
It may seem cruel to subject a roomful of supporters to a stump speech they already know word for word. John Kerry's volunteers presumably do not want to be rewarded at a victory party with a speech about his tax policies; John Edwards's workers do not need to hear for the millionth time that he is the son of a millworker.
But only 20 percent of Americans know that Mr. Edwards's father worked in a mill, and two-thirds do not recognize the most rudimentary distinction in the candidates' tax policies, according to the latest National Annenberg Election Survey from the University of Pennsylvania. It's hard for the crowd at an election-night party to imagine so many Americans know so little about the candidates, but those channel-surfers in the living rooms are the ones who will be picking the next president.
Those Boots, Made for Stumping
When L. Paul Bremer III, the civilian administrator of Iraq, went around in last summer's 120-degree weather wearing combat boots with a suit and tie, it didn't seem to be a fashion with much of a future. But now the Suit 'n' Boots combination has become the rage of the campaign. Devotees claim they're just being practical, but fashion is never so simple.
Mr. Kerry and Wesley K. Clark have gone for the L. L. Bean country squire look, wearing the classic leather-and-rubber Maine hunting boots on campaign swings across the country. Mr. Edwards likes to wear expensive navy blue suits -- Zegna is one of his brands -- with a pair of black waterproof hiking boots that his daughter gave him as a Christmas present. They were intended to help him through the snows of Iowa and New Hampshire. But Mr. Edwards grew so fond of them that he took to wearing them all the time, snow or no snow. He kept them on during television debates and during some of his visits back to the South.
''We tried telling him that he didn't really need these boots on 50-degree sunny days, but we couldn't get him out of the boots,'' said Mr. Edwards's press secretary, Jennifer Palmieri. ''He said he liked the way they were comfortable and made him feel sturdy. I think he got a little superstitious about wearing them.''
As a fashion statement, the Suit 'n' Boots look may seem primitive, but as a political statement it may be more sophisticated. It shows the wearer can deal with contradictions comfortably. Mr. Bremer's suit said he was calmly making progress bringing order to Iraq; his boots said he was ready to sprint for cover through shrapnel. The Democrats' suits say they're presidential; their boots say they're men of the people.
It's a tricky dichotomy, but apparently important this year. Voters have been telling pollsters and journalists they're angry at policies that favor the rich, but so far they've given most of their votes to the wealthiest candidates, like Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards and Dr. Dean. Voters say they want a candidate who's not a Washington insider, but they also want someone sufficiently worldly and distinguished to be electable. They seem to want the Suit 'n' Boots.
An Endorsement Just for Laughs
IN South Carolina, which has an open primary, the Republican Party is officially urging its members to stay away from the polls on Tuesday. But a conservative radio station in Greenville has been urging its Republican listeners to turn out to vote in the Democratic primary -- for the Rev. Al Sharpton.
The campaign began as a joke after Mr. Sharpton was quoted last year as saying that he was running because ''the way to move a donkey is to slap the donkey.'' Slapping the donkey sounded so good to the conservative talk show hosts at WORD-AM that they endorsed Mr. Sharpton. They even sponsored a fund-raiser, inviting listeners to stop by the station and pay for the privilege of petting (slapping seemed problematic) a real donkey.
''We collected $28 and a driving-range token,'' said Peter Thiele, the station's program director, who mailed a check for $30 to the Sharpton campaign. He conceded that the station was not motivated by a desire to promote Mr. Sharpton's policies or the Democratic Party.
''There's not much we agree on with the Reverend Al,'' Mr. Thiele said, ''but it would be kind of nice to have him win the South Carolina primary just for the fun of it.''
Honor Roll
The Ask Not if It Makes Any Sense Prize: ''Together we will build a prosperity in this country where Americans are not just working for the economy, but the economy is working for Americans.'' (From John F. Kerry's stump speech.)
Most Honest Self-Assessment by a Celebrity: ''I'm a little trepidatious about coming to New Hampshire. He was doing great in Iowa until I went out to help him.'' (Martin Sheen, who used his presidential powers from ''The West Wing'' to proclaim Howard Dean Day in New Hampshire.)
Bravest Spin of the Week: ''Kucinich Campaign Progressing.'' (Headline on Dennis J. Kucinich's press release after he finished sixth in the New Hampshire primary with 1.4 percent of the vote.)
Political Points
