THIS week, it's time for some journalism heresy. I'd like to suggest that newspapers with aspirations to greatness -- like the one you're holding in your hands -- learn to be generous to their rivals, and in the process provide value for their readers.
It has long been Times policy to credit other news organizations for their scoops: ''Such and so was first reported Monday in 'The Daily Bugle.' '' It has even longer been part of the paper's genetic code never to let someone else's scoop lie unmassaged by Timesian hands. ''What can we add?'' goes the editors' refrain. Sometimes -- often -- that works. Sometimes, though, the effort at addition becomes, for the reader, an act of subtraction.
In the last several weeks, three stories launched elsewhere have been either diminished or disregarded by The Times. (Of course, among major news organizations, this not-invented-here attitude is no more exclusive to The Times than are commas.) In each case, the effort to maintain a high level of what people around here call ''competitive metabolism'' has not served the readers well.
Last October, The Blade in Toledo, Ohio, published a series of articles revealing that ''members of a platoon of American soldiers known as Tiger Force slaughtered an untold number of Vietnamese civilians over a seven-month period in 1967.'' The series was the product of 10 months of research conducted on two continents and in seven states.
When the Blade series broke, The Associated Press sent out a story summarizing its findings. Many newspapers picked up the A.P. report; some, including the Times-owned International Herald Tribune, put it on the front page. In the Times newsroom, Roger Cohen, who was foreign editor at the time, thought it an important story, but, he recalls, he was ''focused on Iraq'' and ''did not give it the attention it deserved.'' National editor Jim Roberts tried to get something rolling that the paper could call its own, but reporters who knew their way around the Pentagon were otherwise engaged. Editors felt that running 10 inches of A.P. copy would not represent the story fairly.
In The New Yorker of Nov. 10, Seymour Hersh, who as a young reporter broke the story about the massacre at My Lai, praised the Blade series, noting along the way that the four major networks and most major newspapers had all but ignored it. Hersh's article provoked The Times's executive editor, Bill Keller, to order up a lengthy piece on The Blade's discoveries. John Kifner's ''Report on Brutal Vietnam Campaign Stirs Memories,'' which sought to place the Blade series in historical perspective, finally ran on Dec. 28 -- a report on a two-month-old story about events that took place 37 years ago. The Blade's publisher and editor in chief, John Robinson Block, felt that The Times's late weigh-in, which included a sizable helping of the skepticism that re-examination will almost inevitably provoke, was an insult to his paper and its reporters.
Keller told me that if his own staff had developed the Blade series, he would have put it on the front page. Yet at least partly because it was someone else's, it ended up diminished, delayed and, in some eyes, devalued.
Scores of readers wrote me earlier this month about The Times's failure to put former Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill's bombshells about the early days of the Bush administration on the front page. Most suggested (and many insisted) that the story was played down for political reasons.
There are several more practical explanations that could be invoked by Times defenders. They might note that the carefully leaked morsels of news that fed the story were intended to propel the book containing O'Neill's revelations onto the best-seller list. They could point out that O'Neill himself wasn't available to The Times; his first broadcast interview had been locked up exclusively by ''60 Minutes,'' and his first print interview had been promised to Time magazine. Most persuasively, Times editors had very little to go on as they tried to fashion their first story for Saturday, Jan. 10, and what they had was frustratingly manipulative: promoting its exclusive Sunday evening interview with O'Neill, CBS spooned out a few juicy nuggets to newspapers on Friday and Saturday -- enough to entice readers to watch ''60 Minutes,'' yet not enough to make them feel they'd already seen it.
The 10-paragraph Associated Press story The Times ran on Jan. 10 may not have been a prizewinner, but it did have a former cabinet member comparing the president who appointed him to a ''blind man in a roomful of deaf people,'' which certainly sounds like Page 1 news to me. But if it didn't make the front page because CBS had locked down the story, once The Times did have access both to the book and to O'Neill himself, it didn't make the front page because -- well, because by then the news was no longer new. For the historical record provided by the newspaper of record, explosive revelations about a sitting president by one of his appointees were consigned to Pages A11, A22 and A13.
THE most important not-invented-here in recent weeks, and the one that crystallized the issue for me, was a story that ran in The Washington Post on Jan. 7. ''Iraq's Arsenal Was Only on Paper,'' by Barton Gellman, was so stunning a piece of reporting that it led Bill Keller to tell The New York Observer that it ''caused everyone who competes with [Gellman] a serious case of indigestion followed by admiration.'' In a conversation in his office last week, Keller elaborated: Gellman's piece, he said, was ''rich and subtle and deeply reported.'' I asked him why, if it was so good, it didn't merit a story in The Times recounting its main points, especially since The Times's own reporting on Iraqi weapons programs last winter has continued to suffer a hurricane of criticism. Keller said that trying to do a summary of Gellman's work for Times readers ran the risk of oversimplification -- that the nuances that made the piece so strong would not survive reduction to summary form. Gellman's piece, he said, was ''easy to admire, hard to represent.''
Or, as former Times managing editor Gene Roberts once said by way of explaining the difficulty of handling other papers' big stories, ''You can't steal an elephant.'' The necessary checking and re-reporting The Times had to go through to run its own version of The Blade's Vietnam story required several weeks. Tracking down Gellman's Iraqi sources might have taken years. Breaking through the fortress of exclusivity erected around Paul O'Neill by CBS and Simon &amp; Schuster would have taken a safecracker.
But it's not as if The Times, and every other newspaper on the planet, doesn't consistently publish material it hasn't gathered on its own. When a district attorney announces an indictment, The Times doesn't assume it needs weeks to interview witnesses, check allegations or otherwise vet the prosecutor's charges. When a politician makes a speech, there's often so much taken at face value a critic could argue (and in my e-mail, many, many do) that the paper is shilling for the politician. Having read Barton Gellman's words for many years, why can't Times editors have as much faith in them as in John Kerry's, or Dick Cheney's, or the Santa Barbara County prosecutor's? They -- the editors -- may read The Washington Post. But how many of their readers do?
There's no question that the competitive electricity powering a news organization produces a great deal of benefit, just as it would in a soap company fighting for market share or in a research team trying to beat the other guys to a medical breakthrough. I understand why competition is necessary to inspire the troops. I also understand that Macy's never carried anything with a Gimbel's label sewn into it. But maybe The Times's insistence on stamping its own brand on everything it touches ends up diminishing what it delivers. If the goal of newspapering is to inform the readers and create a historical record, shouldn't the editors be telling us about everything they think is important, no mater where they find it?
I've been trying to stick to one theme in each of my biweekly columns, but as that may be more a product of vanity than necessity, I'm going to break the pattern here. Last Sunday's Times Magazine cover story on sex slavery, ''The Girls Next Door,'' by contributing writer Peter Landesman, has provoked a great deal of controversy, and the article's detractors and its defenders have made their cases forcefully. Go to www.slate.com/Landesman for a wide-ranging assault on the piece by Slate editor at large Jack Shafer and for a comprehensive defense by Times Magazine editor Gerald Marzo-rati. For those who missed it, a link to the original story may be found at nytimes.com/weekinreview.
THE PUBLIC EDITOR
