DON and Kathleen Gold covered their furniture with sheets last summer, packed what they could fit into the back of their Honda and drove four days east from Centerville, Utah, to Westchester County, setting off with high hopes on a journey that might surprise other retirees.
They began their new job, which Mr. Gold calls ''a spiritual high adventure,'' in August, as volunteers helping maintain 48 apartments rented by the younger ''elders,'' the name used to refer to all acting male missionaries of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, serving an area from Chinatown to Kingston, N.Y., and from Monticello, N.Y., to Danbury, Conn.
The Golds are also missionaries, but they are not in their late teens or early 20's, like most of the 60,000 elders and sisters -- as they are called -- that the Mormon church sends out annually to encourage others to join their faith. Mr. Gold is 78 and Mrs. Gold is 62, and they have 29 grandchildren. They are elder elders, and the New York North mission, which includes Westchester County, is the host to a dozen such senior elder couples. There are about 4,200 such senior elders at work around the world each year, according to Scott Trotter, a spokesman for the church on the East Coast.
The Bronx and lower Westchester ''stake'' -- the equivalent of a diocese -- is growing: it has almost 4,500 members, about 20 percent more than it did just five years ago, which church officials say is about the same rate of growth experienced nationwide. The Mormon chapel in Scarsdale will be celebrating its 50th anniversary this fall, and there is also a storefront church in Yonkers. Groundbreaking is scheduled this month for a chapel to be built in New Rochelle, and a proposal for a larger temple in Harrison has received all the necessary town board approvals, but construction permits cannot be issued until a sewer main to serve the building can be built under the Hutchinson River Parkway.
The younger elders go door to door or talk to people in the subways and on the streets in search of converts. Charles Carr, 67, a Mormon elder and retired lawyer from Idaho Falls, who is also working here, said: ''Seniors generally are not out to do that kind of contacting. They'll get a referral. It's partly a difference in energy.''
The Golds and others like them, who pay their own way for the 18 months or so they are in the area, are more likely to teach classes to new members or chaperon missionaries making visits to single people, to avoid any appearance of impropriety. They also share their experiences with prospective converts who are facing difficult situations the younger missionaries may not have encountered.
''We are visiting a sister who just lost her husband in March,'' Mrs. Gold said, explaining that both she and her husband had lost their first spouses after long marriages. ''Because we'd both already experienced that, we had empathy with that. And as we teach the Gospel I can say, 'This helped us.''' The Golds are used to living among lifelong Mormons, and they are moved by the fervor of recent converts; they could name 17 new members in the church's Harlem branch since their arrival.
''They ask Sister Gold how do I pray, or do tithing or fasting,'' Mr. Gold said. ''It just touches our hearts.''
Mrs. Gold said of the converts: ''Life is full of a lot of trial for these people, especially here in New York, where there's a very hectic lifestyle. They find inner peace, and come to grips with the fact that they're doing something good with their lives.''
Mr. Carr said the elder couples in the mission work with 175 young missionaries. More typically there would be six older couples in a mission. Some are doing specialized work, working with contractors on the construction of the Manhattan temple being built across from Lincoln Center, arranging employment opportunities for Mormons in the city, and working in public affairs. Another couple are in charge of the 35 cars owned by the church and used in the northern parts of the mission.
Mr. Carr handles the finances and pays the bills for the missionaries, and his wife, Carole, 64, puts missionaries in touch with people who have expressed interest in Mormonism by calling for free advertised materials like a Book of Mormon, videos or recordings of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir.
At the headquarters of the mission in Eastchester, Mr. Carr said he was struck by the diversity he saw in the Scarsdale congregation, which serves Yonkers and Tarrytown, among other communities. The missionaries teach in English, American Sign Language, Mandarin, Cantonese, Spanish and Portuguese.
''You have some economically very well-off people and people who are dirt poor,'' he said, his hands folded, church-and-steeple fashion. ''To see these people from such backgrounds and diversity -- doctors, lawyers, some who have never had a job -- to see them blend together is interesting.''
He said Spanish speakers in the area were particularly receptive to the church's message. In fact, five of the nine units of the Westchester stake are Spanish speaking, said Mark Bench, president of the Bronx and lower Westchester stake. ''People who have been in an area a long time and whose roots go down deep are prone to say they don't want to change and they're happy with what they have,'' Mr. Carr said. ''Immigrants who do not have as strong ties are more likely to listen.''
Timothy Ricks, a Mormon bishop serving Westchester County, experienced some of the reluctance of the rooted to accept his religion when he moved to Scarsdale 10 years ago. ''I was invited across the street to a party our neighbors were throwing,'' he said, ''One of the people there turned to my wife and said, 'I understand some cult purchased the house across the street.' This is a relatively educated person, referring to my religion as a cult.''
In general, the older missionaries say they feel very welcome, even surprised by the warmth of New Yorkers.
Darryl DiMaggio, 63, of Houma, La., said: ''People in New York are very friendly. They don't speak first, but when you do, they're so excited that someone is talking to them.'' He is a retired pilot who took float planes through alligator-filled swamps. His wife, Krystal, 57, a retired registered nurse, says she is impressed with the diversity of the other older missionaries they know, who include lawyers, doctors, a beekeeper and a celebrity coach from Brigham Young University.
The DiMaggios, who live in Yonkers, help staff the church's Family History Center in the Bronx, where church members and the public research their genealogies. The couple's other duties include helping run at least four nights a week of activities at the Kingsbridge Road church and driving church members to appointments and church functions.
Sitting in her Eastchester living room, Mrs. Gold said: ''The minute I heard 'We could use your help,' I wanted to help the elders. I've had four sons in missions around the world, and I just know someone needs to mother these young people.'' She said one of the missionaries had fallen recently, hurting his back, another had an infection in his eye and didn't know what to do, and another arrived with a ripped suit.
''I thought, ''This is what I'm here for,''' she said. ''Life's not fun if it's just you you're taking care of.''
RELIGION
