AT the little red brick schoolhouse on the hill, the directors are trying to learn how to dream big, but go on being little.
''Here we are, at the crossroads,'' said Pamela Moller Kareman, the artistic director of the theater part of the Schoolhouse, a center for the visual and performing arts.
Surrounded by rooms and hallways where art in all shapes and forms is on display and usually for sale, a professional regional theater of consequence has emerged. For more than a decade, four productions a season have run four weeks each.
Now, in the middle of an expanded season, three plays have been scheduled in the customary time slots, with three more productions added for fewer performances; ''special events'' are on tap as well, some for just two or four nights. For example, ''Murderers Are My Life,'' a monologue by a screenwriter who taught in a maximum-security prison, was seen twice in October.
Coming up in what might be called a trial series are ''A Time for Love,'' a new revue of songs by Richard Maltby and David Shire (Friday through Feb. 15), and ''Tea for Three: Lady Bird, Betty and Pat,'' a one-woman play by Eric Weinberger and Elaine Bromka, who portrays the wives of three presidents (Feb. 27 to March 7). ''Barriers,'' a new play about a Muslim family in the wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, written by Rehanna Mirza, which was to have run from last Friday through next Sunday, was postponed. ''It needs work,'' said Lee Pope, the Schoolhouse's managing director.
Obviously, Ms. Moller Kareman has new directions and new audiences in mind. At the same time she is determined to remain true to those devotees who feel proprietary about their own special cultural oasis.
''It's time for us to come out of the closet and stop being a best-kept secret,'' Ms. Moller Kareman said. ''But we belong to a small place, to a loyal community, and we can't lose that.''
When Ms. Pope bought the Schoolhouse in 1983, she was not thinking beyond converting six classrooms in the 7,000-square-foot building into studios and renting them to local artists. Ms. Pope, a Bedford Hills resident who owned a gallery in Somers, certainly wasn't counting on plays on a real stage with sets, lights, proper flooring and professional actors, even though the centerpiece of the building was a 1,700-square-foot open space with lots of windows.
It was Ms. Moller Kareman, attending an art exhibit with a friend, Brooke Palance, who filled in an empty space with the details of a theatrical imagination. Both women were actresses then, propelled by the rush of having formed a new Off Off Broadway company. Here they envisioned their second stage. And in 1987, they put on and appeared in ''Bedroom Farce,'' the Schoolhouse's first professional production.
''There were all those windows to cover up, no chairs, no stage, no backstage, no dressing rooms,'' Ms. Moller Kareman said, recalling how a theater was created in what had been the makeshift cafeteria, gymnasium and auditorium of the Croton Elementary School for 50 years (1926-1976).
''Physically, we made the theater happen,'' Ms. Moller Kareman said. ''Now our fantasies are not fantasies anymore. We can't keep going on hand to mouth. We have a special product, a magical place, and we need to be put on more people's calendars. It's time to be more forceful.''
In contrast to what she called the once-in-a-while pot-luck dinner approach to fund-raising, a benefit show, billed as a ''star-studded evening of comedy and jazz'' took place on Nov. 17. Even though the theater's maximum capacity is 85, the sold-out event added $122,000 to the Schoolhouse coffers, Ms. Pope said. Tickets cost $150; contributions and auction proceeds increased the net take to what one fully staged production might cost, by Ms. Pope's calculations.
(Even in the face of cuts in arts support, small grants of $1,000 to $3,000, including some from the Westchester Arts Council, have been ''dribbling in'' for the last two years, Ms. Pope said, for technical improvements and audience development.)
Ms. Moller Kareman lives in Manhattan, where she is an acting coach, but she herself has turned to directing. ''As an actress, I grew tired of directors telling me to shut up,'' she said.
By now, she has staged 15 plays at the Schoolhouse. The repertory here emphasizes offbeat, unsung and rediscovered plays that have hardly been produced anywhere since their mostly unheralded premieres. Here adventurous theatergoers have a chance to see, for example, a play as obscure as John Steinbeck's ''Burning Bright,'' a fast flop that Rodgers and Hammerstein produced on Broadway in 1950 and Ms. Pope unearthed here in 1995. If Tennessee Williams or Neil Simon is on the Schoolhouse schedule, you can be sure the play won't be ''The Glass Menagerie'' or ''The Odd Couple'' -- but rather ''Kingdom of Earth'' or ''Fools.'' Attending Schoolhouse productions can be akin to taking a crash course in theater arcana.
Even though many audience members live within 15 miles of the Schoolhouse, according to Ms. Pope, demographics are changing because of word of mouth -- and Internet use. She mentioned that a man from Manhattan brought his 15-year-old daughter to the play ''Lobby Hero'' in November.
''She needed a suitable play for a class report, went online and found out we were doing it,'' Ms. Pope said, adding that ''more people are coming here from lower Westchester, Danbury and Fairfield County - and with Pam's connections, from New York.''
Now, Ms. Pope and Ms. Moller Kareman agree, the time has come to produce a business plan for an endeavor that has been propelled until now by chance, idealism and more than a little bit of luck.
When she talks of marketing, Ms. Moller Kareman declares: ''We need help'' - and help is on the way. For the first time, a public relations professional has been retained ''to tell us what we're doing,'' she said. They have signed on Kathryn Hamilton, who has her own publicity firm, which recently moved to Katonah.
The Schoolhouse has no actual full-time staff, only three employees who stand by on demand, and regularly attend to administration, from payroll to house management. They are: Amy Smith, who has been in charge of administration for 20 years and works three days a week; Francie Riley, the house manager; and Ron Marotta, who, Ms. Pope says, ''fixes everything and does anything Amy doesn't do.'' The program lists Mr. Marotta, who is always on call, as the production manager, but he will also fix the boiler and make repairs. Three designers -- Joe Egan (sets) David Pentz (lighting) and Gloria Casey (costumes) -- make up ''a loyal family that has grown up together,'' Ms. Moller Kareman said. Joe Egan who does sets; David Pentz, lighting; and Gloria Casey, costumes. A newcomer, Matt Stein, is in his first year on sound design. And then there is A.J. Beckley, ''who has been in the sound booth since he was in high school,'' Ms. Pope said. His program credit is sound and light board operator.
After all these years, Ms. Pope maintains that she is still clueless about theater -- even though she has been known to come upon a play in the dusty bins of a used book store and say, ''Let's do it.'' By contrast, Ms. Moller Kareman is a seasoned stage professional. Clearly, each woman has drawn from the expertise of the other, but neither denies that the time is drawing near for Ms. Pope, 71, to think of handing over the operation to Ms. Moller Kareman, 53, whose grasp of the nuts and bolts of theater grounds the reach of her artistic sensibility.
''We're a different sort of place and we have to be careful about preserving that,'' Ms. Moller Kareman said. ''The issue is quality and the best way to reach out is to do good stuff. We're not where we have to be, not yet, but it's going to be fine.''
The Schoolhouse Theater is at 3 Owens Road, Croton Falls. Regular ticket prices range from $17 to $22 for plays and special events, slightly higher for concerts. (914)277-8477, www.schoolhousetheater.org.
