AS they do every year at this time, school superintendents across Long Island have begun crunching numbers to set their annual school budgets. And every year for the last two decades, these calculations have been complicated by the failure of the governor and State Legislature to meet their April 1 deadline to finalize a budget, including the amounts of state aid to each school district.
But this year, with a court-ordered mandate for a new state aid formula for schools looming on the horizon, the outlook for school districts is especially cloudy.
The biggest fear among Long Island school officials is that as the state grapples with school aid reform that state courts have ruled must correct past inequities that denied New York City students a ''sound basic education,'' the wealthy suburbs of Long Island will end up losing their share of the state education pie.
So to make sure the voices of Long Island schools are heard and a Robin Hood approach to the problems of the city's schools is not taken, Nassau and Suffolk school superintendents met on Jan. 21 and put out a joint position paper that urges state officials to hold even the wealthiest school districts harmless as the state aid formula is rewritten.
The State Court of Appeals has given the state until July to come up with a solution that properly funds the city's schools, but state officials have said that any new state aid formula would have to address the needs of schools throughout the state.
''We have high hopes that a new formula will be good for everybody,'' said James H. Hunderfund, superintendent of the Commack public schools and president of the Suffolk County School Superintendents Association. ''But let's find enough new revenues to cover every district and let's make sure everyone is taxed fairly.''
At a meeting of Nassau and Suffolk superintendents last month, just days after Governor Pataki proposed using up to $2 billion in revenue from a new, statewide system of video gambling terminals to pay for additional school aid in future years, superintendents noted that studies have shown that as much as $6 billion would be needed to correct inequities not just in New York City but also in other ''high need'' districts across the state. The New York City mayor, Michael R. Bloomberg, also said last week that he opposed using gambling money to pay for schools because it would be neither stable nor predictable.
''The bottom line is there's got to be another source of revenue and no one wants to be responsible for it,'' said Charles W. Fowler, superintendent of the Hewlett-Woodmere schools and president of the Nassau County Council of School Superintendents. But state officials must somehow find the money because, he said, school districts on Long Island ''are already taxed to the max and communities just can't give more.''
While city schoolchildren may have been shortchanged in the past, any new school aid formula must require city taxpayers to finally pay their fair share, Mr. Fowler said. ''We need to look at what New York City is doing and to what extent they are taxing themselves,'' he said.
State aid accounts for roughly 46 percent of New York City's school budget. But the position paper prepared by Nassau and Suffolk school superintendents found that state aid makes up only 26 percent of all school district revenue on Long Island. It also noted that excluding New York City student enrollments, Long Island educates about 26 percent of the state's public school students but receives only 19.9 percent of the state aid to public schools.
In his budget address last month, Mr. Pataki pointedly noted that under his tenure, the city's share of statewide school aid has come to exceed its percent of statewide enrollment.
''It's pretty clear that relative to its capacity to pay, the city doesn't support schools at the same rate as the rest of the state,'' Mr. Fowler said.
Another main demand in the superintendents' position paper calls for a state aid formula that takes into account regional cost differences. Costs of goods and services on Long Island, the report states, run 50 percent higher than costs in the state's northern tier of counties, its lowest-cost region.
A push to have the state recognize Long Island's higher cost of living when doling out state education dollars has been a focus of the Long Island Association and the Long Island Education Coalition for years.
''It's much more expensive to educate a child downstate than upstate from a cost-of-living standpoint,'' said Mitchell H. Pally, the vice president for government affairs at the Long Island Association. ''The same dollar downstate buys you much less than it would upstate.''
He said that state officials finally agreed about five years ago to start taking regional cost differences into account when calculating reimbursement formulas for school construction costs. ''So Albany already has understood that regional cost factors must be considered, and I think it will translate here as well,'' Mr. Pally said. ''Otherwise, you don't have true equity.''
While lobbying for the state to recognize cost and tax differences, the Long Island superintendent's position paper stresses an even-handed approach to school aid reform. ''Long Island superintendents are not interested in engaging in regional competition for dollars,'' the report states. ''While others in the state are promoting an atmosphere of divisiveness through flashy public relations campaigns, we believe that the needs of all children in New York State, no matter where they live, should be met through a fair state aid formula.''
The divisiveness referred specifically to a glossy poster put out by the Midstate School Finance Consortium, a group of upstate school districts. In bold letters, the poster states, ''Unfortunately, Some Kids Just Don't Get it,'' while each corner of the poster features a picture of a fifth-grade child and the cost of an education in his or her district. The costs and districts selected include: $9,851 in Nyack, on the Hudson; $4,973 in Sherburne-Earlville, a rural district south of Utica; $7,291 in Niagara Falls and $16,668 in Port Jefferson. Gary D. Bixhorn, the superintendent of Eastern Suffolk Boces and the chairman of the committee that drafted the Long Island report, said, ''Quite a few people were upset about the implications of that poster.'' The report states that while the average per-pupil expenditure on Long Island is $13,842, when that figure is adjusted by a cost-of-living index, the figure drops to $9,136, which is below the state median for regionally adjusted pupil expenditures.
But long before serious debate begins over where new education spending will come from and how it will be disbursed among the state's many school districts, state and local officials must first resolve budget questions for the 2004-05 fiscal year.
Long Island school officials said they were hopeful that negotiations on this year's budget and on a new state aid formula would go smoothly. Unlike in past years when Mr. Pataki has proposed major cuts to school aid, forcing state legislators to fight to restore funding, the governor this year has proposed a 1 percent increase -- an additional $147 million -- in education dollars.
Long Island educators said, though, that with salary, pension and insurance payments going up by as much as 8 percent, many school districts will be forced to raise property taxes again unless state legislators can extract more money out of the state budget for schools.
''We're certainly in a better position this year than we were a year ago, when we faced very heavy, drastic cuts,'' said Mark Schissler, superintendent of the Central Islip schools. ''But from our perspective a flat budget from the state is really a negative one because of increases that are out of our control. And if we don't see it from the state, then it gets borne by the individual homeowner.''
Superintendents also said that the governor's proposal to use revenue from video lottery terminals, which will start appearing next month at racetracks across the state, to pay for new school aid also provided a promising start to discussions on a new state aid formula. For one thing, they said, it makes clear that the governor intends to find new revenue to increase school spending in high-need districts.
Long Island has nine districts that fall under the state definition of high need, which means that the district's estimated property value and income fall below the level at which it can tax itself enough to pay for a sound basic education. The nine districts are Hempstead, Freeport, Roosevelt and Westbury in Nassau County, and Amityville, Wyandanch, William Floyd, Brentwood and Central Islip in Suffolk County.
But there are many more districts on the Island that consider themselves high need based on their district's property value and income. In fact, 40 districts have joined a consortium of districts known as Refit, an acronym for Reform Educational Financing Inequities Today.
Howard M. Koenig, executive director of Refit, said that even as Mayor Bloomberg and Democratic legislators have already criticized the governor's video gambling proposal as inadequate and regressive because poor people are most likely to use terminals, the projected $2 billion will not be enough. ''It's clear to everyone who labors in this vineyard that we can't talk about just a single revenue stream to solve this problem,'' he said.
So the debate in coming months will likely revolve around the only other broad-based taxes that are available to the state, namely sales, income and corporate taxes.
''It's not going to be easy because nobody wants to raise taxes, but I don't think there's any question that a statewide solution will necessitate finding a significant new revenue source,'' said Mr. Pally of the Long Island Association.
With state legislators up for re-election this year, a new tax this year is not likely, said Gerald Benjamin, a political scientist who follows state politics closely and is dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at the State University of New York in New Paltz.
By the time state officials get down to seriously considering some form of new tax revenue some time next year, he said, the economy and the state's fiscal situation will probably be much improved. ''Even so, a phasing-in over several years will be necessary because an all-at-once outcome of new revenues is not going to happen,'' he said.
The debate, he added, will likely revolve around tax bases rather than tax rates. In other words, rather than consider raising the state sales tax, legislators will scour the books looking for what's not currently taxed, like Internet sales, for example. And instead of property tax increases, they may consider taxing properties that are currently not on the tax rolls.
Since Long Island is one of the state's wealthiest areas and therefore pays some of the highest amounts in annual state income and sales taxes, Long Islanders will likely wind up providing a significant share of any new state tax revenue. But, Dr. Benjamin said, ''in general, Long Islanders would probably be hit proportionally.''
Whatever state legislators come up with will be better than a property tax increase, said Mr. Schissler, the Central Islip superintendent. ''The hope is that they will try to find the broadest-based tax possible, so it affects individuals the least,'' he said.
