SAM calls it the Last Place. ''This is the last place I thought I'd end up,'' he explains.
The snow falls in whispers outside. It is warm inside the Harmony Atrium, a glass-enclosed public space at Broadway and West 62nd Street. But Sam and a few dozen other homeless people remain bundled in their coats and scarves, as if storing the heat for later.
Several feet away, a more bare-skinned group of people has converged near an artificial rock wall. They stand and stare at the wall as if inspecting a subway map. Wearing T-shirts and shorts, and harnessed by ropes, the men and women climb the wall by latching onto synthetic fixtures. They gracefully descend with a whirring sound.
From time to time, the climbers gaze at the homeless as if they were looking through a cage at the zoo. The homeless stare back with the same naked curiosity.
Night after night, this unintended encounter between rock climbers and shelter-seeking New Yorkers plays out at Harmony Atrium, and not necessarily to harmonious effect. It is as if two wedding parties of different denominations booked the same hall.
Dance music thumps in hollow beats from loudspeakers as one group glides up and down the wall and the other group sits in semi-hibernation, drifting in and out of sleep. The scene raises the question: Which is more bizarre, a man girded in ropes grabbing at fake seashells or a woman rocking back and forth, sipping beer from a soda can?
Jason Hutto, a trader at the New York Stock Exchange who climbs every Tuesday night, says he likes the setting. ''It's got character,'' he says. ''A lot of characters.''
The climbing wall is owned by ExtraVertical Climbing Center, which charges $9 for the first climb and $5 for each additional climb.
''I wonder why people would pay to climb the same thing over and over and over again,'' says a 40-year-old man who identifies himself only as Frank.
He sits in his usual place, a faux-marble plastic table at the center of the airy room, playing a computerized game on Sam's cellphone that mimics a casino slot machine. Soon, Sam bursts into a rap that he composed in 1991:
The night was young/Things got better/I talked to Amarretta/I was glad I had met her.
Minutes later, Wayne Douglas, who says he's a Vietnam veteran, joins the table. He peers at the wall from under a black wool hat. ''I've done my climbing already,'' says Mr. Douglas, 55. ''I climbed when I was in the service.''
At midnight, the space will close and the three will head out to the trains of their choice. For Frank, it is the E train. For Sam, the A. For Mr. Douglas, the No.2. He looks out at the street as if to ready himself: ''It's coming down hard.''
ANDREA ELLIOTT
URBAN STUDIES/STARING
