IF I had a restaurant, it would have the feeling of Ciao Bello. A huge fireplace would dominate the dining room, its light bright enough to read by and its heat hot enough to melt the memories of slush and fat down coats that shed feathers upon every wearing. The chairs would be just like Ciao Bello's, upholstered bottom and back and comfortable enough to relax into. Floors would be carpeted, muting noise and layering comfort. The waiters would fuss over you and your children, just the way they do at Ciao Bello. And like Ciao Bello, my restaurant would include in every menu a printed specials list, because I wouldn't want servers spending their time re-repeating specials and diners spending their time trying to reconstruct the list.
And the food would be comforting, as are many dishes at this little Italian place. For days and nights like these, the restaurant serves a husky mushroom soup that leaves no doubt about its flavoring agents, as well as a house-made pappardelle, with each ruffled strand of pasta bearing slight evidence of a Champagne cream sauce and the earthiness of its porcini mushroom garnish. There is also a rosemary-perfumed lamb shank that behaves properly and falls right off the bone to blend with its cushion of equally well-treated risotto.
Choose wisely and you will eat very well at Ciao Bello.
The 120-seat place opened in late 1994, Italian because the owner and chef, John Qiku, had spent time in Italy and learned the cuisine through years of restaurant work. A few years ago, Mr. Qiku and his wife and co-owner, Peggy, turned the kitchen over to Manuel Aquino, who had worked alongside Mr. Qiku since the restaurant opened. The Qikus turned most of the running of the business over to their sons, Izzy and Bruno.
The restaurant is just far enough off the main street of Somerville that you think you have passed it before you get there, but then it comes up suddenly, a low-slung two-story affair wrapped in creamy siding and painted brick, with a canopied walkway from the parking lot. Inside, the gas fireplace is opposite a wall decorated by a huge boot, near the table that holds a supersized wheel of Pecorino Romano cheese that the waiters carve out to serve up in small chunks alongside good bread, Greek olives and a lovely yin-yang swirl of red pepper and arugula purée, both flavored with garlic.
The antipasto menu is simple enough, but dense in choice and very well prepared. Table favorites included the aforementioned soup enriched with sautéed shallots and heavy cream as well as nicely fried calamari alongside a marinara sauce that turned sassy with crushed red pepper flakes. Other hits were the mildly pungent arugula salad balanced by sweet caramelized onions and a gorgonzola vinaigrette, a special one night, as well as the asparagus salad with red three ways - onion, tomatoes and sweet peppers. The Belgian endive dressed with red onions, roasted red peppers and goat cheese was a treat on its own, but the chickpeas added intrigue, since they weren't anchored by dressing and became moving targets. The beet salad was credible, and next time I want to try the smoked salmon garnished with arugula and goat cheese and dressed with lemon vinaigrette.
As with most Italian places, boxed pastas are the backbone of standard cheese and vegetable combinations, all of which work as well as could be expected. You can get your rigatoni with broccoli rabe and sausage; your penne with goat cheese, tomatoes and basil; and your bowties with onions, olives, anchovies and capers. But the dishes become more interesting when the pastas are house-made, so ask before you order. On one night, boccatini was successfully partnered with a garlicky blend of shrimp, chopped tomatoes and feta cheese. On another night, it was served with squid, mussels, clams, shrimp and scallops in a pink sauce. The house-made gnocchi, an ethereally light mix of potato, flour, egg and ricotta, was a true success, especially when it was played against a deeply flavored Bolognese sauce.
With its main dishes, however, the restaurant slips from very good to merely good. Though there are a couple of winners, other dishes are lacking. Winners are the braised lamb shank with carrots and a simple concoction of chicken breast sautéed with roasted red peppers, mozzarella and escarole, which came together with its sauce of pan juices, white wine and fresh-squeezed lemon juice and is encouragement to order other chicken dishes on the menu.
But the grilled tuna was less than expected despite its delectable cream sauce flavored with red pepper. I had imagined a thick steak and it was more of a sandwich patty, thin and cooked through even though it was ordered medium rare. Broiled tilapia suffered much the same fate and was simply uninteresting, and three separate veal dishes -- one a thick chop with a delightful sounding topping of sautéed escarole, roasted peppers, portobello mushrooms and hot Italian sauce -- were uninspired. Perhaps the pork chop or steak would be better choices, or even the standard Italian side dishes: spinach, broccoli rabe, escarole or asparagus sautéed in olive oil.
Desserts are quite showy, arriving on a multi-tier trolley that looks to require real muscle from the servers. It drew all eyes on its multiple trips through the dining room, but I can save you the trouble: Choose the house-made desserts -- either the cheesecake flavored with a touch of orange liqueur or the tiramisù, with its ladyfingers softened by a dunking in spiked coffee. Either is a rich and delicious ending to a comforting evening and, with coffee, would fortify you for the trip into the cold, cold night. That's just what my restaurant would do, too.
Ciao Bello  156 North Gaston Avenue, Somerville  (908)704-8444
GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- Firelight glinting off the glassware and quiet conversation.  SERVICE -- Attentive and on the verge of doting.  SMOKING -- Allowed in the bar.  WINE LIST -- A revolving list that changes four times a year.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Any salad, cream of mushroom soup, any house-made pasta, gnocchi in Bolognese sauce, braised lamb shank, chicken with red peppers and escarole, tiramisù, cheesecake, crème brûlée.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $5 to $8; pastas, $15 to $19.50; main dishes, $18 to $26; specials, $5.50 to $32; desserts, $5 to $8.  HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Friday. Dinner, 3 p.m. to 10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, and 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday. (Closed on Super Bowl Sunday and Thanksgiving.)  CREDIT CARDS -- All major.  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- The restaurant is on one level and is accessible.  IF YOU GO -- Somerville is almost equidistant from Trenton and Newark, near the intersection of U.S. 206 and 22. From 206, turn east onto Main Street. In the center of town, turn north onto Gaston. The restaurant is on the right.
REVIEWED -- Feb. 1, 2004.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
