Twelve people, including three American soldiers, were killed on Saturday in two bomb attacks in northern Iraq as Iraqis and Americans braced for a potentially violent week.
In one attack, a suicide bomber rammed his car into a police station crowded with officers in Mosul, killing at least 9 people and wounding 45.
In the second attack, three American soldiers were killed when a homemade bomb destroyed the Humvee in which they were riding. The soldiers, members of the Fourth Infantry Division, were traveling south in a convoy about 25 miles southwest of Kirkuk.
The attacks came on the eve of the Muslim holiday of Id al-Adha, or the Feast of Sacrifice, which commemorates the Koranic account of God allowing the patriarch Abraham to sacrifice a sheep instead of his son.
Some officials here fear there could be more violence during the holiday. Guerrillas have often struck during religious holidays. On Oct. 27, the first day of Ramadan, coordinated suicide attacks in Baghdad killed 35 people.
The Id al-Adha holiday runs through Wednesday.
Iraqi officials said Saturday that they were also worried about the possibility that the guerrillas would step up their attacks to mar the visit of a team of experts from the United Nations, who are expected to assess the feasibility of holding a nationwide election here by June. The officials are expected to arrive as early as next week.
Most of the United Nations staff left the country after a suicide bomb attack on their compound in August.
The United Nations team, which will make a recommendation to the Iraqi Governing Council, could help break the deadlock between American officials and some Iraqi leaders, who are divided over the method of choosing a new national assembly.
Some Iraqi leaders, particularly Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the leader of the country's majority Shiite population, are insisting on direct elections for assembly members. The Americans say direct elections are impossible at the moment, largely because there are no voter rolls and because of the continuing violence. Instead, the Americans are proposing a series of caucuses nationwide to choose the assembly members.
In a news conference on Saturday, Adnan Pachachi, the current chairman of the Iraqi Governing Council, said his government and the American forces would do their best to protect the United Nations team as it did its work.
''There is always the possibility of violence,'' he said. ''I think we are ready. I hope we are ready.''
In the Mosul bombing, witnesses said, a man in a red Opel sedan drove to the foot of the cement wall that ringed the Iraqi police station and blew himself up. It was about 10:30 in the morning, witnesses said, and the area was crowded with Iraqi police officers who had come to pick up their holiday paychecks.
People ran screaming from the scene, leaving behind a tableau of blackened bodies and severed arms and legs and heads. Pieces of flaming metal flew into the road, and the station was afire.
''I saw a lot of people blown into two pieces,'' said Imad Yunis, a guard at the Republican Hospital next door, who ran to the scene to carry away the wounded. ''Some of them, I could not tell if they were women or men, because they were burned completely.''
Attacks against the Iraqi police have been common in recent months as the guerrillas have mounted a fierce campaign to intimidate the supporters of the American occupation and the new Iraqi government.
Despite the violence, there were signs of progress on Saturday. Officials at Iraqi's central bank announced they had granted licenses to operate in the country to three foreign banks: Standard and Chartered, HSBC and the National Bank of Kuwait.
If the banks open on schedule, in mid-March, they will be the first foreign banks in Iraq in decades.
