IT may have been the best week of my life. It was certainly the most sybaritic.
There are 16 of us, all Americans, on the French Country Waterways barge Esprit, off on a six-night cruise on the canals of southern Burgundy in early May. We come in pairs, ranging in age from late youth to late middle age; among the younger set is a gay male couple, whose outré humor enlivens many a conversation. As we get to know each other, we discover a wide range of common interests (movies, opera, British detective novels, M.F.K. Fisher), but overarching them all is the enthusiasm for food and wine that has brought us together. For some reason, a large percentage of us have at one time or another lived in California.
We have met in Paris and been escorted aboard a T.G.V. bound for Dijon by Anne-Laurence Wupperman, an engaging and energetic young woman who will be our bus driver and guide on shore excursions. It's a short drive from the train station to the Burgundy Canal, where the Esprit is moored. It is a tidy vessel, white painted, 128 feet long by 16 feet wide, with window boxes full of purple and yellow pansies hanging from the sun deck rails; they will be in peril of being sheared off whenever we go through a lock.
My husband, Tom, and I pass through the comfortably appointed lounge (overstuffed sofas and chairs, a small library, a coffee table covered with art books, flowers everywhere) and go below to unpack. Our stateroom is exactly deep enough to accommodate the built-in double bed. But there is ingenious storage space, comprising a real closet, and a minuscule bathroom with an excellent shower. There is a little bunch of flowers on the built-in dressing table, and a gift of wine waiting for us.
Back upstairs, we gather around the bar for the cocktail hour (although it is a perpetually open bar) and are introduced to the crew, all of them English speakers. The captain, Nigel Bealing, and Steve Houchin, the chef, are, in fact, English; the French contingent consists of Anne-Laurence, by whom we are already enchanted; Céline Dupaquier and Carine Thomin, bartenders, housekeepers and doers of anything else that needs to be done; and Yannick Frelon, the deckhand. Yannick is sporting an incandescent black eye, a result, we are told, of a bicycle accident, which gives him a misleadingly louche air.
All of them are busy at all times, most visibly Yannick, who, when he is not lending a hand to the lockmasters, is washing the huge windows in the lounge and dining room, washing the sun deck (and drying its furniture after a heavy dew) or patching up the paint on the Esprit's sides, which are almost invariably scraped when going through a lock.
Most days are divided between cruising and touring. Anne-Laurence leads us through the streets of Dijon, with its relics of the 14th- and 15th-century dukes of Burgundy, and Beaune, where we tour the medieval hospice that is the site of the well-known annual wine auction and Rogier van der Weyden's jaw-dropping ''Last Judgment.'' In each city we have time to wander about on our own and, of course, for taking a cafe break or two. At the turreted and fortified Château de la Rochepot, high on its forested hill overlooking the idyllic landscape, Anne-Laurence modestly passes us on to the in-castle guide, although she herself was once a guide here.
A short drive brings us to the Château du Clos de Vougeot, a synthesis of history, architecture and hype. The surrounding vineyards, long famous for their superb vintages, were owned by the abbey of Cîteaux and the winery worked by its monks from the 12th century until the French Revolution. But the chateau, now a museum, has been owned since 1944 by the Confrérie des Chevaliers du Tastevin, a promotional organization whose lavish banquets are held here.
Anne-Laurence leads us through the arched entrance into a pristine, austere Cistercian courtyard, then into a vast, dark interior that hides four 12th-century presses, each about 20 feet high. After a look at the 12th-century cellar where the chevaliers hold their parties -- shown in many commemorative photographs (one or two with Sophia Loren being inducted), we end up in the gift shop. You can guess what it sells.
We are then scheduled for a wine-tasting nearby. It takes place in a satisfactorily cool and cobwebbed cellar, and we are allowed to spit on the floor. We finish up with tots of prunelle, an eau de vie flavored with the fruit and kernels of the little wild plums that are also called sloes (think sloe gin). I love it, but many don't, abandoning their nearly full glasses as we leave. I consider emptying them, but there is not enough time, since we are calling in at the attached wine store.
Wine is central to our voyage. We drink it at least twice a day, and spend much time in the discussion of its merits. If we are generally fortunate in our shipmates, we are particularly lucky in a couple who own a winery in Washington State. Carrying coals to Newcastle, they have brought selections of their very good wares for us to sample, and they are equally generous with their knowledge. It is clear that I probably have less knowledge of wine than anyone else on board -- and in this crowd, I am not going to fake it -- so I am happy to learn such esoterica as how to get the last seven drops of wine out of the bottle (let it lie on its side for a bit) and how to tell a chardonnay vine by its leaf (look for a naked vein).
When we are not drinking, we are eating. Breakfasts are an ample buffet of fresh, warm breads, juices, fresh fruit and so forth; lunch, the brochure promises, will be another buffet. I was, I must admit, expecting something along the cheese-and-cold-cuts line. Boy, was I wrong. Lunch is, to be sure, served buffet fashion, but each day brings something warm (roast beef or grilled tuna or, on one occasion, a pyramid of roast quail), three salads, something exotic (note to self: try Roquefort and raspberries or beets and strawberries at home) and a hot-out-of-the-oven quiche, or tourte or tarte, with seconds available. Red wine or white? There are both, in apparently unlimited quantity. And three cheeses, which are presented and described by Carine or Céline.
Seating for meals is open, which allows several chances to talk to everyone on board. Dinner is a more formal affair, served by Carine and Céline in the flattering glow of candlelight. There are four, or sometimes five, courses that reach an apogee (or perhaps apotheosis) with the last night's meal: a truffled zucchini soup; a mille-feuille with nutty fresh Parmesan presented with a confit of red cabbage and poached duck foie gras; roast filet mignon of veal with pommes dauphin and white asparagus; three cheeses, and a dark chocolate torte with mint ice cream and caramelized Granny Smith apples.
All the dinner wines, with the exception of a fine Alsatian riesling, are premier or grand cru. The final evening's offerings are Pernand-Vergelesses 1er Cru 2000, Corton Charlemagne Grand Cru 1990 and the red Charmes-Chambertin Grand Cru 1994. I leave the deconstruction to the experts, and sip my way to bliss.
Each French Country Waterways cruise includes a swell dinner on shore, and ours is at Lameloise, in Chagny, to which Michelin has long awarded three stars. After aperitifs in the bar, we are escorted into a simply appointed dining room that has been reserved for our group. Tom begins with a house specialty, little ravioli filled with escargot, which gleam like black pearls through the translucent pasta, then goes on to the daurade with an olive-scented sauce and then another specialty, tenderly pink roast pigeon with baby vegetables and truffle butter. I choose a terrine de foie gras, the daurade and a subtly herbed lamb fillet -- not as adventurous as Tom's meal, perhaps, but highly satisfying. Then a monstrous regiment of cheeses and a chocolate dessert to end all chocolate desserts. And finally, a seemingly endless progression of petits fours (homemade marshmallows are a revelation). The wines are appropriate and delicious.
But even more than the pleasures of table and cellar, my own favorite thing is messing about on the barge. Indeed, I skip an excursion to the Château de Longecourt -- we are moored at Longecourt-en-Plaine -- so I can lounge in our cabin, happily mesmerized by the reflections of the water on the ceiling. (I come to regret this later, when the resident count is described as not just utterly charming but also movie-star handsome.) There are two small, square windows in the cabin, and again, when I pass up a last winery visit to stay on board while the barge is moving to a new mooring, there is an exciting caught-in-the-washing-machine effect as we pass through a lock.
A constantly changing landscape unwinds like a ribbon as we cruise, changing from vineyard to pastoral as the days pass. It is spring, and the countryside is in bloom. The Esprit's stately pace, no faster than a moderate walk, allows us to identify the wildflowers on the banks of the canal, toadflax and cowslips prominent among them. Swans graciously offer themselves for our approval. Dogs bark at us, but are silenced by chunks of bread thrown to them from the pilot's perch.
Children wave as we pass, as do those of our shipmates who have taken the opportunity to get off at a lock to stroll or jog along the towpath, or to take a little spin on the one-speed Peugeot bikes that are kept aboard for our use. At one point, we find ourselves under close inspection by a party of vacationing nuns, who are last seen merrily lending a hand to the lockmaster.
Aboard the T.G.V. back to Paris from Le Creusot, it is time to take stock. In five full days on the Canal de Bourgogne, the River Saône and the Canal du Centre, we have cruised a grand total of not quite 100 miles. We have hooked up with some very boon companions. We have seen splendid sights and eaten marvelous meals. And, in the course of 11 onboard lunches and dinners, we have drunk 22 different wines (not counting Champagnes and aperitifs) and eaten 33 different cheeses.
Our clothes seem to have shrunk, but we are unrepentant. Calories? What calories? And damn the cholesterol! Full speed ahead!
If you go
French Country Waterways, Post Office Box 2195, Duxbury, Mass. 02331, (800) 222-1236, fax (781) 934-9048, www.fcwl.com, operates six-night barge trips in Burgundy, Champagne, the Upper Loire Valley and Alsace-Lorraine. Barges hold 8 to 18 passengers each.
Sailings depart on Sunday from March 28 through Oct. 30; rates range from $2,995 to $4,795 a person, based on double occupancy, depending on the vessel and type of accommodations (most cabins have twin beds). All meals, drinks, wines and excursions are included; tips are extra.
Discounts of 50 percent are available on the 18-passenger Esprit for those celebrating their 50th birthday this year. Discounts of 5 to 60 percent are available to those having wedding anniversaries in multiples of five years in 2004 (the longer the marriage, the greater the discount). Anniversary discounts apply to cruises in all regions.
SPRING-SUMMER CRUISES SARAH FERRELL is associate editor of The Sophisticated Traveler of The New York Times Magazine.
