HERE in New York, it started with Helen Kiok. Mrs. Kiok died unexpectedly on Dec. 25, 2003, at the age of 87. Her brief paid death notice, published Dec. 30 in The New York Times, said she was ''dedicated to family, friends, learning, teaching and social justice.'' In the last line, it instructed: ''In lieu of flowers, donations in her name may be made to any organization dedicated to the defeat of George W. Bush.''
A search of electronic archives revealed that other death notices in this newspaper containing similar language about Mr. Bush followed on Jan. 1, Jan. 20 and Jan. 24, like a chain letter. Although dead people voting is a hoary tradition in places like Jersey City and Chicago, this kind of posthumous attempt to influence elections seems new, a creature of the Internet age and an indication of the intensity of this political season.
''Hey, it's like a mortuary version of the Dean campaign,'' suggested Norman Adler, a longtime political consultant in New York. ''A lot of the Dean campaign was a matter of spontaneous political combustion through the Internet. People saw something and they thought it was a good idea, so they e-mailed other people, or put it on their blogs, and that's how it grew.''
To some, using a death notice as a paid political advertisement seems to bring incivility to new heights. From his position as a Democratic political consultant, Hank Sheinkopf asserted that these notices were poor political propaganda and wouldn't cost the president one vote. What's more, he said: ''There's something over the top about that. It's not the nicest kind of behavior.''
But the families who placed the death notices say that politics was deeply personal to their loved ones, and that Mr. Bush's tenure, from the circumstances of his election to the loss of lives in Iraq and the so-far invisible weapons of mass destruction, inflamed their passion so much they wanted to send messages from the grave.
Mrs. Kiok, a retired history teacher at John Bowne High School in Flushing, Queens, surely led a life laced with political struggle. She fled a Ukrainian pogrom at the age of 5, and was arrested during a cafeteria strike while she was a student at Brooklyn College in the 1930's. Widowed early, she had to start raising two young children on her own. Her family remembers that she carried a copy of the United States Constitution in her purse.
Mrs. Kiok had heard of the defeat-Bush death notice and loved the idea, said her daughter, Ellen Kolodney, a social worker in the Bronx district attorney's office. As a joke, Ms. Kolodney said to her mother, ''Well, Mom, we'll do this for you,'' not thinking she'd have to make good on her promise so soon.
Mary Jean Tully, 78, whose paid notice ran Jan. 1, was a pioneer of the feminist movement. Her son Bruce, a private equity investor in Manhattan, remembers that even her Christmas cards had political messages. (''I'm praying for Gore,'' she wrote in 1999.) She was a founder of Veteran Feminists of America, and Betty Friedan and Gloria Steinem agreed to speak at her memorial service.
The Tullys copied the ''defeat Bush'' line in the Kiok death notice. Mr. Tully did wonder whether the message was tacky, but when he called his father for advice, his father replied: ''It's her. Leave it in.''
In her Jan. 20 death notice, Gertrude Brown Korman, 98, was described simply as a ''beloved mother'' and ''adoring grandmother.'' The ''defeat Bush'' line is the only hint that she had a life outside her family.
Most recently, the line appeared in the Jan. 24 death notice for Herbert Kalmanoff, 92, an Upper East Side psychoanalyst and former United States Army captain. His son, Jonathan, who lives in Rochester, said the line spoke for itself. ''I don't want to turn it into a bigger deal than it is,'' he said.
The first such death notice in the country appears to have been one for Sally Baron, a waitress, cook and factory worker, which ran in August in The Capital Times of Madison, Wis. Ms. Baron's daughter, Maureen Bettilyon, said last week that the idea came to her and her brother as they were trying to think of a cause their mother believed in deeply. ''We really didn't think anybody would notice,'' she said. ''We were just trying to kind of sneak it through.''
How does all this make the Bush-Cheney campaign feel? ''This is why we need TV phones, so that you would see the look on my face,'' said Terry Holt, the campaign press secretary.
And what might that look be: laughter, perhaps? ''Certainly not,'' Mr. Holt retorted. ''You know, it's umm, incredulous. Disbelief.'' Sounding a bit at a loss for words, he continued: ''I only can say that if, you know, um, as a private person, the passing of my loved ones is going to conjure up lots of emotions. None of them political.''
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
