ANALOG DEVICES, which engineers specialized integrated chips in Norwood, Mass., gave a party last spring to celebrate the introduction of the Blackfin, a new digital signal processor it had big expectations for. Like many companies, Analog chose to make a splash at a trade show, in this case the Embedded Systems Conference in San Francisco, a gathering of high-tech manufacturers of products like telephone handsets and digital audio players.
The thinking was logical: few people willingly wander through electronic circuitry for four days at a place like the Moscone Center without at least some intention of buying a gewgaw or two. So Analog's marketing department was delighted when 1,500 attendees accepted their invitation. There, beneath signs proclaiming ''Like Never Before,'' the evening's overarching theme that doubled as a kind of sales mantra, guests ate, drank and danced to a local rock band.
Analog had help in putting on its reception from CMP Media, the Manhasset publishing giant that organized the expo. Known primarily for its 43 trade magazines, including niche must-reads like EE Times and InformationWeek, CMP also produces 25 major trade shows a year, pulling in global audiences. Under the name XChange, it also produces 200 smaller discussion-oriented events for senior executives.
CMP, a division of United Business Media in London, provided Analog with lists of influential people to invite, helped put up signs and banners, plugged the Blackfin in the pages of the show's floor guide and helped pull attendees into focus groups at the conference, all for the cost of renting space at the show.
Joe Laskowski, Analog's director of corporate marketing, was pleased with the results. CMP ''doesn't just take your money -- they are a true marketing partner,'' he said.
But CMP, which specializes in high-tech and health care technology events, is not motivated only by a generosity of spirit. Trade show attendance around most of the world has been in a tailspin for the last three years. The annual Comdex computer show in Las Vegas once rose as a kind of temporary city of 200,000, but this past November, it drew barely a quarter of that figure.
The downturn makes many executives in the exposition industry flinch. ''Trade shows on the whole are a tough business and are not doing well,'' said Paul Miller, CMP's senior vice president for electronic publishing who oversees the Embedded Systems Conference and other high-tech shows.
''It's been a kind of perfect storm,'' he added, citing the impact of Sept. 11, the general economic sluggishness and overcapacity in high-tech industries.
After last year's conference, CMP entered into negotiations with Messe München International, a German trade show producer, and this year it will blend Embedded Systems into Messe München's globetrotting Electronica conference. The new show's San Francisco stop will pull in three times the audience, the companies said.
Show owners like CMP, which ranks second among international trade show producers behind the International Data Group, are doing everything they can to accommodate exhibitors, short of lowering prices.
Attendance at trade shows around the world last year dropped nearly 25 percent, according to a survey by Expo magazine, a trade publication, and the International Association for Exhibition Management. Still, show owners managed to raise revenue an average of 5 percent during each of the previous two years.
In large part organizers did this by polishing a lemons-into-lemonade pitch, assuring exhibitors that the dwindling crowds at many shows are, in reality, a good thing. ''At shows, attendance might have fallen, but the quality of attendees has gotten stronger,'' said Doug Ducate, the president and chief executive of the Center for Exhibition Industry Research. ''Companies that used to send 40 people are now sending five or six. The tire kickers, the mom-and-pop business owners, they're not coming now. The people who do come, they're the people who have the real buying power.''
Richard Mead, the managing director of the Jordan, Edmiston Group, an investment banking firm in New York specializing in the media, said, ''CMP has focused very sensibly over the last few years, making themselves very efficient. For that reason, they haven't experienced the sort of drops in attendance that comparable owners have,'' he added. ''They've done a good job of riding out the storm.''
Some signs point to a turning tide. ''A lot of industries are doing exceedingly well, including construction, home building and heavy equipment manufacturers, which have recently had record turnouts'' at industry shows, said Steven Hacker, the president of the International Association of Event Managers. ''Health care is robust, home renovations shows are doing well, and industries like pharmaceuticals and biotech'' are thriving, he said.
The entry into the flashy world of trade shows, where hard-nosed product marketing gets a show-biz makeover, seems at first blush an unlikely direction for a trade publisher like CMP, whose founders, Gerard and Lilo Leeds, created their first publication, a newsletter called Electronic Buyers' News, on their dining room table in Manhasset in 1971. But the move into trade shows was not only logical but, Mr. Miller's protestations aside, quite lucrative.
''A magazine establishes a market base, and that's an excellent marketing vehicle for a trade show,'' said Donald Pazour, the chief executive of PBI Media in Potomac, Md., and a former chief executive of Miller Freeman, the trade show and publishing company that owned CMP for a short time just before it was sold United Business Media in 1999.
CMP's organizational structure underscores the two-way relationship between publications and shows. Rather than operating its 25 major trade shows from a single division, CMP runs them as extensions of the publications that spawn them.
Bolstered by this arrangement, trade shows are CMP's most profitable endeavors. Alix Raine, a spokeswoman for CMP, said that she could not release revenue totals for 2003 but that trade shows accounted for 18 percent of the company's revenue and 29 percent of its profits. Publishing, both paper and electronic, constitutes the balance.
Last year, said Mr. Mead of the Jordan, Edmiston Group, CMP's revenue from events totaled about $500 million, second to the International Data Group, which pulled in more than $2 billion.
While CMP's mix is financially sound, making a trade show distinctly the work of a particular company -- what marketing types call the branding process -- is no small task, said Mary Beth Rebedeau, the executive director of the Society of Independent Show Organizers. Last month's electronics show in New York is hard to tell from this month's show in Chicago -- same exhibitors, same sales hype, same drill.
At CMP, ''it's the publications that drive the trade show business,'' not the other way around, Ms. Rebedeau said. ''Trade shows are very profitable,'' she added, ''but it is harder to build a brand with a trade show.''
L.I. @ WORK
