The Pakistani government on Saturday removed Abdul Qadeer Khan, the founder of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, from his post as a special adviser to the country's prime minister.
The step, and other measures, suggested that the government was laying the groundwork for exposing wrongdoing by Dr. Khan, a man revered as a national hero in Pakistan.
Dr. Khan, three scientists and three low-level army officers are the focus of an investigation into the possible sharing of Pakistani nuclear technology with Iran, Libya and other countries in the late 1980's and early 1990's. Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the Pakistani president, has said that ''some individuals'' appear to have sold nuclear technology for personal profit.
General Musharraf, who seized power in a coup, has been under competing pressures from the United States, secular and Islamist political rivals and Pakistan's powerful army. He must somehow strike a balance between being tough enough in the investigation to satisfy American concerns and not being seen as an American lackey, or betraying the army, his base of support.
Officials outlined a series of steps that suggested an airing of evidence would occur, but it was not clear whether Dr. Khan or low-level scientists and army officers would be prosecuted.
General Musharraf will make a televised address to the nation ''shortly after'' a series of national holidays that end on Thursday, a senior official said. An already extensive security presence around Dr. Khan's home has been ''enhanced,'' the official added, but he has not been arrested.
The removal of Dr. Khan from his post came after the National Command Authority, the senior military and civilian leaders who oversee Pakistan's nuclear arsenal, was briefed on the investigation's progress.
The authority issued a statement saying it ''condemns and distances itself in categorical terms from individual acts of indiscretion in the past.''
Pakistani officials have said that bank accounts believed to belong to Dr. Khan and nuclear smugglers from Germany, the Netherlands, South Africa and Sri Lanka have been found in Dubai and other Persian Gulf cities.
Analysts are divided on the meaning of General Musharraf's action.
Ayesha Siddiqa, a security analyst in Islamabad, said the army feared that if Dr. Khan was arrested he would identify senior military officials who approved the transfers. The military-led government has thus far taken the position that any sales of technology were an unsanctioned act, perhaps by Dr. Khan and a handful of close aides and low-level military officials.
''A. Q. Khan will lead to more names,'' Ms. Siddiqa said in a telephone interview. ''That is what they are weighing.''
But Rasul Baksh Rais, a professor at Lahore University of Management Sciences, said the Saturday actions were a signal that Dr. Khan had committed a serious offense. Mr. Rais said he expected the government to move against Dr. Khan, if clear evidence against him existed.
''It suggests that there is something serious against him,'' Dr. Rais said. ''That Dr. Khan is no longer in the same esteem and respect of the government of Pakistan and he has done something really serious against the interests of Pakistan.''
Pakistan began its investigation in November, when Iranian officials told the United Nations nuclear monitoring agency that black marketeers who aided Iran's nuclear program had ties to Pakistan. In early January, Libya told Pakistan that nuclear smugglers it had used also had ties to Pakistan.
Dr. Khan's troubles began in 2001. General Musharraf forced him to retire from his post as head of Khan Research Laboratories, the country's main nuclear weapons facility, which was named for him.
American officials have said they pressed General Musharraf to remove Dr. Khan, whom they have long suspected of sharing nuclear technology with other countries.
Dr. Khan was appointed special adviser to the prime minister for strategic programs in 2001, a term used to describe the country's nuclear program. A government statement issued Saturday said Dr. Khan had been removed from the post in order to ''facilitate'' the investigation into the sharing of nuclear technology in a ''free and objective manner.''
Since his retirement from the nuclear program, Dr. Khan, a larger- than-life figure who is a fierce nationalist, has brought out deep divisions in Pakistan.
His enemies, including a rival faction of nuclear scientists, dismiss him as a megalomaniac who exaggerated his role in constructing Pakistan's nuclear bomb and accuse him of corruption.
Dr. Khan's supporters say he achieved an astounding feat, successfully enriching uranium and eluding an American effort to block the Pakistani nuclear program.
In a rare interview recorded in late December and aired in full on Jan. 23 by the private Pakistani television channel Geo, Dr. Khan denied sharing technology with Iran. He said international news organizations were maligning him because the weapons he built thwarted India's plan to ''destroy Pakistan.''
''What I did, I made all of their policies go to waste,'' he said. ''A single person destroyed all of their intended planning for the next 25 years.''
He then laughed and said: ''Who made the atom bomb? I made it. Who made the missiles? I made them for you.''
On Saturday, the president's chief spokesmen continued to assert that the inquiry was making progress. Maj. Gen. Shaukat Sultan Khan, the military's chief spokesman, said the investigation had ''narrowed down to a few people.''
Asked if Dr. Khan was one of the remaining suspects, he replied ''he is certainly among them.''
