WHEN an actor portrays a real-life person, there's usually a clear distinction between portrayer and portrayed. But HBO's ''Curb Your Enthusiasm'' hews so closely to the life and lunacy of Larry David that it imposes an awkward burden on the two women who must tolerate his daily woes. Cheryl Hines, who plays the environmental activist wife on the show, is often mistaken for Laurie David, Mr. David's actual environmental activist wife.
''I recycle!'' Ms. Hines said with an exasperated laugh over lunch recently at the Chateau Marmont, noting this sole similarity between blond actress and brunette wife. Other than that, the two women barely overlap and barely interact. Ms. Hines formed her version of the wife to Mr. David's curmudgeon character before she had ever met the real Ms. David, who refrains from offering Ms. Hines tips. The TV relationship showcases a balance of bickering and restraint that suggests years of negotiation; viewers often assume that Ms. Hines and Mr. David must actually be married. Instead, Ms. Hines is newly wed to another man, Paul Young, a talent manager and a producer of Comedy Central's ''Reno 911.''
Mr. David first met the bubbly Ms. Hines during her tryout to play his TV wife five years ago. They improvised dialogue from this jumping-off point: he was not going to eat chicken anymore. Ms. Hines was the only actress who turned neither soft nor shrill, and her lilting, joking admonitions caught Mr. David's imagination: ''She stood up to me but in such an amusing way that it made me smile,'' he said in an interview. It was a new feeling. ''My wife has much less patience with me,'' he said. Laurie David agrees: ''She's much more patient than I am and much nicer to him than I am,'' she says. ''His TV wife is his fantasy wife, in every way.''
Indeed, this 10-episode season, which reaches its halfway point tonight, has set up weekly trials of wifely tolerance that would seem painful if they weren't so ridiculous. The Cheryl David character displayed saintly patience when catching her husband sizing up another woman's breast implants. And in a recurring story line, she actually granted her husband one infidelity as a 10th-anniversary gift. Ms. Hines said that it appeared plausible only because her character let Larry flounder around, teasing him that he was a clumsy flirt who couldn't seal the deal.
''She doesn't want him to, but she knows he's not going to be rolling around naked with a strange woman,'' Ms. Hines said. ''He doesn't like to touch strangers. You know what I mean? The likelihood that he's going to get naked with one is smaaalll.''
The actual Davids recently celebrated their 10th anniversary, with no such extramarital privileges. Laurie David first met her future husband and father of their two daughters when he was a no-name, nebbishy comedian and she was a talent scout for David Letterman in his NBC days. After Mr. David's set at the Duplex in the West Village, she chased him onto the sidewalk, shook his hand and hoped to book his big break.
But even she couldn't get him on ''Late Night.'' She had sold Mr. Letterman on Harvey Pekar, of ''American Splendor'' fame, but as for Mr. David, ''Dave just didn't get his humor,'' she said.
Increasingly, she did. Their first kiss came a few years later. Sensing a suddenly escalating romance, she sat with a girlfriend in the Excelsior Hotel coffee shop and scribbled on a place mat the advantages and disadvantages of marrying Larry David. She recalls 2 pros and 10 cons, but they got engaged anyway, two weeks after that initial kiss. ''Basically I took a real chance on this guy,'' she said.
Suddenly, each got a Hollywood sitcom deal, and their friends placed odds on Laurie David's producing job with ''Get a Life!'' versus Larry David's writing gig for ''Seinfeld.''  ''Everybody thought my show was going to be a hit and his was going nowhere,'' she said. The opposite was true, and the transplanted New Yorkers married after three years in Los Angeles.
The ''Seinfeld'' phenomenon gave the Davids some financial freedom, and Laurie David dedicated time to raising two daughters, now 7 and 9. And through his new show, her husband found a way to pay tribute to his wife's environmental advocacy, which is now her full-time job. ''The best gift he ever gave me was making his character drive a hybrid car,'' said Ms. David, who serves on the board of the Natural Resources Defense Council, drives an ecologically correct Toyota Prius, and this week will gather a celebrity-filled group of New York activists to discuss how to oust President Bush. Ms. David said that her activism sometimes makes her husband wish that she had never taken his last name. ''It's not sometimes, it's all the time,'' Mr. David corrected. ''She's costing me viewers.''
Around the time of the Davids' marriage, Cheryl Hines was relocating from her home state of Florida to Los Angeles. Tending bar and struggling for parts, she met the comedian Phil Hartman's sister, who recommended that she get her start at the Groundlings theater, where comics hone goofy sketches and vicious pop-culture parodies on their way to sitcom and ''Saturday Night Live'' stardom. The regulars at the bar pooled some money and Ms. Hines took her first Groundlings class. One instructor was Lisa Kudrow, then on ''Mad About You'' and eventually a star on ''Friends.''
The workshops involved tough love, and pretty, genial women like Ms. Hines had the most to prove. ''I was supposed to be a cave woman or something,'' she recalled. ''And I was in the middle of my improv, and my teacher shouted out: 'We know you're cute. C'mon! What else do you have?' '' That chiding question came from Mindy Sterling, the stern Frau Farbissina of ''Austin Powers'' fame, and although it stung, it opened Ms. Hines up to less pleasing portrayals. Soon she burst onstage as a draconian school nurse named Mabel and, later, as a pregnant belly dancer.
Still, roles eluded her, and she took a job as personal assistant to the director Rob Reiner and his wife, who kindly showed up for each of her Groundlings openings. Ms. Hines kept quiet about the open-call rigors and the no-call-back blues, and then shocked her bosses when she was cast as the wife of their friend, Larry David.
''Because I'm the girl that buys the bath towels for them!'' she said. ''And they've been friends for a long time with the Davids. So it was just a leeetle bit of a jolt.'' She suddenly had to become a character not unlike those she served, a couple with lives gilded by sitcom wealth. Ms. Hines was getting an education in one of the most prominent themes of ''Curb Your Enthusiasm'': the awkwardness of Hollywood social dilemmas.
That was five years ago, and now Ms. Hines has four seasons of ''Curb Your Enthusiasm'' wrapped up, as well as one Emmy nomination, a new husband and a baby on the way. She met her husband on the Groundlings board of directors, of which he's chairman. Both come from humble backgrounds -- hers in Tallahassee, his in a Colorado trailer park -- and they celebrate their new lot in life by inviting friends to their Hollywood Hills home for ''chop night,'' when Ms. Hines serves up some tomato-smothered pork chops.
''It's much different to be in this town when you have money and you're not worried about every check that you write, that it won't bounce,'' she said. Ms. Hines has been told to expect to shoot at least one more season of ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' after her baby is born this spring.
In the meantime, she is working on another mama role, in NBC's animated ''Father of the Pride,'' about a family of performing lions in Siegfried and Roy's Las Vegas show. (The network is still proceeding with the series for this fall, despite the tiger attack that seriously wounded Roy Horn and closed the stage act indefinitely.) As a reward, she indulged in a recent splurge -- a decidedly un-David-like BMW. ''This is the first time in my life that I actually bought a new car,'' she said through giggles. ''And it was too hard for me to buy a Prius.''
TELEVISION Ned Martel writes about television for The Financial Times.
