DREAMS THROUGH THE GLASS  Windows From Bergdorf Goodman  By Linda Fargo  Assouline, 160 pp., $50.
CLOTHING is just protection from the elements, but fashion, of course, is a story we tell ourselves. Sometimes it's a simple story: the cut of your blue jeans, for instance, can now telegraph not only which of the past four decades you feel most comfortable in, but whether you are embracing that period with irony or innocence.
Some of the most entertaining stories occur when fashion is separated from actual warm bodies and used as a prop or a jumping-off point in a department store window. This is where it becomes the stuff of pure fantasy, like the pages of a 1960's Vogue or Harper's Bazaar.
The act of looking through a window lends itself to the creation of something or somewhere extraordinary on the other side of the glass, writes Linda Fargo, the designer of Bergdorf Goodman's windows for the last seven years. She writes, ''I prefer these places to have the bewildering nature of a dream, at once familiar, recomposed of remembered histories, yet strange and untraveled.''
Here is Ms. Fargo's portfolio, photographed by John Cordes and Ricky Zehavi. A gray cashmere dress with jet beading from Halston's Signature Collection reminded Ms. Fargo and her team of designers of fog and mist, the beading like sheets of rain. They fabricated a Dorothy in the tornado scene -- a flying chair, a bicycle, an uprooted tree and the wind -- whipping the pages of a newspaper: ''Fair weather predicted,'' reads its headline.
Ms. Fargo's holiday windows are the most fantastical. My favorite is ''Last Supper,'' using 1999's millennial theme. A table groans with the fecund debris of a huge meal, and mannequins were keeled over on stacks of plates. Ms. Fargo writes of salvaging pheasant carcasses, fish bones and seashells from local restaurants. ''This was not a banquet to be portrayed in its composed state and untouched perfection,'' she said, ''but rather the aftermath of 1,000 years of holiday feasting, devoured and enjoyed with abandon, lust and satisfaction.''
This Christmas, Ms. Fargo's dream-inspired vignettes included a shell-encrusted grotto, a kind of Tony Duquette homage.
BOOKS OF STYLE
