MR. PARADISE
By Elmore Leonard.
291 pp. New York:
William Morrow. $25.95.
PEOPLE say it all the time: open the newspaper and read stranger stuff than you could invent. Fiction writers have (you choose) got it easy, or they've been trumped by reality. This is true only if you believe what you read in the paper and believe in ''reality.'' Elmore Leonard's 40th book, ''Mr. Paradise,'' is filled with ironic quotation marks, though he doesn't put them on the page. Tone is everything. How, exactly, can you be sure what the tone is? Well, you can't. Leonard addresses those who think they hear the same music he does, but who are open to questioning the familiar, to listening carefully and seeing when something has a different emphasis.
Flannery O'Connor wrote that good fiction comes at you through the senses, and in Elmore Leonard your sense of hearing is much called upon. What happens in this book is -- perhaps more than usual -- very much about language, the decline of the language: not just its warpings or its variables or its much talked about imprecision. Class figures into it: those in power often benefit by adopting a particular vocabulary; those without power use language to exclude as well. And everyone knows language can seduce -- which can be very enjoyable but which can also be problematic.
When Kelly, a model who is present when a murder takes place, describes her father, she points out: ''He's a semiretired barber. Not a hair stylist, a barber.'' Hair stylist is in invisible ironic quotation marks. When Frank Delsa, the homicide detective investigating the murder, questions someone he suspects and is told, ''This nigga busts in and shoots 'em,'' he rephrases the statement: ''This home invader.'' Delsa's description is also in ironic quotes. They continue to punctuate, sharp as an ice pick, throughout the novel.
Elmore Leonard's previous work has demonstrated he's got a sense of humor. He's hip and has the ability to keep readers involved, even if some miss an ''in'' joke or have no idea there's a literary allusion. You will love this excellent book even if you make nothing of the fact that the victim, surname Paradiso, is known as Mr. Paradise. If you want to, though, you can let your mind wander to ''Paradise Lost'' in Book One, where we find Milton's famous line (which happens to be spoken by a fallen archangel): ''The mind is its own place, and in itself / Can make a heav'n of hell, a hell of heav'n.'' Leonard is chronicling a struggle between good and evil. The Christian reader would certainly nod: man has fallen from grace. A heathen would hardly be prohibited from understanding that our world has become a violent, sad place -- though there are those among us who would speak of it euphemistically, hoping the veneer of language could soothe the hurt within.
Yet reality oozes out of the cracks, and Leonard is there to swirl it around. Victoria's Secret catalogs are not inherently subversive, but do we doubt that they advertise something other than underwear? Cargo pants serve one function when worn by the military, another when worn by a model who pairs them with a cashmere sweater, yet another when worn by a criminal. Fashions or fetishes are appropriated, but their connotations change, they mess with our minds, when they make the jump from function to arbitrary style. Our society has sunk deep into the quicksand of style, it seems, and looking around, Leonard selects well: the flotsam and jetsam we might think is harmless rises to the surface to support larger acts (the subjects of his books) that involve good versus evil. If we can flirt and posture, laugh ironically about ghastly things and accept any discordant detail about how people look and what they seem to say, as opposed to what they are and what they really mean, we're cheerleaders (as is one of the murder victims -- though a rather unconventional cheerleader) for a corruption in our society whose taproot is anchored in the soil of a malaise that can become murderous.
''Mr. Paradise'' is about deception. People deceive through false identity (appropriating, dissembling), just as they, themselves, have been deceived -- whether by the implied promise of collapsed dot-coms or by positive, false assumptions about family.
Mr. Paradise's employees are self-justifying and treacherous. Beware those who repeat the cant that your life is the story you tell yourself. Two former convicts, employees of Anthony Paradiso, the elderly lawyer who has ''saved'' them (sorry: you might mistake my irony if I didn't punctuate), arrange, or are complicitous in, his murder; a former prostitute who has gone with her friend to entertain Mr. Paradise is killed when a psychopathic Marx-Brother-gone-way-way-wrong criminal decides he must shoot her as well to ensure her silence.
Enter the homicide detective Frank Delsa (and his colleagues), who must sort it out. He does, somewhat inadvertently, converging with the two maniacal hit men hired by Montez Taylor (a k a Chops) in the very house where the murder was committed, presided over by Satan, in the guise of a merely totally corrupt lawyer named Avern Cohn. There are numerous lessons to be learned, among them that dissing people can result in deadly retribution, and that ''stupid'' people (who appear throughout the book as minor characters, usually off-camera, like a woman who calls the police to turn in her brother when she is displeased that he opened her can of beans) often determine the outcome of important matters.
Ironic -- right? But Leonard is no simple moralist. Rather, he brilliantly involves himself in playing the same game he is exposing. His details are so well chosen, so recognizable that we initially feel an amused sense of false security about their presence. His characters feel such a sense of entitlement that the reader sometimes loses sight of the truth.
To a suspect who expresses surprise that Delsa is going to let him smoke in a nonsmoking building, Delsa reveals himself in the guise of explaining: it's a problem ''only if you get caught.'' It's a minor matter, surely; the reader is amused. Yet the word ''smoke'' transmogrifies into slang with negative connotations elsewhere. When we turn our heads from one matter, we become vulnerable to turning our heads from the next matter, and the next.
There's a frightening sort of refrain in the book: ''It's what you do'' (Chloe, a prostitute turned mistress); ''That's what you do, isn't it?'' (Mr. Paradise, condescendingly instructing his servant about his duties); a drug dealer is said to stash drugs at his mother's, ''like they do.'' Ah, yes: the way things are. The status quo of the previously unthinkable, now the world as any sophisticated person must know it. We are made to consider the banality of evil, the evil of banality (signaled by Leonard in all that ostensibly makes us more comfortable: nicknames, acronyms, metonymy).
In Elmore Leonard's universe, we need to stop laughing. Metaphorically, we are dead and buried if we have learned nothing from history and have fallen so far we fail to understand that our actions have moral consequences: if we cannot see our ubiquitous disregard for our fellow man as (ironic quotes or not) ''evil.''
Ann Beattie is the Edgar Allan Poe professor of literature and creative writing at the University of Virginia.
