KNIGHT A. KIPLINGER is not just the president of the Kiplinger financial advice machine. He is also a client.
Let others make and lose fortunes on Internet stocks. He bought nary a one. Let others live the high life now and figure that the future will take care of itself. He will not live above his means (end of discussion). And let others seek quick profits from initial public offerings or sleeper stocks. He favors blue chips every time.
''I don't swing for the fences; I don't go for home runs,'' Mr. Kiplinger said. ''That makes me a true Kiplinger-type investor.''
It sure does. For more than 80 years, the Kiplinger family has been spewing forth economic forecasts and investment advice that, to oversimplify, says that when the tortoise races the hare, back the tortoise. And Mr. Kiplinger, 55, president and editor in chief of Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine, the Kiplinger Letter, and a few spin-off newsletters on taxes, agriculture and California business, clearly has made slow-but-steady a successful investment mantra.
His money is spread through mutual funds, bonds, real estate and other holdings that, if not very sexy, feel awfully safe. His individual retirement account money is in the Fidelity Magellan fund, ''a very solid performer over many years,'' he notes.
What about individual stocks? He reckons that, in the three decades or so since he started investing, he has averaged an annual return of better than 10 percent from buying shares in established companies like Merck, J.P. Morgan Chase and I.B.M., and holding on even after they have hit temporary earnings blips.
''Some assets you buy for income, some for growth,'' Mr. Kiplinger said. ''And some'' -- he cites cash equivalents here -- ''just so you sleep well at night.''
It is pretty conventional investment advice. And in many ways Mr. Kiplinger is the personification of old-line American conventionality. He went into the family business, as his father did. He loves and collects antiques. His first name is a family surname (his maternal grandmother was Daphne Knight), as were the first names of his father, Austin; his grandfather Willard; his son, Brigham, 22; and daughter Sutton, 20. (Daphne, 18, got grandmother's first name, a slight change to the family nomenclature rule). And he wears a suit and tie with the comfort that most people manifest in jeans.
But spend a long lunch with Mr. Kiplinger, and you soon realize that he is not a plain-vanilla moneyed guy.
For one thing, he's a share-the-wealth advocate. Each of his 180 employees gets stock, profit sharing, a defined-benefit pension plan and unlimited free stays at a company-owned Florida resort. He writes hefty checks to charity and has often written advice columns that list philanthropic contributions as morally, and fiscally, right.
You can picture him driving a Mercedes. And he does. But, it's a 1955 Gullwing 300 SL, a bright red two-seater that he bought in 1969 for $3,900 and has lovingly restored over the years -- or more accurately, has paid to have restored. (''I'm just not good with cars,'' he said.)
And he is left-handed, a trait that many studies have linked to creativity and out-of-the-box thinking. As lunch progressed, those descriptions seemed ever more fitting. Every time his hostess figured that she knew the advice he was about to give, he offered the opposite.
The expected wisdom: Pay your bills and invest what's left over. The Kiplinger wisdom: ''Pay yourself first. '' In other words, never skip a payment to your I.R.A., your 401(k) or whatever your chosen savings vehicle. ''If you go into arrears on your bills,'' he said, ''it'll focus your attention on cutting back spending.''
The expected wisdom: Check those ubiquitous lists of the best-performing mutual funds, and buy shares of the best ones. The Kiplinger wisdom: Look askance at funds that make everyone's list of top 10 performers. ''They are often shooting stars that temporarily benefited from a falling dollar or a boom in health care, and they can just as quickly flame out,'' he said. Instead, stick with funds like Oakmark Equity and Income, Meridian Growth, CGM Focus or others that, even if not in the top 10, are consistently strong performers.
Perhaps not surprisingly, Mr. Kiplinger's forecasts are often eyebrow raisers, obvious only in hindsight. Three days before the last presidential election, The Kiplinger Letter predicted that a lot would hinge on Florida, and that George W. Bush would ultimately win that state, and thus the office. (The year Mr. Kiplinger was born, 1948, was the only year when The Kiplinger Letter erred on a presidential race. Like so many others, it predicted that Thomas E. Dewey would trump Harry S. Truman.) In March 2000, just days before technology stocks came tumbling down, The Kiplinger Letter warned that ''most dot-coms have been bid up to WILDLY inflated levels'' and suggested that readers start moving away from tech stocks.
''What we do best is puncture the popular mania of the moment,'' Mr. Kiplinger said.
HE is no newcomer to the role of contrarian. He attended Cornell University from 1965 to 1969, when leftist activism ruled the campus. While his fellow students were protesting the Vietnam war and fighting for civil rights, Mr. Kiplinger was deriding them for shouting down anyone with different views.
''I hated the way the fascism of the new left trampled on the First Amendment,'' Mr. Kiplinger said. ''I thought the war in Vietnam was a well-intentioned tragic mistake, but I protested in writing and conversation, not in riots.''
After Cornell, Mr. Kiplinger went to Princeton for graduate work in international affairs. He said he was soon ''disgusted'' with the way protesters ran roughshod on campus. ''The university was so intimidated by the new left that it abandoned its role as guardian of free speech,'' he recalled.
So he dropped out and became a reporter for a small newspaper in Rockville, Md. Having a fine tenor voice, he joined the Washington Chorus. So did Ann Miller, a special-education teacher and a fine soprano. They met in the spring of 1979; they were married by December. Four years and two children later, the long hours and stress of newspaper work had gotten to him, and he joined the family business.
As out of sync as Mr. Kiplinger may have been with his peer group, his personal odyssey is very much in sync with Kiplinger family history.
Knight Kiplinger's grandfather Kip -- actually, Willard, but ''he just hated it when anyone called him that,'' Knight recalled -- was one of the first journalism graduates at Ohio State and covered economic policy for The Associated Press well before he published the first Kiplinger Washington Letter in 1923. Kip's son, Austin, was an evening-news anchor for a Chicago station before running the family shop. Knight's son Brigham has not yet decided on a career. For now, he is teaching in an inner-city school in Washington, and his father does not rule out the chance that he, or one of the daughters, will wind up at the Kiplinger helm as well.
''Don't ever discount the pull of loyalty and affection and pride in family name,'' he said.
For now, though, Knight Kiplinger wears the leadership mantle himself. And, so garbed, he acquiesced good-naturedly when his luncheon companion asked for some investment tips. Basically, his advice boiled down to this: Forgo the possible highs to avoid the heart-rending lows. Here are some of his specific recommendations:
Avoid I.P.O.'s, no matter how delicious their business model appears. ''They're a fool's game, because insiders always get the preferential prices,'' Mr. Kiplinger said. Wait a year or two, and even if the business model was sound, he said, ''I'll bet you can pick up the stock for less.''
Don't confuse a promising premise with a promising company. Yes, the Internet is here to stay. And, yes, it made sense -- and perhaps still does -- to bet on Intel, Cisco Systems or other established companies whose products make up the Internet's infrastructure. But it never made sense to buy stocks of dot-com start-ups. ''Don't ever be tempted by shares of companies that don't have earnings,'' he said.
Shun mutual funds that do not limit the amount of money they will accept. ''Ethical funds will stop accepting new money as soon as their money manager runs out of ideas for new companies to invest in,'' Mr. Kiplinger said. If those funds open their doors down the road, buy in.
Leave day trading to the professionals. ''It's gambling, not investing,'' he said. ''You'll wind up buying momentum and hype and sizzle, not quality.''
Realize that no class of assets has unlimited upside potential. Residential real estate -- even your home -- can be a great investment, but it can also be a sinkhole. Right now, he sees real estate and many bonds as fully priced at best, overpriced at worst. Stocks are not the ''screaming bargains'' they were a year ago either, he said, but they are still well priced, ''and over the long term, nothing really does as well.''
Don't buy shares of foreign companies, no matter how strong their performance seems. ''It is too hard to closely follow their activities and prospects,'' he said. ''Mutual funds are the one smart way to invest overseas.''
Don't turn up your nose at index funds, which rise and fall with the market as a whole. ''They really are a way to own an infinitesimal slice of the American economy,'' he said.
Trust the experts, but only after you have verified their expertise. For example, if you are buying or selling a house, choose a real estate agent who has completed many transactions in your neighborhood, not just in your price range.
Don't think that fees are set in stone. Choose an agent who will agree to a lower commission if your house sells quickly, or if he or she represents the buyer as well. The same applies to stockbrokers: many of them will agree to lower their commissions to keep your account. ''Buy the highest-quality service you can afford, but don't assume you have to pay top price for it,'' Mr. Kiplinger added. ''We are living in a negotiating society, so don't assume that things that were once nonnegotiable still are.''
AT LUNCH WITH: KNIGHT A. KIPLINGER
