For the Democrats, 1988 was a rough year. Ronald Reagan had just left office. Michael Dukakis was their presidential candidate. The character issue was in ascendancy, with Gary Hart knocked out of the running when reporters caught him on the Monkey Business. And then there was Jack Tanner. Over the course of his campaign, the mild-mannered boomer liberal skidded from scandal to lucky accident, rebranding himself like a cola, until his candidacy was stubbed out in a burst of bureaucracy at the convention. He was less an independent voice than a beige horse, doomed to irrelevance. But at least Tanner had one advantage over other losing candidates: he was fictional.
The protagonist of the experimental mockumentary ''Tanner '88'' -- produced by a fledgling HBO and being shown this week on the Sundance Channel -- Tanner was an imaginary candidate inserted into the real political race, the creation of the jittery-camera auteur Robert Altman and the ''Doonesbury'' cartoonist Garry Trudeau. The prankish series captured (and embodied) the television camera's steadily growing role on the political landscape. And while its big hair and clunky cellphones may be dated, the series itself is queasily prescient, as both politics and television.
Long before the rise of reality TV, ''Tanner '88'' explored the tendency of televised behavior to slip helplessly into performance. In improvised sequences, Michael Murphy's Tanner interacted with numerous real-life politicos, including Pat Robertson, Bob Dole, Bruce Babbitt and Kitty Dukakis. At the time, this technique had a subversive force, suggesting as it did that spontaneity had become just another marketing trick. But it now seems to presage a world in which a primary requirement of running for president is the ability to seem presidential.
Each ''Tanner'' episode on Sundance will be preceded by a recently filmed ''Fireside Chat'' -- 11 wry follow-ups with Tanner (played by Mr. Murphy); his gimlet-eyed campaign manager, T. J. Cavanaugh (Pamela Reed); and his bratty idealist of a daughter, Alex (Cynthia Nixon.) These interviews allow the show's creators to comment on how the political landscape has changed since 1988. With Tanner as his sadder-but-wiser proxy, Mr. Trudeau ticks off the lessons of the last 15 years: spin your personal life before the media does it for you, anything that reeks of the 60's will kill your campaign and winning is all. ''The people who succeed in politics aren't like you and me,'' Tanner concludes. ''Especially me.''
It's a line that -- like the series itself -- merges cynicism and moral frustration. Tanner was more Zelig than hero, a mushroom of a candidate, soaking up the flavors of the political stew. ''Our main mandate was to keep Tanner kind of low-key, a kind of Kennedyesque character,'' Mr. Altman recalled in an interview. ''We didn't want him to say a lot, we wanted other people to say a lot.'' Such a blurry protagonist allows for a grimly funny portrayal of the campaign process, the task of wooing an electorate at once jaded and eager to be snowed. Along the path to oblivion, Tanner lobbies a New Hampshire couple who trade Polaroid photos of the candidates like baseball cards, snubs a Hollywood supporter (Rebecca DeMornay) and visits a media trainer who grants him the gift of eye contact. His staffers brainstorm a dryly ironic slogan: ''For Real.'' ''What happened to 'The Future Is Now'?'' asks a reporter. ''Well, Molly,'' the campaign manager, T. J., explains, deadpan, '' 'The Future Is Now' was then, and 'For Real' is now.''
There are moments when the series seems alarmingly psychic. Several years before James Carville and Mary Matalin locked eyes, Jack Tanner conducted a secretive cross-campaign romance with a Dukakis staffer. Tanner's cameraman presents a sentimental video reminiscent of Bill Clinton's famous ''A Place Called Hope.'' And Cynthia Nixon's Alex seems cobbled together from equal parts Chelsea Clinton and Karenna Gore.
The pressure on Tanner to package his own biography seems especially contemporary. Pestered by a reporter who is delving into his divorce and family background, the candidate snaps, ''Oh, by the way, I learned to drink to please my father, who I wanted to murder, so I could then marry my mother.'' Anyone who witnessed Howard and Judy Dean forced to audition their marriage on CNN has seen this once-exceptional phenomenon turn into a kind of stylized national hazing.
But the show is perhaps most notable as a portrait of the contradictions inherent in molding a winning Democratic candidate -- a figure who can talk about social justice without seeming like a wimp. Well-meaning though he may be, Tanner is finally the kind of candidate who shrinks whenever he wanders on camera. Like the current crop, he is hard-pressed to seem neither slick nor awkward, to suggest gravitas without coming off as pompous, to perform excitement without seeming like a nut. His staffers watch in paralyzed bemusement as he fumbles photo ops, at one point plying schoolchildren with a lesson in tax abatements.
Still, if ''Tanner'' doesn't present a heroic vision for politicians, it offers something else -- a perverse respect for the people just outside the camera's vision. As Tanner dims into frustrated irrelevance, T. J. comes to seem a fascinating heroine of pragmatism, her willingness to wheel and deal a necessary power in this compromised environment. ''Jesus! I love to watch you set a hook,'' a colleague says at one point, watching her plant a false story with a TV reporter. ''It gives me shivers.''
At such moments, the sometimes slow-paced series captures the mess and thrill of the campaign trail: the fast-food, the late-night hookups, the scrambling to turn a gaffe into an advantage. And when the campaign turns truly anarchic -- when Tanner's staff touts a deliberately outrageous presidential cabinet including Gloria Steinem, Studs Terkel and Art Buchwald -- the show also captures the camaraderie of disaster. That may not be a blueprint for winning, but it's one possible lesson in political survival.
Would a ''Tanner''-like experiment succeed today? ''K Street'' tried to update the show's improvisational style, but fell oddly flat -- perhaps because there's little shock in seeing Mary Matalin and James Carville riff on their own stylized personas. Instead, the ''Tanner'' vision survives on shows like ''The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,'' which features a similar style of winking outrage. Last week, when Howard Dean chose to skip the morning news show and appear instead with Stewart, it was a statement Tanner himself might have appreciated. For better or worse, much of the electorate has come to regard satire as less a response to politics than as its ideal delivery system.
'Tanner '88'  Sundance Channel, beginning 9 p.m. Tuesday
TELEVISION: RERUNS
