A floodlit, two-story chamber in the Queens Museum of Art, large enough to fit a couple of small aircraft, houses the institution's pride and joy: the Panorama of the City of New York, a justly famous three-dimensional model of the city.
The Panorama, commissioned by Robert Moses for the 1964 World's Fair in Flushing Meadows, comprises 800,000 buildings; it is at once so detailed that you can make out individual office lights, and so large that downtown Manhattan is a few minutes' leisurely walk from Far Rockaway.
But some headaches come with custody of the largest metaphor in New York. There is, for example, the matter of what do with the miniature twin towers, a couple of 13-inch gray blocks topped by two three-quarter-inch antennas, at the bottom of the Panorama's Manhattan Island.
''We got a lot of calls'' after Sept. 11, 2001, said Tom Finkelpearl, the museum's director. ''Everyone who had written a story about the Panorama in years called up. There were Japanese film crews.''
A year after the attacks, Mr. Finkelpearl decided to install, on the spot where the tiny towers stood, a miniature version of ''Tribute in Light,'' the haunting pair of bluish shafts that first shot up next to the Trade Center site in the spring of 2002.
Now, in miniature as in life, there is the problem of money. In the fall of 2002, five Assembly members pledged $10,000 each for an overhaul of the Panorama's lighting. But the money is taking its time in arriving, and meanwhile Mr. Finkelpearl has already been forced to revise his predictions about when the miniature ''Tribute in Light'' will be installed. The Dormitory Authority, the state agency in charge of administering such grants, does not hold out much hope of the money's arriving soon. ''We don't have any paperwork on these grants yet,'' said Claudia Hutton, an agency spokeswoman.
Nor is using cheaper technology an option. During a test run, Mr. Finkelpearl said wearily, ''we found out that inexpensive laser beams are green.''
Meanwhile, the 40-year-old computer that controls the Panorama's lighting -- original to the World's Fair installation and in line for replacement with the promised money -- has become wheezy. The lights are supposed to turn off every nine minutes, providing a full minute of ''night,'' during which the installation glows luridly. During a recent visit, they did not turn off at all.
''The lights in here are museum pieces,'' said David Dean, the museum's director of planning. ''The bits and bats that go into them are irreplaceable.''
Mr. Dean displayed the large, whirring cabinet in a back room where the testy old computer is kept, but was afraid to open it for fear of disturbing the components. When the new system arrives, he said, ''we joke that this should go in the World's Fair exhibition downstairs.''
Until that day, there is not much more to do than wait for the promised money. At the moment, the only element in the Panorama marking the attack is a red-white-and-blue-striped ribbon forming a figure eight between the two towers.
Mr. Finkelpearl says he has learned from the trajectory of the real-life trade center memorial. ''It seemed like it was a mess,'' he said, with hope in his voice, ''and then it all came together.''
ALEX MINDLIN
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: FLUSHING MEADOWS
