FEW things can torpedo multiple friendships as quickly as a golf vacation, poorly arranged.
The choice of golf courses, number of rounds, hotel, restaurants and tee times can all trigger debate when 4, 8 or 12 egos and budgets are involved. Add to this the fact that golf vacations hold a sacred place in the pantheon of adult getaways -- with no kids to watch, no spouses to consider, no obligatory attractions to visit -- and the travel planning pressure skyrockets.
Whether the Internet has helped golfers save otherwise doomed friendships is difficult to say. But it has at least diminished the degree of difficulty in arranging and booking golf trips, said Keith Christianson, an airline mechanic, personal trainer and avid golfer in Wantagh, N.Y.
For the last 13 years, Mr. Christianson has helped organize a full-fledged guy's weekend of golf at one of the most popular golf vacation destinations, Myrtle Beach, S.C., the center of a 60-mile coastal stretch with more than 120 courses. For the first nine years of the annual autumn escape, Mr. Christianson said he relied on phone calls and printed guides to select courses and hotels for 8 to 12 friends. In 2000, Mr. Christianson said he found www.myrtlebeach.com, a site that caters to golfers and nonduffers alike.
''You can go to that site and pull up all the courses, and get a picture, layout and a description,'' he said. ''It saves us a lot of headaches.''
MyrtleBeach.com, published by Intellistrand, a local media company, includes a fairly intuitive layout and some useful features that even some golf-centric sites miss. For instance, prospective visitors may choose from a list of most of the area's courses, view available tee times and book online.
Much Clicking Required
Useful though it is, myrtlebeach.com doesn't cover everything. For those who would like to stay at a resort -- to minimize the distance between bed and the first tee -- the site requires users to waste time clicking around to different Myrtle Beach districts to find listings. And that assumes visitors know the difference between the area's districts.
Other sites, like Myrtle Beach Golf Holiday (www.golfholiday.com), give a single-page listing of accommodations at roughly 80 resorts serving the area's golf properties.Of course, sites like these are most useful if you know precisely which course you're playing, or at least in which area. Golfers who are in the early stages of planning trips are better served by clicking to broader golf sites.
TravelGolf.com can be helpful in generating ideas. The site is a gateway to 35 golf destination guides, each overseen by an editor who provides weekly or monthly updates. For instance, the company's GolfArizona.com Web site last month published a list of the state's best courses, including the best golf resorts, best new courses and best values, among others.
These sites sometimes lack professional polish or objectivity. One featured article about a renovation of the Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St. Andrews in Scotland quoted TravelGolf's president and publisher, Robert Lewis, as well as Brian Gowdy, its vice president for the European division; independent sources would have offered greater credibility.
Golfdigest.com, the online division of Golf Digest magazine, suffers no such lapses. The site leans heavily toward instruction, but the link for Courses on the home page yields plenty for a golfer's wish list.
The Planet Golf link lists the magazine's course rankings for 100 countries. Editors also list a story about what the publication's editors deemed the world's most remote course, in Bhutan.
Also worth a click is golf.com, operated by GolfServ.com, one of whose investors is The New York Times Company. It has two useful features for those researching golf destinations. One is the Course Recommender, in the Courses &amp; Travel section. This feature scans more than 20,000 courses for one similar to a course you specify.
At times the feature works in puzzling ways. I typed in the Stanwich Club, a well-known but private course in Greenwich, Conn., hoping the site might recommend a course I could actually play. The course recommender suggested I try Hallbrook Country Club in Leawood, Kan., in part because it, too, is private.
The site's Find Courses feature was more helpful. Users type in a destination, and get a list of courses within a specified radius and links to a particular course's Web site.
Some Blind Shots
Often, though, the course's own Web sites disappoint. Unlike ski resorts, golf resorts and courses rarely give golfers views from various points on the course. Typically, the sites will include hole-by-hole illustrations one would find on the back of a scorecard, along with basic yardage information.
Golfersguidetravel.com is a bit more helpful on this front. The site, which features information on 10 popular golf destinations, mostly in the Southeast but also Arizona and Hawaii, lists in-depth information for each of the courses in a particular location that the course sites ignore. One particularly nice feature is a hole-by-hole view, which maps out each hole. (The link is found near the bottom of each course's page.)
There, users are presented a Web page -- produced by the software company GolfWits -- that allows golfers of different abilities to see how they might play each hole. Scratch male golfers playing the par 4 16th hole at the Poipu Bay Golf Course on Kauai, for instance, are advised to play their second shot to the left, skirting the Pacific Ocean and through a noose of sand traps onto the green. A bogey golfer, though, is advised to lay up about 100 yards short of the green.
As is sometimes the case with interactive Web site features, I had difficulty using this particular feature with a Macintosh. That would be a handy excuse should you hook that second shot into the drink.
Hitting From the Red Tees
Few of the golf-related Web sites address women who golf, a growing force in the sport. An exception is the Web site of Golf for Women magazine, at www.golfdigest.com/gfw, a division of Golf Digest.
The site's Travel section, found on a link on the left side of the home page, is most useful for its Top 50 Courses list. There, women will find a compendium of courses whose designers considered those who cannot drive 300 yards, and for whom a rest stop is not a walk behind a tree.
Denise Martorana, a stockbroker from Sag Harbor, N.Y., relies on Golf for Women, among other sites, before a trip. Ms. Martorana, who boasts a one handicap, said she routinely clicks to nextdaygolf.com to save money on greens fees. The site, which serves courses in the Southeast, works in the manner of discount airline sites: selling tee times that might otherwise go unused. (Stand-bygolf.com also offers this service.)
While nextdaygolf can accommodate foursomes and other large parties, Ms. Martorana said she frequently plays alone, particularly on business trips. ''I never mix golf and business,'' Ms. Martorana said. ''Golf is too special.''
PRACTICAL TRAVELER E-mail: tedeschi@nytimes.com
