Five girls who were forced to take tests for sexually transmitted diseases last year after skipping school to attend a ''hooky party'' have agreed to drop their federal lawsuit against New York City and school officials. In exchange, the city has agreed to change its policy concerning the medical testing of students and to pay the girls an undisclosed amount of money.
The five girls were students at Intermediate School 164 in Washington Heights last April when they decided to cut class to attend the party. Word got back to school officials that there were sexual high jinks of some kind at the gathering.
Instead of giving the girls detentions, demerits or some other common form of punishment, school officials made them submit to gynecological exams and take tests for pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases. They were suspended for three to four days each and not allowed to return to school until they provided school officials with a doctor's note with the test results.
Five months later, the New York Civil Liberties Union filed suit against the city, the Department of Education and the school's principal and administrator, claiming that the girls' rights to privacy, bodily integrity, equality and due process had been violated. The suit sought damages of $200,000 for each of the students. The forced tests and suspensions ''reflected a fundamental indifference to the rights of the girls,'' Donna Lieberman, the union's executive director, said yesterday in announcing a settlement of the suit.
Under the settlement, school officials can no longer demand that students take tests for pregnancy or sexually transmitted diseases, said Rebekah Diller, who heads the union's reproductive rights program. Nor can school officials demand to see the results of such tests or even make students reveal whether they are pregnant or infected with a disease, Ms. Diller said.
Anna Schissel, a staff attorney for the reproductive rights program, said the civil liberties union had received ''tons of reports'' from students throughout the public school system who had been told to leave school because they were pregnant.
Under school regulations, a pregnant student must be given the choice of remaining in her regular school or taking classes at one of the city's special schools set up for students who are pregnant or have children. Under the settlement, school officials agreed to recommit themselves to the policy of giving students a choice, Ms. Lieberman said. The city admitted no wrongdoing in the settlement.
Lisa Grumet, an attorney with the city's Corporation Counsel, said, ''The revised procedure and new training agreed to by the Department of Education are consistent with other steps the department is taking with the goal of reducing dropout rates for pregnant students.''
The five plaintiffs in the suit have not been named, although Bonita Gonzalez, a paralegal for the civil liberties union, read aloud a statement yesterday by one of the students, identified as Susan Roe.
''It's really good,'' the statement said of the settlement, ''because other kids will not have to go through the same thing I did.''
