THE sheer number of specialty gardening societies amazed me for years. Who were all these joiners and why were they so interested in (obsessed by?) rare lilies, yellow clivias and auriculate primroses? Of course, some gardeners love to share their successes and others celebrate their failures, but did they really need to organize formal support groups?
Finally I realized what brought these people together was a desperate desire to own certain plants.
And once I tapped into their collections of rare seeds, I had to admit, who wouldn't want access to coveted species and varieties unavailable at the local nursery?
Several years ago, when I joined the Royal Horticultural Society -- at 200 years of age, the grande dame of such groups -- the rationale was wanting to receive its informative monthly magazine, The Garden, and with one issue came a pamphlet titled Surplus Seed for Distribution. Apparently one benefit of membership was the right to 25 packets of seed collected by other members and at the society's gardens at Wisley, in Surrey, and Rosemoor, in Devon.
And what a selection: The pamphlet listed more than 1,000 species, from old-fashioned Sweet Williams to Himalayan blue poppies. The plant descriptions were as discreet as the British themselves: Nothing more than a botanical name and whether the plant was herbaceous (British code for perennial), woody or annual, the color of its flower and its height -- in centimeters. Nevertheless, I was carried away by the thought of planting the seeds of anise hyssop and a few lush-leaved Rodgersias.
The offerings were available on a first-come, first-served basis, so I fired off my wish list right away. The seeds arrived in simply labeled glassine envelopes with a few notes on germination.
Soon I was down in the basement at all hours checking on my hyssop seedlings as they came to life under grow lights. Somehow nurturing a plant from infancy fills a gardener's heart with parental pride and fear of failure. While seed-starting always involves some failure, the anise hyssop growing along a rock wall in my garden in Bridgewater, Conn., more than makes up for a few unsuccessful attempts at propagating Rodgersias.
After my first experience with a seed exchange, plant organizations held a new allure. The New England Wildflower Society, for example, or the North American Rock Garden Society could provide access to hundreds of purple-leaved Labrador violets and a mysterious plant called sheep's laurel, a native related to the much-lauded mountain laurel. Though to the best of my knowledge I had never seen sheep's laurel -- indeed, perhaps for that very reason -- I could not wait to grow one.
Most organizations, I learned, charge at most a nominal fee for providing seeds. .
Because many of the seeds are collected and donated by society members, occasionally a plant doesn't match its label. The North American Rock Garden Society, which has been running a seed exchange since 1936, has a reputation for being a reliable source. Even when there are surprises, Tom Stuart, director of the society's seed exchange, said, ''As the seeds donated are usually the favorites of the gardener who collected them, even a mistake can be interesting.''
The New England Wildlflower Society, which is dedicated to the preservation of native plants and is best known for its Garden in the Woods site in Framingham, Mass., began a seed exchange in the mid-1980's as an offshoot of its index seminum, which provided seed to botanical gardens around the world. The exchange has since become an important way to meet the group's habitat preservation goals.
It certainly satisfied the curiosity of one of its new members. My sheep's laurel seedling is now approaching the four-inch mark. I guess membership has its privileges.
Satisfying Rare-Seed Mania
Order early, as demand often exceeds supply. Think about ordering a few self-sowing annuals, like breadseed poppies and nicotianas, because they can be sown outside later, freeing space under your grow lights in late winter.
Membership in the Royal Horticultural Society, www.rhs.org.uk, is £40 (about $73) and includes a subscription to The Garden as well as access to the seed exchange.
The New England Wildflower Society, www.newfs.org/seeds04, annual dues $25, distributes helpful information and has online seed exchange catalogs.
Annual dues at the North American Rock Garden Society, www.nargs.org, are $25; for an additional $12.50, the society gives its members 25 seed packets --30 for those who donate seeds.
The Primrose Society, www.americanprimrosesoc.org, membership $25, offers members seeds at 50 cents a packet, with a limit of 25.
The North American Lily Society, www.lilies.org, membership starting at $10, issues members quarterly bulletins and free seed packets.
CUTTINGS
