AN air of self-consciousness hangs over ''Fit to Be Tied,'' the comedy by Nicky Silver that has taken up residence at the 12 Miles West Theater Company. Yes, it's absurd and unpredictable, but you can feel it working to be those things. Which makes it merely funny rather than hilarious.
Mr. Silver himself is in part to blame; his other plays, like ''The Food Chain,'' have set the absurdity bar so high that ''over the top'' is almost unattainable. But there is an odd restraint to the performances here as well.
''Fit to Be Tied,'' which was staged at Playwrights Horizons in Manhattan in 1996, is about Arloc (Geoff Wilson), a gay man who has mother issues, intimacy issues, all kinds of issues. When he was 12, his mother, Nessa (Gloria Falzer), sued him, unsuccessfully, over an inheritance left him by his father. These days their relationship is a bit odd, to say the least.
Nessa is eager to leave her current husband, Carl (V. Gene Myers), but picks an inopportune time to do so; she arrives at Arloc's house, newly liberated, only to find a man named Boyd (Jason Romas) there, bound and gagged in a chair.
Boyd, who plays an angel in the Radio City Christmas Spectacular, has essentially been kidnapped by Arloc. ''This is my first foray into the world of sadomasochism,'' Arloc says as he's tying Boyd up, ''but how hard could it be?''
With so much willful bizarreness crammed into the first act, you know that Act II will seek to up the ante by jumbling the dynamics, and it does. Not that lunacy for lunacy's sake is the only point here. Throughout the play an unopened envelope sits on a table. It contains the results of an H.I.V. test for Arloc, who has recently learned that his former lover died, presumably of AIDS complications.
Mr. Silver works some occasional magic with this incongruous combination of ridiculousness and dread, but not as effortlessly as in some of his other works. The cast does not do him any favors, often failing to find the mania in the script. Ms. Falzer, though she gets her laughs, seems particularly tentative. ''I'm sorry I exploded,'' she says at one point, but the ''explosion'' consisted merely of saying one line slightly louder than others. Mr. Silver's outlandish potpourri, directed here by Gary Martins, demands more.
The best performance comes in the smallest part, from Mr. Myers. In one droll high point, a rumination on suicide gets sidetracked by a discussion of the inadequacy of grapefruit knives for that task. ''One of these nights I'm going to grab a knife with possibilities,'' he says. It's a nicely pitched performance amid some that are a bit awkward.
''Fit to Be Tied'' is at 12 Miles West Theater Company, 488 Bloomfield Avenue, Montclair, through Feb. 15. Box office: (973)746-7181.
THEATER REVIEW
