The rover Opportunity took its first roll on Martian soil early on Saturday morning, and scientists offered the most tantalizing evidence so far that the landing site once lay in liquid water.
While ice still exists near the poles, most of Mars, including the equatorial region where the Opportunity set down last week, is devoid of water, liquid or frozen. But some scientists believe Mars was warm and wet early in its history and may have possessed an environment where life could have arisen. The $820 million mission of the Opportunity and its twin, the Spirit, is to look for geological signs of liquid water in Mars' distant past.
At a news conference on Saturday at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory here, Dr. Philip Christensen, a professor of geological sciences at Arizona State University, confirmed that an instrument on the Opportunity had detected the iron oxide hematite in the dark pebbles and gravel that dot the landing site.
Furthermore, Dr. Christensen, the lead scientist for the instrument, said, ''I think the preliminary evidence is consistent with hematite forming at low temperatures in chemical reactions with water.''
The instrument, known as the mini-thermal emission spectrometer, looks at infrared light radiated from the rocks and soils. Certain minerals including hematite emit a distinctive mix of infrared light.
One team member, Dr. Wendy M. Calvin, said Friday morning that hematite had been discovered at the Opportunity landing site, but the leaders of the science mission did not confirm it, saying more checking was required. Dr. Christensen said his team finished its analysis on Friday afternoon.
Hematite that forms at low temperatures from sediments at the bottom of a lake or sea has a noticeably different infrared signature than hematite that forms out of hot lava without water. Dr. Christensen said that the infrared data argued against the hot lava explanation.
Hematite is what drew scientists to this location, Meridiani Planum, flat plains near the equator. From orbit, the Mars Odyssey spacecraft spotted a deposit of hematite the size of Oklahoma blanketing Meridiani Planum, but it could not tell whether the hematite was in the soil or the rocks or elsewhere. The Opportunity was sent to investigate, and researchers hope to learn not only where exactly the hematite is, but also its origin.
Already, the infrared instrument has provided some clues.
While the pebbles and gravel contain hematite, the fine reddish soil below does not. The exposed, light-colored bedrock 20 feet from the Opportunity is also hematite free. Dr. Christensen said the pebbles must have come from a rock layer, not yet seen, above the light-colored bedrock that had eroded away into pebbles. ''It's got to be there somewhere, and if we're lucky, we'll find it,'' Dr. Christensen said.
Scientists will soon have a better look.
At 4:50 a.m. Saturday, the Opportunity made its first drive, methodically rolling 10 feet off the front of its lander, its six wheels then digging into the dirt. It will sit there for the next few days, conducting experiments on the soil beneath it, before moving on to the bedrock.
At present, the scientists have no idea what the bedrock is made of. ''All I can say at the moment is what it's not,'' Dr. Christensen said. The instrument readings showed no hematite, no quartz, no carbonates.
A suite of instruments that the Opportunity will press against the rocks should tell more about the minerals there. For instance, if scientists find goethite -- essentially hematite with trapped water -- that would strengthen the argument for past water.
For the trip to Mars, the Opportunity was folded up to fit within a triangular pyramid. After the landing last Sunday, the pyramid opened like flower petals, forming a platform, and over the next week, controllers extended the Opportunity's wheels, turned on instruments and tested equipment. The testing and deployment went so smoothly that mission managers decided to begin driving early, on Saturday, the Opportunity's seventh day on Mars.
''I think we're getting kind of good at this,'' said Joel Krajewski, chief engineer in charge of the rovers' initial preparations on the Martian surface.
By contrast, Spirit, which landed on the opposite side of Mars three weeks before the Opportunity, did not start its drive until its 12th day. With Spirit, air bags used to cushion the landing blocked the forward exit ramp -- a piece of reinforced fabric -- so controllers swiveled it by 120 degrees to drive off a different ramp. The Opportunity has no such obstacles.
''This is a cake walk by comparison,'' said Kevin Burke, the lead mechanical engineer for handling the lander exits. ''Realistically, it's pretty benign.''
On Friday, engineers rehearsed the roll-off at a test laboratory at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which is running the rover missions.
To ease the exit, controllers had pushed down the back ''petal'' of the Opportunity's landing platform, pitching the rover forward at an angle of 12 degrees. In the test, the engineers put full-scale mock-ups of the rover and lander in a similar pose, like a swimmer about to jump off a diving board.
The mock-up rover moved off the mock-up lander without incident -- in the 536th and final rolloff test in the last year -- to a round of applause from onlookers.
Morning of the seventh Martian day for the real Opportunity began at 11:05 p.m. Friday, accompanied in the control room by the playing of Bruce Springsteen's ''Born to Run.'' Four hours later, at 3:26 a.m. Saturday, with the sun close to noon over Meridiani Planum, Mr. Burke issued the commands for the Opportunity to move. Eleven minutes and 128 million miles later, the message reached the Opportunity. At 4:50 a.m., the rover started moving and traversed 10 feet in 83 seconds, veering slightly to the right. A few minutes later, controllers received the beep from the Opportunity that it had received and performed the commands.
''The vehicle should be already on the surface at this time,'' said Jim Erickson, the mission manager. In the control room, another song: ''Going Mobile'' from the Who.
Finally, at 6:02 a.m. came the final confirmation: a photograph from the Opportunity. ''Two for two,'' said Chris Lewicki, the flight director, referring to the successful deployments of the Spirit and Opportunity. ''One dozen wheels on soil.''
