Students at Stuyvesant High School in Lower Manhattan can choose from an impressive variety of foreign language classes. Besides the French, German and Spanish courses that are standard at most high schools, Stuyvesant students can take Mandarin, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Korean and Latin.
But for the school's growing number of Muslim students, something is missing.
''It would have been a cool option if we had had Arabic,'' said Naazia Husain, a senior who grew up speaking Arabic but has never studied it formally. ''Given this increased interest in the Arab world, it would be a sign that our school offers something great.''
So this school year, Ms. Husain and others in the school's 40-member Muslim Student Association decided to push for an Arabic program. Rolf Schwagermann, an assistant principal who supervises the school's foreign language department, liked the idea, but said the students would have to show sufficient interest among their classmates, find a qualified teacher and raise $20,000 for class materials and curriculum development.
The first part was easy. In a school of about 3,000 students, Ms. Husain and her co-organizers collected 400 signatures from those who said they might be interested in Arabic.
Amassing $20,000 has been harder. Three years ago, when students and parents pushed for Korean to be taught at the school, they raised the money and found a teacher. But there was a difference.
''That initiative definitely came from the parents,'' Dr. Schwagermann said. ''From my experience, this is the first time it's a student initiative with the students really doing the work.''
After soliciting donations from parents, with some success, and from foundations and universities, with little success, the students turned to mosques in their communities. So far they have raised about half the money, including $2,700 from a mosque in Queens, the Jamaica Muslim Center, and they plan to approach other mosques.
Finding a teacher is another hurdle because as Dr. Schwagermann pointed out, the pool of qualified teachers is small. But the pool of students who might take Arabic is large, Ms. Husain said, noting that 90 percent of those who signed the petition were not of Arab descent.
''It would really make the school more open-minded,'' she said. ''Through Arabic you would learn something positive about the Middle East and Islam, something that would give people a better opinion, perhaps, of Muslims and Arabs.''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK SCHOOLS
