PATRIOTS OFFENSIVE LINE VS. PANTHERS DEFENSIVE LINE
Tampa Bay defensive tackle Warren Sapp mocked the Patriots' offensive line last week, which drew a rebuke from Tom Brady. But even Bill Belichick calls the Panthers' defensive line scary. There's a reason for that. Kris Jenkins, below, is one of the game's most dominant defensive tackles and Julius Peppers (7 sacks) and Mike Rucker (12 sacks) are premier pass rushers. The defensive line accounted for 32.5 of the Panthers' 40 sacks in 2003, the second-highest total for a defensive front in the league, behind Miami. Charlie Weis, the Patriots' offensive coordinator, said that there is no weak link to attack.
Why did Sapp belittle the Patriots' line? Perhaps because there is not one Pro Bowl selection on it, because a rookie is starting at center (Dan Koppen), because a second-year player who did not make his first career start until the end of September starts at right tackle (Tom Ashworth) and because now that Damien Woody is out with a knee injury, Russ Hochstein, who began the season on the practice squad, is starting at left guard. It is an anonymous but remarkably functional group, particularly at protecting Tom Brady for the quick, short passes that are the lifeblood of the offense.
PANTHERS OFFENSIVE LINE VS. PATRIOTS DEFENSIVE LINE
The Panthers had a record-setting season in pass protection and blocking for the run. Their 2,091 yards rushing was a team single-season record and their 26 sacks allowed were five fewer than the previous team record. Against the Eagles in the conference championship game, the offensive line did not allow a sack for the 10th time this season, and the Panthers ran for 155 yards, the second time this postseason that they ran for more than 150 yards.
The beauty of the Patriots' defensive line is its flexibility. The base defense is a 3-4, with the mammoth run stuffer Ted Washington at nose tackle and Richard Seymour, one of the best defensive linemen in the game, at end. But sometimes the Patriots will use only two down linemen, as they did against Indianapolis, and you'll see linebackers Willie McGinest or Mike Vrabel in a three-point stance. Vrabel led the team with 9.5 sacks.
JUDY BATTISTA
