THE symphony orchestra is endangered, and only adventurous young music directors can save it. At least that's one widespread take on the current situation. Podiums must be turned over to a new generation of conductors who could bring new vigor, coziness with living composers and sympathy for contemporary culture into concert halls. Seasoned maestros, however much we venerate them, must step aside.
Maybe these old-school maestros are not up to the task of running modern-day orchestras during economically challenging times, but musically they can still deliver. Some of the most galvanizing orchestra performances that New Yorkers have been privileged to hear in recent weeks have come from veteran conductors.
On Jan. 13 the German maestro Wolfgang Sawallisch, 80 and in frail health, led the Philadelphia Orchestra at Carnegie Hall in a spacious, calmly authoritative and altogether mesmerizing performance of Bruckner's daunting Fifth Symphony. Mr. Sawallisch stepped down as the orchestra's music director at the end of last season, ceding the post to Christoph Eschenbach, who is himself 63 but has more vitality than most musicians half his age. Still, it was clear from this performance that the devoted players are eager to have Mr. Sawallisch return as long and as often as he can.
On Jan. 21 Colin Davis, looking distinguished and chipper at 76, conducted the last of three arresting programs with the London Symphony Orchestra. The series had begun three days earlier with Britten's ''Peter Grimes,'' a concert performance so viscerally dramatic that even the tenor Glenn Winslade's vocally troubled account of the title role hardly diminished the overall impact. The orchestra, self-governing and historically feisty, celebrates its centenary this year, and Sir Colin has been its principal conductor since 1995. The players and administrators will not hear a word about his stepping down.
Meanwhile, Kurt Masur, also 76, the music director emeritus of the New York Philharmonic, returned to conduct three series of concerts, which ended on Jan. 24. The performance level varied, but in scores Mr. Masur lays special claim to -- Mendelssohn's ''Scottish'' Symphony, Max Reger's Variations and Fugue on a Theme of Mozart -- he drew elemental and tautly exciting playing from the Philharmonic musicians.
This achievement was all the more impressive given the history of tension between Mr. Masur and the orchestra during his 11 years as music director. Many players have openly complained that Mr. Masur's manner was imposing, intolerant and even abusive. That tension may have undermined some of the recent performances. The playing of Schumann's ''Rhenish'' Symphony, for example, had character and rectitude but lacked grace and elegance.
Yet a hard-driving conductor unafraid of antagonizing players can sometimes achieve real musical intensity, much like the fearsome coach in the N.F.L. who pushes a team mercilessly -- all the way to the Super Bowl. Vince Lombardi's bullying of the Green Bay Packers would have made George Szell's relentless disciplining of the Cleveland Orchestra look like pussyfooting.
As orchestras, of necessity, begin to look more seriously at the new generation of conductors, what is to be learned from the recent New York appearances of these venerable maestros? The more time I spend in this field, the more I appreciate self-effacing performances that do not signal, ''Here is my interpretation,'' in bold letters. Great conductors in their maturity can often achieve that quality of masterly repose. That was certainly the hallmark of Mr. Sawallisch's Bruckner. Here was a musician so steeped in the music, so attuned to its intricacies, ethos and spiritual essence that he could sit back and allow the performance to happen.
Though Sir Colin has attained the same sureness, there is more to the story of his recent successes. In his youth he was a firebrand, with passionate enthusiasms for composers he thought underappreciated, especially Berlioz and Sibelius. Yet his work also had a quality of English reserve. In whole swaths of repertory, like the Beethoven and Brahms symphonies, the reserve won out. But in the last decade his firebrand side has come to the fore again, and the independent-minded players of the London Symphony have responded.
Sir Colin explained in a recent radio interview on WNYC that when he first conducted the London Symphony in 1959, it was an all-male ensemble with a ''tough, aggressive virtuoso sound.'' It was ''full of extraordinary characters,'' he added, and conductors ''were pretty scared of them.'' But eventually ''the ladies were allowed in,'' he said, ''and music was reinstated as the principal activity of the orchestra.''
Offering generalizations that many women may find sexist, Sir Colin explained that ''women have a civilizing influence on rowdy young men,'' and they play ''with more flexibility and sweeter sound.'' (Please direct all letters to the offices of the London Symphony.)
Whatever the reasons, the orchestra has mellowed, Sir Colin has been re-energized, and the partnership is poised to rank among the legendary pairings in history, on a par with, say, Herbert von Karajan and the Berlin Philharmonic. Sir Colin's Jan. 21 program consisted of Beethoven's Eighth Symphony, in a bracing performance that made this bumptious work seem no laughing matter, and Stravinsky's ''Firebird,'' in a blazing account by turns hauntingly still and rapturously wild. This familiar score sounded as audacious as it must have when introduced by the Ballets Russes in Paris in 1910.
That Sir Colin led such a probing and rhapsodic performance of Sibelius's Fifth Symphony in a Jan. 19 program devoted to that composer's music was no surprise. This work has long been a specialty of his. But who would have expected the elusive tone poem ''En Saga'' to be so involving? Sir Colin encouraged the players to embrace the music's strangeness, as when those weird violin arpeggios go on and on while a soulful and oblivious melody threads through the winds.
In another telling comment on WNYC, Sir Colin said that in conducting Sibelius, ''you've got to lose yourself in the dark recesses'' of his imagination.
''Frankly,'' he added, ''I think it's worth it.''
It's easy to imagine Mr. Sawallisch saying much the same about Bruckner, Brahms or Schumann.
Mr. Masur faced a bigger challenge at the Philharmonic, where many players have publicly proclaimed his successor, Lorin Maazel, a welcome relief. Conducting three subscription series in a row, Mr. Masur had to accommodate several star soloists. He seemed genuinely inspired by the brilliant young violinist Sarah Chang's white-hot playing in Shostakovich's punishing Violin Concerto No. 1. He also drew fetching colors and hazy textures from the orchestra in Henri Dutilleux's ''Sur le Même Accord,'' a nocturne for violin and orchestra, played with sumptuous sound and subdued intensity by Anne-  Sophie Mutter. She and Mr. Masur gave the premiere of this work with the London Philharmonic in 2002, and it clearly meant much to them to have the composer present on his 88th birthday for its American premiere.
That same program, however, offered an unfortunate account of Beethoven's Triple Concerto, for piano, violin and cello. Mr. Masur seemed determined to convince listeners that this work, considered subpar Beethoven by some, has real nobility and inventiveness. But his efforts were undermined by the pianism of André Previn, one of the soloists. If there are compensating qualities for Mr. Previn's smudgy fingerwork, they were not evident here. Indeed, his playing seemed to rattle Ms. Mutter, his wife, who lapsed into rare instances of shaky intonation. The cellist Lynn Harrell also seemed uneasy; his playing was forceful and gruff.
Historically, the New York Philharmonic has been a recalcitrant and hard-to-please band. For example, though the players respect and work productively with Sir Colin, who conducts them regularly, they have never played for him with the palpable involvement of the London Symphony musicians. Maybe the chemistry just isn't right. But formidable musicianship and sheer determination can trump good chemistry, as Mr. Masur has proved again.
There is no reason to doubt that the Philharmonic musicians are as happy with Mr. Maazel as they say they are. With his phenomenal technique and his comprehensive knowledge of the orchestral repertory, he makes life easy for players. Yet it sometimes seems that just because he has the skill to control every element of a performance -- dynamics, pacing, articulation, balance, texture -- he can't resist doing so. He is no self-effacing interpreter. Especially in the standard repertory -- the symphonies of Beethoven, Tchaikovsky and the like -- his interpretations can seem proudly self-conscious.
The Philharmonic is almost certain to announce soon that Mr. Maazel's four-year contract, which ends in 2006, will be extended for two years. The orchestra has finally begun to form productive working relationships with several younger conductors. But unwilling to take any chances, it has yet to find a successor who suits it.
Meanwhile, New Yorkers can hope that these aging master conductors will keep visiting.
MUSIC
