Roger and Debbie Clemens dropped by. So did the Hilton sisters, Nicky and Paris, the American Idol runner-up Clay Aiken and the wrestler The Rock. And at midnight everyone pulled up chairs over the covered-up swimming pool and listened to Willie Nelson sing.
''Amazing what a football game will do for a guest list,'' said John Thrash, who turned a little family natural gas business into the giant eCorp.
On Friday night Mr. Thrash and his wife, Becca Cason Thrash, one of the city's most indefatigable hostesses, opened their mansion for 500 guests to team up with the Olympian Carl Lewis and Anthony Kennedy Shriver (yes, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's brother-in-law) to help their charity, Best Buddies, raise money for people with mental disabilities.
It has been that kind of week in Houston, where they gave a party and everyone came. By Friday, 450 private planes were parked nose to nose (to save space) on taxiways and a spare runway at Hobby Airport before the field was closed to new arrivals. Hundreds more planes were expected at Ellington Field and Bush Intercontinental.
Earlier in the week there was celebrity poker and, cocktails in Houston's own Versailles with the city's restaurant czar, Tillman J. Fertitta, and guests like George and Barbara Bush. And there was a rappers summit session with hip-hop stars and Beyoncé, who will sing the national anthem at the Super Bowl on Sunday.
So many rappers called for their preferred drink, Roederer Cristal Champagne, that supplies dried up. But Spec's, which calls itself the world's largest spirits store (22 checkout aisles) offered a six-liter bottle from a special year 2000 production for $20,000. At that tidy sum, there were no immediate takers.
In a town where hosts and hostesses regularly knock themselves out with old-fashioned Texas hospitality, the Super Bowl has brought out, if not always the best, unquestionably the most.
''People come to Texas expecting a lot of hospitality, and hosts try to treat them well,'' said Jackson Hicks, a leading caterer known as the Prince of Parties whose staff of 300 churned out back-to-back dinners for thousands of National Football League players, owners and friends.
Mr. Hicks's apotheosis came Saturday night at his catering hall, The Corinthian, in Houston's revitalized downtown, where Playboy had booked its fifth annual Super Bowl party, one of the week's hottest tickets.
Themed parties are popular here, and Playboy went with Heaven and Hell, asking guests to choose angelic or devilish attire. Mr. Hicks selected the food and drink accordingly, white desserts upstairs and dark spicy fare and chocolate below.
Hugh Hefner was otherwise engaged, publicists said, but 10 Playmates and dozens of celebrities and 1,700 others were invited to help support a silent auction benefiting an N.F.L. charity, Athletes Helping Kids.
Big is good in Houston. This, after all, is a city that in little more than 30 years built three ballparks, the Astrodome, Minute Maid Park and Reliant Stadium, and partied through dizzying roller-coaster cycles of bust and boom. For the 150th anniversary of Houston and the 25th anniversary of the Johnson Space Center in 1986, a laser show projected on downtown buildings by the French musician Jean Michel Jarre turned the city into a vast artist's canvas that brought traffic screeching to a stop.
And Houstonians extravagantly feted visitors to the World Economic Summit session in 1990 and the Republican National Convention two years later.
But the Super Bowl, just about everyone agrees, is an occasion apart.
The crush of superstars brought its own problems. Jerry Vann, a backstage manager and celebrity-handler who has been called ''concierge to the world,'' got a call from the musician Sammy Hagar, who had run out of his favorite tequila, Cabo Wabo. Mr. Vann found a bottle.
Not everyone was in chic salons. Thousands poured into downtown for free band concerts and pub-crawls.
''I've been working on 16 or 18 parties,'' said Richard W. Flowers, chief operating officer of the Events Company and one of the city's leading party impresarios. ''Houston is a generous town,'' he said, ''and people compete to stand out.''
As a division of Landry's Restaurants, which operates some 300 restaurants nationwide, Mr. Flowers's company kicked off the week of high entertaining by helping Landry's founder, Mr. Fertitta, stage an elaborate thank-you for 200 local Super Bowl backers and N.F.L. leaders, including Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
Mr. Fertitta's home in River Oaks, a palatial place of 19,000 square feet on 5.4 acres listed on the tax rolls as Houston's second-most expensive residential property at $13.7 million, became a Versailles for the occasion. French wall panels were hurriedly put up around the car park, to house 200 diners when the weather turned unexpectedly chilly.
How did he get George and Barbara Bush in for cocktails?
''I asked them,'' Mr. Fertitta said, calling Houston ''a box of 50,000 people'' who all know each other, although it did not hurt, he allowed, to have raised money for Mr. Bush, as he did later for President Bill Clinton.
After dinner, guests were invited across the compound to the tennis courts, where Mr. Flowers had created a Wild West saloon, complete with faux steer heads and cow hide seating, to hear the country singer Clay Walker while streamers were shot from the stage into the audience.
Mr. Fertitta was ebullient. ''You should see my Mardi Gras party in Galveston,'' he said. ''It's amazing.''
