The state Department of Transportation's excellent, forward-looking project to improve capacity, energy efficiency and safety on the 40 miles of the Long Island Expressway from Suffolk County into Queens is nearing completion. As a transportation engineer and planner, and as a Long Islander, I am pleased to see that this major capital program generally incorporates elements like high-occupancy vehicle lanes (to optimize people-carrying capacity), improved clearances and shoulders (for safety and quicker handling of incidents), relocated ramps (to reduce what transit types call ''weaving conflicts'') and environmental features (e.g., plantings and recharge basins).
I am very concerned, however, to see that the New York City section, from the city line to a point west of the Cross-Island Parkway, does not include H.O.V. lanes and shoulders.
By facilitating higher people-carrying per vehicle, H.O.V. lanes are an important element of energy-efficiency programs. The project's H.O.V. lanes are already in operation in Suffolk and Nassau, and they would be even more effective if they were continued to the first major intersecting highway in the city, the Cross-Island Parkway.
But even more troubling than the lack of H.O.V. lanes is the complete omission of shoulders in the New York City section. With modern planning, design and construction techniques, shoulders could have been provided without moving the existing service roads. In fact, the four new bridges over the Expressway (the Cloverdale Boulevard pedestrian overpass, East Hampton Boulevard, Douglaston Parkway and Marathon Parkway) all have spans long enough to accommodate the travel lanes plus shoulders. The completed construction, however, has barriers at the edge of the travel lanes, so any disabled vehicles, or police vehicles, will have to stop in the right lane, blocking traffic and risking being rear-ended. Also, before the current construction, there were three lanes and a shoulder in each direction throughout this section, including under the bridges. For this roadway-land use situation it seems, and is, illogical to provide added lanes while removing shoulders.
I applaud the Transportation Department for working with the involved communities and interest groups to apply design guidelines flexibility, aiming to minimize environmental and/or socioeconomic impacts. But in this case, it appears that the negotiations with local interests resulted in serious functional disadvantages, even though the guidelines could have been met without significant community impacts or unreasonable costs.
Whatever the underlying background, the end result is that the New York City section of the expressway will have less capacity and safety as compared with the Suffolk and Nassau sections. While it may be too late to correct the difficulties now built into this expressway section, it is my hope that future programs will be able to retain key features, like shoulders, while remaining responsive to community needs.
Leon Goodman  Searingtown
