IN novels like ''I'll Take It,'' movies like ''In &amp; Out'' and especially plays like ''Jeffrey'' and ''The Most Fabulous Story Ever Told,'' Paul Rudnick has taken an openly gay theatrical sensibility into the mainstream more successfully than any comic writer could have imagined possible even 10 years ago. In his new play, ''Valhalla,'' which opens on Thursday at New York Theater Workshop in the East Village, Mr. Rudnick brings that sensibility to a new realm, literally: ''Valhalla'' stars Peter Frechette as mad King Ludwig of Bavaria, the notoriously insatiable aesthete who in the mid-1800's bankrupted his treasury by building (among other follies now adored) fairy-tale castles, underground grottoes and the Festspielhaus at Bayreuth. In his own mad castle -- a downtown loft so encrusted with Gothic froufrou you would not be surprised if King Ludwig himself were the decorator -- I spoke to Mr. Rudnick about recent developments in gay theater, and his role in it.
JESSE GREEN
JESSE GREEN -- Not long ago, any play with gay content was out to shock you or, worse, teach you a lesson. Whereas in ''Valhalla,'' you have two flagrantly homosexual main characters whose gayness is nevertheless secondary. Call it post-gay theater, even though the basic setting is a pre-gay world.
PAUL RUDNICK -- Pre-label.
GREEN -- Because you're really interested in something beyond that, right?
RUDNICK -- I've had a lifelong fascination with Ludwig. Why do his castles -- one is the model for the Magic Kingdom castle at Disneyland -- remain touchstones for so many people from every gender preference group and walk of life?
GREEN -- Over-the-top gay taste becoming as mainstream as you can get.
RUDNICK -- Exactly. There's a common chord of fantasy that Ludwig continues to strike. And I wanted to see how Ludwig's life would ultimately illuminate a seemingly disconnected character -- a gay kid from Texas in the 1940's.
GREEN -- James Avery is an outrageous invention: sexually unbridled in a way we don't associate with that time and place. In an old-fashioned play he would have committed suicide or been murdered; here, he gets his man and his dance number and, thanks to World War II, a chance to see Ludwig's treasures.
RUDNICK -- Some American soldiers would steal the precious artworks they found during the war and sell them on the black market. But what I wanted to explore was not so much the profiteering as the idea of what contact with that level of European culture and that scale of beauty might do to a small-town American kid.
GREEN -- So your real subject is the demands and dangers of beauty. It's a gay thing, but not only a gay thing. The word gay is never even used.
RUDNICK -- Once. Seeing how Ludwig created this gorgeous, garlanded cavern filled with flowers and swan boats and an artificial lake, one of the characters comments, ''It's like nature if God was gay.'' I couldn't resist.
GREEN -- So is gayness to be seen as normal or spectacular?
RUDNICK -- Gayness is as endlessly and intimately varied as any other aspect of humanity.
GREEN -- Ludwig and James are almost lunatic in their passion for beauty. Did they have to be gay to make that work?
RUDNICK -- Not necessarily, but I do consider those things to be a form of gay soul. And what the world is more and more coming to realize is that so many people of every gender persuasion share it.
GREEN -- Is that a change, or are we just acknowledging something that was always so?
RUDNICK -- I think it was always so, but it often was disguised. If you look at a Broadway show like ''The Boy From Oz,'' Peter Allen is a fascinating cultural figure because he's someone who could only have existed at a certain seam in pop culture development. Here was a man, who while never openly gay, managed to marry a gay icon, be the son-in-law of one of the greatest gay icons of all time and use his sexuality to seduce a mass audience. He's a real bridge between Paul Lynde and Larry Kramer.
GREEN -- Why do you think straight audiences are going? It can't only be to see Hugh Jackman take his shirt off, because how many times can that excite you enough to pay $100?
RUDNICK -- Science hasn't determined that yet. Still being studied.
GREEN -- O.K., then how would you describe the appeal of the gayness of that show -- an appeal that's strong enough to keep a mediocre piece of work running at least as long as Jackman is in it?
RUDNICK -- Whoever plays that role has access to an enormous flamboyance. Often, musical theater tends to belong to female performers because they're allowed a far greater emotional range. They can belt. They can weep and recover. Curly in ''Oklahoma!'' and Harold Hill in ''The Music Man'' are somewhat restrained characters. But a character like Peter Allen gives you access to all of those Dolly, Mame, Mama Rose emotions.
GREEN -- ''Oz'' is only one example in a season notable for gay material being marketed to general audiences. Let's talk about a few others. ''I Am My Own Wife,'' about the German transvestite Charlotte von Mahlsdorf: I enjoyed it but found myself asking, especially since it moved to Broadway, ''Will anybody who is not attuned to gay issues come to this play?''
RUDNICK -- It's lunacy to imagine that a play can only speak to your personal experience. In that case, every play would have to be set in your living room.
GREEN -- Still, one of the things gay people learn to do at a very young age is to read an allegory for themselves into what may not be a gay play at all. It's a little hard to do in ''Fiddler,'' but----
RUDNICK -- Oh, I don't know. I found that New Jersey bore a strong resemblance to Anatevka. Although, of course, I was far happier to leave.
GREEN -- But with a play like ''I Am My Own Wife,'' can a straight audience now do the same thing? Can they see a gay play and understand the connections to their own lives?
RUDNICK -- Straight audiences aren't required so much to identify as to relax. A great character is a great character. Very few people watch Blanche Du Bois or Richard II and immediately think, ''That's me.'' It's the entertainment factor that's crucial. Audiences will accept almost anything if they're being amused, seduced. And we must pay tribute to the grand tradition of American sexual hypocrisy. People love to be shocked and titillated, and gayness has provided that particular service lately.
GREEN -- Was ''Take Me Out,'' in which the cocky baseball player and his accountant were the only two gay characters, a gay play?
RUDNICK -- Harvey Fierstein years ago asked if a gay play was a play that sleeps with other plays. But ''Take Me Out'' is a wonderful example of, literally, something for everyone. And the gayness was useful because, again, it provided access to the wider emotional range that conventional heterosexual men have been discouraged from expressing.
GREEN -- How about ''Taboo,'' the Broadway musical about club kids in 1980's London? When I saw it, there were a lot of young people in the audience. Gay or straight, they didn't seem in the least bit troubled by the gayness.
RUDNICK -- Kids are far less concerned with the sexuality of characters. And ''Taboo'' makes the gay characters cool. Though, in a certain sense, gayness has become so respectable that it's square.
GREEN -- Does that mean in 10 years -- or in one year -- gay material will be stale?
RUDNICK -- There's more to do after the novelty wears off. When the dam breaks, you get early plays of recognition, where the simple fact of seeing your life as a gay person, as an African-American, as an Asian-American onstage, is thrilling. But then there are endless progressions beyond that. Now that you have access to these characters, to these subject matters, you can go everywhere. It's why there are so many exciting gay playwrights now who couldn't possibly be grouped as only gay playwrights. Probably the only thing they share is a mild irritation at being called gay playwrights. Actually, I think it's perfectly fine to be called a gay playwright as long as you refer to David Mamet and Arthur Miller and Sam Shepard as straight playwrights, because, Lord knows, they are.
GREEN -- Especially David Mamet.
RUDNICK -- But even he wrote a lesbian-themed play, ''Boston Marriage.'' I thought: ''Has he no decency? Hands off, buddy!''
GREEN -- But I'm more interested in Mamet's take on gay issues than in some gay playwrights' takes. I found ''The Last Sunday in June,'' a sort of updated ''Boys in the Band'' that ran Off Broadway last summer, almost incestuously gay.
RUDNICK -- I call it a living newspaper. You want to see what they're wearing, how they're living, how does it compare to your life. And I think that's a valid assumption for a play.
GREEN -- That doesn't make for crossover appeal, which may be why the show never made the talked-about move to Broadway.
RUDNICK -- The gay audience alone is not sizable enough to create a ''Lord of the Rings''-type hit. What am I saying? ''Lord of the Rings'' is the gayest piece of material I've ever seen. I mean, what's going on with those hobbits? They all shared a bed in the first movie and only one of them seemed to have a wife. And that whole Frodo scenario seems like something better left to the Internet. Anyway, it's a sad myth that all gay people go to the theater. If only! Some of them just like to play golf and watch TV.
GREEN -- At the other end of that spectrum were two musicals with major gay content. ''Zanna, Don't!'' was about a high school in which heterosexuals were the closeted minority. And ''Avenue Q'' is a Muppet show for slackers. Pure escapist fantasies.
RUDNICK -- You could imagine either of them being performed in every high school and college in America.
GREEN -- Really? ''Avenue Q'' is much less gay but there is consensual puppet sex. Whereas ''Zanna, Don't!'' -- flaming though it was -- was squeaky clean and couldn't make it financially.
RUDNICK -- I think it will be done everywhere. It's a mistake for those of us who live on the coast to condescend to the people we fly over. They don't want to keep doing ''Arsenic and Old Lace'' every year. Curiosity is far more potent than it's given credit for, especially sexual curiosity.
GREEN -- So that's one trajectory for what we've been calling gay theater: total mainstreaming, for better or worse.
RUDNICK -- Well, you only have equal rights when you have equal trash.
GREEN -- How did all this happen so fast?
RUDNICK -- I'm tempted to refer to it as a bloodless revolution, but it's not, because so much is a result of the AIDS epidemic. There was this enormous and hideous price to be paid for this particular explosion. But it was also enormously overdue.
GREEN -- So if gayness gets exhausted as a mine for stories, where will you go next?
RUDNICK -- As if heterosexual stories could be exhausted! One of the reasons I wrote ''Valhalla'' is that there are so many gay stories that haven't been told. We've barely scratched the surface of these lives -- and now we get to get our greasy, lavender paws all over them.
GREEN -- Do you foresee a day when a straight -- nongay -- play can't get on Broadway?
RUDNICK -- God willing.
THEATER
