ASIAN composers have in recent years devised ingenious ways to pull elements of their native traditional music into their scores. But Ichiro Nodaira, the featured composer in a festival presented next weekend by Music From Japan, couldn't care less.
In fact, Mr. Nodaira makes a convincing case that even in music composition, it's perfectly possible to study Western practices, and then go out and beat us at our own game. Having spent a dozen formative years in Paris (1978-90), where he composed at the computer-music studio Ircam and served as pianist for the Ensemble Intercontemporain, Mr. Nodaira, 50, has so thoroughly internalized Western music that he coolly resolves problems most composers either shrug off as too profound to deal with or don't even know they have.
His pacing, for example, an uncanny balancing of the inevitable with the unexpected, gives a listener an unusual and palpable sense of overall destination. This might be easy enough to pull off were he something of a pastiche composer, but he is not. No phrase deviates from the inflections of his opening measures. What gives you the impression of being carried farther and farther along into places that, while stylistically consistent, sound utterly new is a careful holding-back of possibilities -- textures, say, and instrumental juxtapositions -- until their moment of maximum impact.
It bespeaks an unusual degree of patience and feel for drama. For if you're just going to let your imagination rip -- and Mr. Nodaira does -- you have to consider the risk that all your inspired textures will eventually cancel themselves out, making your piece sound pretty much the same from beginning to end. True, some composers want this effect; Mr. Nodaira is evidently not among them. He prefers to strike a balance between inventiveness and restraint.
In Tokyo last summer, Mr. Nodaira discussed his years overseas. ''I was influenced by many composers living then in Paris, and played works by Tristan Murail and Gérard Grisey,'' he said, referring to the founders of ''spectral music,'' a method of composing that links form and content to properties of acoustic behavior. ''But I was interested in their thinking, not their compositional techniques.''
''Outdoors'' (2003), Mr. Nodaira's virtuoso suite for solo viola, to be performed by Paul Neubauer at Merkin Concert Hall on Saturday, makes the point. There is no lack of ''alternative'' sonorities -- rapid-fire oscillations between harmonics and ordinary tone production, calibrated bow pressures and contact points -- which leave a listener little time in a zone of security. Yet despite its avant-garde techniques, the piece means to pay homage to Bartok, especially through its rhythmic incisiveness.
Mr. Nodaira's world is hardly limited to establishing a Japanese perspective on European aesthetics. His electric-guitar concerto, ''La Corde de Feu'' (''Fire Chord''), revels in the incongruity of an archetypal American sonority smack in the middle of an orchestra.
Putting on a CD of the work, I was prepared for another of those pieces that try to bridge the gap between rock and symphony. The electric guitar may be indelibly evocative of Jimi Hendrix, but that's only a departure point. Mr. Nodaira is clearly more interested in sound than in culture.
But amplification is no friend of subtlety. The turn-on-a-dime shifts in timbre our ears are accustomed to from acoustic instruments vaporize when amplified. Mr. Nodaira uses this difference to decisive advantage: lo and behold, the electric guitar becomes a point of stability, as the orchestra hurls itself against it. Highly charged collisions of instruments produce riotous colors and swift forays within striking range of the electric guitar's timbres. Assemblages of muted brasses or of clarinets momentarily clarify the wavering guitar notes, then withdraw into their own arguments. The piece feels posited on a beautiful irony, with the orchestra dancing in wildly expressive frenzy around the raging but ultimately circumscribed electronic soloist.
The new chamber works to be heard on Saturday offer different takes on the possibilities of rapid-fire mutations in instrumental relationships. With the piano featured prominently, the range of variation in timbre can go only so far. But Mr. Nodaira plays on the historic imprint of chamber music in our memory to invoke variation of another sort, interweaving traditional practice -- a flute and a piano collaborating on the same musical material -- with episodes in which the two instruments hurtle down divergent paths.
''Because I am a pianist, because I play mostly classical music, I am interested in the relationship between transcription and composition,'' Mr. Nodaira said in connection with his current work. ''I want to explore the differences.'' In recent years he has done just that, creating works that initially preserve the melody lines of Bach, then proceed through broader transformations to undermine what is recognizable.
Toward the end of his residency at Ircam, Mr. Nodaira composed ''Quatorze Écarts Vers le Défi'' (''Fourteen Deviations to the Challenge''), scored for chamber ensemble and electronics, and now available on a Fontec CD. To my ear, it ranks among the most elegant achievements ever created in the electronic-acoustic medium. But after he returned to Japan, his attention turned away from electronics -- to Beethoven. Recently he has sought some unification of the two, through works that subject fragments of Beethoven piano sonatas to electronic modulation.
Speaking of Beethoven, the Japanese label Live Notes recently released Mr. Nodaira's recordings of 21 of the piano sonatas.
Music From Japan  Merkin Concert Hall  Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 2 p.m.
MUSIC Matthias Kriesberg is a composer in residence at the Center for Research in Computing and the Arts at the University of California, San Diego.
