For a generation, Indonesian journalists knew better than to write about business and government corruption. The country's dictator, Suharto, would close down the publication and throw the editor or reporter in jail.
The dictator is gone -- five years now -- and news organizations are still trying to find their role in a democracy, at times indulging in unbridled excess. But in a country that is widely viewed by the World Bank and foreign businessmen as among the most corrupt, the rich and powerful have a new tactic in their battle against the press: libel actions.
The latest verdict, in late January, stunned many Indonesians. A court ordered one of the country's most respected newspapers, Koran Tempo, to pay $1 million to a prominent businessman, Tomy Winata.
The judges said the newspaper had insulted Mr. Winata by suggesting that he had sought a casino license in one province and might be looking at another location for one. Gambling is illegal here.
In carefully chosen language, the American Embassy expressed concern about the verdict. ''We respect the Tempo media group's professionalism and the role it plays in upholding this nation's democratic principles,'' Ambassador Ralph L. Boyce said. ''Without publications like Koran Tempo, the ongoing process of democratic reform in Indonesia would be endangered.''
The future of Tempo, shut down twice by Suharto, is very much in doubt because of the financial burden imposed by the verdict.
''We may be called the 'late Tempo,' '' said Bambang Harymurti, the 47-year-old editor of Tempo Group, which includes Koran Tempo, an Indonesian-language daily, and an English-language weekly magazine, Tempo, which was started by democracy advocates in 1971. Legal fees alone last year were equivalent to one month's salary for all his reporters and editors, Mr. Harymurti said.
Mr. Winata has also filed a criminal action against Mr. Harymurti -- for which he could be sent to jail for up to 10 years if convicted -- for a magazine article linking Mr. Winata to a disastrous fire.
The suits against Tempo are likely to intimidate all journalists in Indonesia, said A. Lin Neumann, Asian program consultant with the Committee to Protect Journalists. ''Tempo is a symbol of press freedom,'' he said. ''It has had a reputation almost from the beginning of being one of the best magazines in Southeast Asia. It is widely respected abroad and in Indonesia.''
The lawsuits have already had a chilling effect. One major newspaper recently settled a libel action against it by a large company by agreeing never to write another word about the company. Tempo was planning a cover story, ''Don't Vote for Corrupt Politicians,'' timed to coming elections. It has decided it is too risky to publish.
Tempo has the look of The Economist, with editorials at the front, but with a heavier investigative orientation. It regularly breaks stories about terrorism, based on leaks from secret interrogations, and it has exposed everything from violence at the government's school of public administration to baby-selling rackets and illegal logging.
This is risky business. Indonesia's libel laws generally favor the plaintiff. Truth is not a defense.
A notoriously corrupt judiciary compounds the problems facing journalists and foreign businessmen here. The average salary for a trial judge is $400 a month; judgments often go to the highest bidder, litigants, businessmen and foreign diplomats say.
Under these circumstances, libel suits flourish.
The governor of East Kalimantan and his lawyer have filed a barrage of lawsuits, civil and criminal, against Hans Vriens, director of the local office of APCO, an international public relations firm based in Washington, over an op-ed article he wrote for The Asian Wall Street Journal. The article, ''Megawati Breaks a Business Impasse,'' described the fight over a 51 percent share of the largest coal mine in Indonesia, which the foreign owners, Rio Tinto and BP, were being required to sell.
Mr. Vriens described the governor, whose name he did not use, as ''determined'' to acquire the interest for the province, but said President Megawati Sukarnoputri had stood up to the governor's ''aggressive tactics'' and had decided that the shares should be divided among the provincial, district and central governments. The governor has also sued The Journal.
