SINCE 1972, when it leased one building in the Trumbull Industrial Park, Unilever, the giant home- and personal-care products company, has been assembling a minivillage of office buildings. Now, a 72,000-square-foot, $23 million addition to one of its five buildings within the park is under construction. It is the final project in establishing divisional headquarters in this 314-year-old town.
Last year, the company decided to move the headquarters from Greenwich to Trumbull, where costs are lower. ''The primary reason,'' said Stacie Nevadomski, director of corporate affairs at Unilever's Trumbull office, ''was to bring our East Coast employees to a single site, minimizing investment and disruption. There was no place to expand in Greenwich, and having a reduction in operating costs will help.''
The addition will accommodate about 1,000 employees working at Unilever sites in Greenwich and in Englewood Cliffs and Edgewater, N.J. When construction of the addition is completed late this year, those workers will join some 600 colleagues who already occupy Unilever buildings in Trumbull. One of their current sites, the 233,757-square-foot headquarters at 33 Benedict Place in Greenwich, is to go on the market in February.
Unilever operates in 88 countries and employs about 258,000. ''We have no need or plans to acquire more real estate,'' Ms. Nevadomski said. ''This will be our personal care, home products and global information office headquarters, while our food headquarters will be based in Englewood.''
Besides the cost reductions accruing from operating under one roof, Unilever will benefit from a tax abatement program initiated by the Town of Trumbull last year. It was established as an incentive for companies to locate and expand here, taking some of the burden off the heavily residential tax base.
There are only 12,200 households scattered across Trumbull's 23 square miles, but commercial development is confined to four sites at the town's northern and southern borders, as mandated by a 40-year-old master plan designed to keep such development under control and away from residential neighborhoods.
To qualify for a 70 percent tax abatement in the first year and 10 percent a year for the next six years, a commercial construction project must have a minimum cost of $15 million, excluding land. Unilever's current combined tax bill for real estate and personal property (which consists of equipment and furnishings) is $1,074,674.
''Our population of 35,000 has been inching up by a thousand or two a year,'' said Raymond Baldwin Jr., a lawyer and a Democrat in his second two-year term as first selectman, the equivalent of mayor, ''but the increase has been among younger residents with school-age children.''
Consequently, a sixth elementary school opened last September, and home building is brisk. Home prices over all have ballooned from an average of about $200,000 only a couple of years ago to $400,000 and upward; prices exceed $1 million in a new development of 83 homes. ''They are sold as fast as they can build them,'' said Stephen Hodson, a realtor and member of the first selectman's economic development team.
Unilever's existing total of 332,000 square feet at Trumbull Industrial Park is in three company-owned buildings: Nos. 40 and 50 Merritt Drive, which were first leased, then purchased; and No. 75 Merritt Drive, which the company built and owns. Unilever also leases a combined total of 112,000 square feet at 45 and 50 Commerce Drive. Together with the new addition, which will be joined to 40 Merritt Drive, the company will have a total of 526,000 feet of office space in the park. To create a cohesive campus atmosphere, it has engaged Kling, a Philadelphia architectural firm, to design a master plan for the five buildings.
Among Unilever's neighbors at the park are Nasdaq, New Horizons, Gartner Group, Avery Worldwide, Connecticut Magazine and the 180,000-square-foot, $32 million Sikorsky Building, a development, support and warehouse center, completed three months ago. Robert Scinto built and owns the building, along with a few parcels of open land, which he will not develop without a leasing commitment from a tenant. Mr. Scinto has built and owns 2.8 million square feet of office space in 30 buildings around the region of Shelton, Fairfield, Bridgeport and Trumbull; nine are in his signature Enterprise Corporate Park in Shelton.
Wearing another hat as head of his economic development team, along with six volunteer members, Mr. Baldwin said, ''when people want to build here, their first stop is my office.''
Target was a recent visitor. Persuaded by the tax abatement and a regional climate friendly to retailers, the big box store has broken ground on a free-standing 125,000-square-foot building behind the Hawley Lane Shopping Center. The older regional mall off Route 8 is near the Stratford border and south of the Trumbull Industrial Park. A Physicians Health Services office building will be demolished to make way for a surface parking lot, and additional parking will be under the Target store. Based on its commercial area, the store is entitled to 625 parking spaces.
Target will become part of a condominium that will include the mall and the new parking lot. The 250,000-square-foot enclosed mall was purchased by National Realty in the early 1980's and has a Kohl's, Home Goods, Hallmark and Dress Barn among some 20 stores and restaurants, including McDonald's and Dunkin' Donuts.
Jerry Birmingham, managing director of development at National Realty's Westchester office, said: ''The town is pro-business. Tenants hang in, and when one does leave, it's replaced quickly.''
Commercial condominiums appear to be having a renaissance for the same reason that buying a house when interest rates are low winds up being more cost-effective than renting, and of course ownership builds equity. That reasoning is being applied at Trefoil Industrial Park at the northern border, where a concentration of medical offices is growing.
The newest arrival is the Trumbull Professional Center, a 93,000-square-foot medical condominium, which broke ground in November at 115 Technology Drive. The first of its three wings is expected to open in the fall, offering doctors and other medical professionals and organizations suites of 1,200 square feet to 10,000 square feet (full floors) for an average purchase price of $200 a square foot at 6.5 percent interest. Each of the 54 suites will have an independent energy-efficient heating, ventilation and air-conditioning system, and there will be more than 400 reserved parking spaces.
The building sits on seven and a half acres out of 17 acres owned by ElDorado Holdings of Westport and Tashua Associates of Trumbull. The remaining acreage is being held for further development. Within the park at 15 Corporate Drive are the Medical Arts Center, Vision Care Center and Bridgeport Oncology. Buildings at 35 and 55 Corporate Drive, which also hold professional offices, are owned by the New Boston Fund. According to local realtors, 80 to 100 acres are available for development in the park.
The last of the four commercial ventures on the outskirts of town is the 1.2-million-square-foot, newly renamed Westfield Shoppingtown, built in the early 60's as the Trumbull Shopping Park. Just off Merritt Parkway Exit 48, it is approached by a long winding entrance drive lined with trees and shrubs. It has 180 small stores and restaurants anchored by Lord &amp; Taylor, Macy's, Filene's and J. C. Penney.
Shopping for household necessities and services is almost entirely confined to a handsome retail center in a complex that adjoins Town Hall and to the Trumbull Shopping Center on White Plains Road.
Mr. Baldwin and his economic development team believe that they can help balance the residential-commercial tax disparity not only with the tax abatement but by allowing a maximum of six stories for new and existing commercial buildings, rather than the current three stories. The proposal will need the approval of town boards.
A state-required revaluation of all town real estate is due in 2005, and values are expected to rise, but taxes, according to the first selectman, probably will not. Trumbull's tax rate, at $27.50 per thousand dollars of assessment is up by about $2 per thousand from last year, but it is still at a midlevel point for Connecticut.
THE town's regulations for maintaining green space and a small-town residential quality of life have been effective, and nobody seems to be talking about losing that ambience. There is a remarkable absence of even a single store, repair shop or gas station on Main Street, the gateway into town off the Merritt Parkway. Both sides of the street are lined with an array of well-kept older homes because retail development is prohibited on all internal roads except in the designated locations.
A new master plan currently in the works is not expected to create additional zones or areas where commercial development can take place. Expansion within existing industrial parks and designated retail areas should suffice for the present, said Mr. Baldwin, adding that ''sometime in the future we may have to make some revisions.''
Controlling residential sprawl is a priority if a balance between residential and commercial real estate is to be achieved. ''We spent $20 million in the past 10 years acquiring 1,400 acres of open space,'' Mr. Baldwin said. ''We will buy anything over two acres on a sewer line to prevent developers from accumulating parcels and attempting to get zoning changed for subdivisions. We're not looking for any more residential density.''
In the Region | Connecticut
