THE Cheesecake Factory's reputation clearly preceded its arrival here last September. It has been mobbed since the day it opened, with many customers already familiar with one of the 72 restaurants in this ever-growing national chain. The White Plains addition checks in at only No. 69.
Whimsical décor hints of Egypt, a comic-book version, done in unlikely but pleasing sorbet shades. The atmosphere is ebullient, energetic. Food and preparations are fresh; presentations, attractive. Servers caution that portions are enormous, and sharing is expected and prudent. Some appetizers would suffice as an entree for a very hungry diner.
The variety of offerings caters to all tastes. In fact, first-timers will struggle to get through the unwieldy menu -- purportedly of more than 200 items, including 50 desserts. Salads and pastas, for example, appear in two sections. About half the offerings are categorized as ''specialties.'' Although appetizers carry no such distinction, many were dandy, and made the better part of a meal.
Cut lengthwise, crisp avocado egg rolls revealed colorful and delicious centers of avocado, tomato and cilantro. Almost transparent rice pancakes wrapped Vietnamese shrimp summer rolls (served cool), their satisfying textures provided by shrimp, rice noodles, carrots, asparagus and mushrooms.
Skip ho-hum quesadilla for mild, Tex Mex egg rolls, stuffed with chicken, black beans and melted cheese; salsa and luscious avocado cream completed the plate. Many diners will enjoy filling their own Thai lettuce wraps with coconut curry noodles, several sauces, satay chicken or bean sprouts.
Crab cakes and four juicy miniature burgers called Roadside Sliders were also good. Hot spinach and cheese dip with tortilla chips and a napkin piled with popcorn shrimp made fine dishes for patrons lingering over a drink. With more than a dozen cooks in the kitchen, one evening's miss could be another's hit; fire-roasted artichokes had flavor but were overly steamed, and grilled vegetable pizza lacked character.
Of the many salads offered, we sampled two, and both were winning: chopped Cobb with chicken, bacon and blue cheese; and endive with sweet pecans, blue cheese and radicchio.
Diners who like the kick of spicy heat in food will be disappointed. Seasoning tends to be sweet, and in general, chili pepper is used very temperately.
Three fish tacos in soft tortillas were delightful with citrus salsa, black beans and rice, like an appetizer turned into an entree. Even better were huge and succulent grilled shrimp New Orleans, with savory sweet peppers and onions. Oddly, sautéed shrimp with angel hair pasta packed much less of a flavor wallop, as did macadamia-crusted mahi-mahi.
You've got to like chicken to eat here; it's in more than a third of the menu, better in appetizers than in entrees. Supposedly spicy Bang-Bang chicken with Thai shrimp and rice had heavy notes of sweet coconut. Served on pasta or rice, Cajun jambalaya, again with chicken and shrimp, proved unaccountably bland. Lemon-herb roasted chicken was overdone and dry.
It's risky to order steak in a place that doesn't specialize in beef, but Factory's Chino-Latino skirt steak proved remarkably tender and tasty; have the sweet sauce served separately. Heavily infused with maple syrup, pork tenderloin was dry and too well done. Shepherd's pie, which should be a natural for this place, had little meaty flavor under the cap of mashed potatoes.
No surprise here, cheesecake was creamy and dense. Beginners might order the original, then perhaps move on to the fanciful, like Sticky Chewy Chocolate Pecan or White Chocolate Chunk Macadamia Nut. Our slice of Dutch Apple Caramel Streusel had turned slightly. An embarrassment of richness marked a couple of other desserts piled high with mounds of whipped cream over a skyscraper of brownie and vanilla ice cream (brownie ice cream sandwich) or of dark chocolate cake and chocolate chips (Black-Out cake).
A few organizational problems still need addressing: parking tickets are not validated; there is no coat check for heavy winter coats; and reservations are not taken.
The full bar pours a flotilla of designer cocktails and coffees along with the more familiar quaffs, including beers, juices, hot chocolate and delicious Paradise Tropical iced tea. Wines have high markups, especially by the glass. Bonny Doon Pacific Rim riesling ($24) or Rosemount shiraz ($26) match most of the fare here.
The Cheesecake Factory  1 Maple Avenue  (at Bloomingdale Road), White Plains.  (914)683-5253
GOOD
Atmosphere -- Huge, noisy dining hall nicely designed on a long crescent with a glassed-in kitchen in the cusp. Funny, funky décor; excellent lighting. Tables in the bar often shared with friendly strangers. Parking in back. Mostly patient service from a trained staff.  Recommended dishes -- Avocado eggrolls, roadside sliders (burgers), Thai lettuce wraps, Vietnamese summer rolls, Cobb salad, endive salad, fish tacos, shrimp New Orleans, Chino-Latino steak, original cheesecake, black-out cake.  Prices -- The entire menu available all day (smaller portions served until 5 p.m.); $6 to $25.  Credit cards -- Major cards accepted.  Hours -- Mondays through Thursdays, 11:30 a.m. to 11:30 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 a.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 11 p.m. Brunch, Sundays, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m.  Reservations -- None accepted; be prepared to wait.  Wheelchair access -- Street level.  The Ratings -- Excellent. Very good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.  Review Published: Feb. 1, 2004
DINING
