This Super Bowl is not for the faint, the weak, the soft. It is not for players who prefer to run out of bounds, not for guys who cannot rise from a pounding, not for teams that fail to hang their hat on hitting and toughness.
This Super Bowl could be the top-hitting Super Bowl of all time.
In fact, it will be a top-this-hit, top-that-hit affair.
In a league that adores big hits and one defined by fans who celebrate and remember colossal collisions as much as they do fancy touchdowns, Super Bowl XXXVIII between New England and Carolina will undoubtedly leave two spent teams by game's end, and one winner in the battle of hits and toughness. Both teams were built to win physical battles as much as the X's and O's tangle.
Find the winner of this game's hard knocks and what will most likely be revealed is the champion.
In essence, this game presents football in its purest form.
The Patriots and the Panthers manhandled their opponents in their conference championship victories and boasted about it later. There was lots of talk by both winners (New England over Indianapolis and Carolina over Philadelphia) about bloody noses and bloody uniforms and intimidating hits, and the winners were not the ones splattered in red.
Did you win the physical battle against Indianapolis, New England cornerback Ty Law was asked?
''Yes,'' he readily replied.
Did you maul Philadelphia, Carolina safety Mike Minter was asked?
''No doubt,'' he said.
But neither team is talking like that about its opponent in the Super Bowl. There is too much respect. Too much at stake for two superior hitting teams to stoke the other into a frenzy that gives it any kind of hitting edge.
Nobody wants to present a loose mouth that winds up making him the hunted. Nobody wants to lose a tooth in the game's opening minutes.
''They're just like us when it comes to toughness and hard hitting,'' Law said. ''We look at them, and it is like seeing our reflection in the mirror.''
Minter said: ''I don't know these guys enough to say one way or another who has the physical edge. But I have a feeling that is what it is going to come down to on Sunday.''
The Carolina running game punishes defenders. The New England defense pulverizes ball carriers as much as it tackles them.
The Carolina defense zips toward the ball and presents a front four that bruises. The New England special teams are kamikaze-like.
''I would say it would be a physical game -- that's how both teams got here, not straying from that,'' Mike Vrabel, a New England linebacker, said.
New England offensive tackle Matt Light said: ''It's come down to who's going to be more relentless, who's going to go after it, who's going to finish everything. I know they're going to do it. I know they're going to bring everything they have on every play. And I have confidence in every one of our guys doing the same thing.''
Carolina linebacker Dan Morgan said ''bringing heat'' was the makeup of the Panthers and ''the only way we know.'' Bill Belichick, the Patriots' coach, said that Carolina is ''the toughest team we've played all year.''
Who's tougher?
Who's toughest?
Start with New England safety Rodney Harrison. He earned a reputation for being an intimidating hitter in the N.F.L. long before he became a Patriot this season. In this Super Bowl, his penchant for big, nasty hits will be on full display.
''Off the field, I'm calm, cool, relaxed, respect people, respect the media,'' Harrison said. ''But on the field, you go out there and it's just controlled violence. You want to smack somebody in the mouth. That's what it's about.''
That is what this Super Bowl is about.
When the National Football Conference won 13 consecutive Super Bowls before Denver of the American Football Conference snapped the streak in the 1998 game, the N.F.C. had been such a dominant conference in part because it was much more hard-hitting and defensive-minded. Those A.F.C. teams kept showing up in the big game soft and depending on finesse and were buried under an avalanche of blows.
When coaches like Belichick, Bill Parcells, Jimmy Johnson, Jeff Fisher and others moved from the N.F.C. to the A.F.C., hard hitting and a physical, stout brand of football followed. This style has helped the A.F.C. win four of the last six Super Bowls.
It is a trend that New England, the A.F.C. champion, would like to continue. Carolina will have something to say about that.
''You are talking about two models built to win the tough, physical battles and we have been stressing that to our players all week long,'' Mike Trgovac, Carolina's defensive coordinator, said. ''I hope it comes down to the physical thing. That's who we are.''
Morgan said, ''We need no reminders.''
Law said, ''Nobody around here is shaking.''
Let the hitting begin. We shall see who ducks, who dodges. Exerting one's will and sapping that of the opponent in the physical battle happens in some manner in every football game on every level.
In Super Bowl XXXVIII, however, the action will be like two slabs of concrete clashing. Look and listen for the loudest thud. The team most often decked will fade.
The champion will be the team left standing.
Football Analysis
