The city will spend $12 million on social services and financial aid in six neighborhoods to try to prevent unstable families from becoming homeless, the commissioner of homeless services said Friday.
The initiative comes as the city, which is obligated by court order and law to provide shelter to all those who are homeless, has had its homeless centers increasingly swamped by women with children. Currently, about 8,100 families are in long-term shelter at an average cost of $25,000 a year per family. Many come to the shelters in the hopes of being placed in permanent housing.
The commissioner, Linda I. Gibbs, said the program is meant to be a first step in breaking this cycle. ''For too long, the city's response to homelessness has been shelter as a first and often only line of response,'' Ms. Gibbs said in a statement. ''We're investing in new solutions to age-old problems - and those investments must be at the community level, where those at risk can be identified and served before their housing crisis results in homelessness.''
The investment will come in the form of $2 million awards to community-based groups in the six neighborhoods that send the most families to the city's homeless shelters: the South Bronx and East Tremont in the Bronx; Bedford-Stuyvesant and Bushwick in Brooklyn; East Harlem; and Jamaica, Queens.
The community organizations, which have yet to be selected, will be asked to identify families in unstable housing situations -- like those without leases or those doubled up with relatives or friends -- and provide them with help in staying housed. Immediate help with paying rent , referral to an anti-eviction program and family counseling are among the forms of assistance.
The Housing Stability Initiative, as the city is calling it, has met with a largely positive response from nonprofit groups.
''My thought is: At last!'' said Rosanne Haggerty, president of Common Ground, a New York-based nonprofit group with programs to prevent foster children and former prisoners from becoming homeless. ''This really reflects the recognition about best practices,'' she said, ''and how you keep families intact and prevent the trauma of homelessness in the first place.''
Ms. Haggerty said similar programs had already been successfully tried in Minneapolis and Southern California.
Vito Lopez, who represents Bushwick in the State Assembly, said, ''Any kind of supportive funding to allow people to stay in their own home will have a very positive impact on the stability of the neighborhood.'' He added that the way he understood the initiative, the money could be used not only for desperate tenants but also for landlords having trouble maintaining their properties.
Many specific actions recommended came from a panel convened to help the city settle a 20-year-old lawsuit about the rights of homeless families brought by the Legal Aid Society and the Coalition for the Homeless. The plaintiffs agreed to give the city a break from litigation if it worked out comprehensive plans to address some of the causes of homelessness.
A panel member, Gail Nayowith, the executive director of Citizens' Committee for Children of New York, said the $12 million was a good first step toward resolving the litigation. She said it represented ''a significant effort on the part of the city and counsel for homeless family plaintiffs to reach consensus on a strategy to resolve the crisis of homelessness outside the courtroom.''
But Steve Banks, the Legal Aid lawyer who represents the plaintiffs, was more skeptical. ''We have always said that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure,'' he said, ''but it is not clear that $12 million will be enough to spare thousands of children from the pain of homelessness and the taxpayers from the extraordinary costs of providing shelter.''
