Eight years ago, the feminist essayist Germaine Greer called for modern democracies to stop turning their first ladies into quasi royals and adopt the old Communist practice of keeping them out of sight. By the 21st century, she wrote, a woman ought neither expect to achieve a position of power nor ''be expected to relinquish her privacy and her own work, to diet and dress up and give interviews every day, simply because she has married a man who has a prospect of success in politics.''
Dream on, Germaine. In the intervening near-decade, Kenneth Starr and Congress have made lying about presidential adultery an impeachable offense, and Hillary Clinton has parlayed her first ladyship into a Senate seat. That is to say, the protocols governing American first coupledom have grown as strict as in any monarchy, and first ladies who figure out how to exploit them can achieve unprecedented levels of power. Oh, yes, and ''The Bachelor'' and ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy'' have come into being, along with all the other reality shows. That means that the machinery for publicly humiliating those who stray from approved narrativesof self-presentation has reached the farthest corners of the land.
If you want to see these forces working in unison, look at the current electoral season. The regnant first lady, a model of wifely discretion, escapes all but the most deferential notice. Meanwhile, would-be first ladies who deviate from the script (stand silently but steadfastly by your husband's side; advise sagely but discreetly; smile sweetly but not broadly) watch the typeface on their tabloid headlines grow point by point. Indeed, faced with wayward wives, even serious political analysts begin to breathe heavily, in the manner of announcers on makeover shows. Will the millionairess Teresa Heinz Kerry help or hurt her husband with her blowsy sensuality and Botox and prenups? Will Dr. Judith Steinberg Dean's unyielding frumpiness be taken as a sign that Howard Dean is every bit as unlovable and unpolished as he seems?
But what is wrong, you may ask, with gossiping about politicians' wives? We chatter all day long about everyone else's. We are as naturally curious about our colleague's interestingly coifed bride as we are about the elusive Mrs. Dean. Besides, it is our duty as citizens to meet the missus, as Michael Kinsley put it in a recent column. We ought to see the human face behind the carefully managed image and policy papers before we pull the lever.
What's wrong with it is that it's based on a fallacy so obvious we've stopped seeing it. When we make a political marriage part of the story, we do not penetrate the spin. We merely shift our attention to more spin. Some would call it useful spin, in that, if done well, it provides the public with positive marital role models. But it is an illusion nonetheless, and to believe in it enough to vote accordingly is to engage in deliberate self-deception. We're like people who choose their pharmaceuticals because we like the looks of that nice couple on TV who recommend them.
That politicians make up pretty stories about the most intimate parts of their lives is nothing to get upset about. For if it is natural to gossip, how much more so is it to try to protect ourselves from gossip, to utter or act out little untruths about personal information we do not wish to share? We pull out a chair for our wife at dinner parties when we'd never do so at home. We pat our spouses' hands and declare our marriages to be in fine shape when, in fact, we're in therapy and are starting to talk about divorce. These are the sorts of niceties without which civilization could not exist. ''The distinction between what an individual exposes to public view and what he conceals or exposes only to intimates is essential to permit creatures as complex as ourselves to interact without constant social breakdown,'' the philosopher Thomas Nagel has written. It is because we sequester our true selves behind a scrim of conventionality that we have the freedom to think dark thoughts, feel illicit impulses, love our torturers and despise our benefactors -- to be, in a word, human.
This insistence on prying into areas of life better left veiled may seem innocent, but it has malign consequences. Among other things, it has led to the erosion of trust in authority. We require aspiring leaders to pledge allegiance to their socially necessary fictions (Clinton: I have repaired what was wrong in my marriage), then call them hypocrites when they fail to live up to the fibs we forced them into (I did not have sex with that woman).
The tyranny of the gossip state falls with undue harshness on women, since the number of roles acceptable for presidential spouses has not grown at the same rate as the number of roles available to women in society. First ladies may be one of only three things: the spiffy supportive wife, the emasculating shrew wife or the pitiful abandoned or betrayed wife -- the last being particularly useful for the wife who wants to strike out on her own. Wives who won't be wifely, who eschew the traditional armature of femininity, come across as nearly naked, which may be why Diane Sawyer, in that ''Primetime Thursday'' interview, seemed barely able to contain her condescension toward Mrs. Dean.
So what are candidates' wives to do? It seems to me that they have two courses of action. They can do what they've always done -- smile and wave in public, pop pills in private and wait for their turns to come. Or they can choose not to. But no wife can do that for long unless all the other wives do, too, since no candidate will unilaterally disarm himself of his so-called secret weapon. That is why it is up to government to protect them. I call on Senator Clinton to introduce legislation forbidding the exploitation of spouses for political purposes or, failing that, to put limitations on the length and style of their appearances. This may be the one situation in American life just right for the burka.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-1-04 Judith Shulevitz contributes regularly to The New York Times and Slate.
