THE stock market's broad rally, which had a rocky start last March, is now heading toward its first anniversary without so much as a stumble. Since the end of March 2003, the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index has never declined 5 percent from any new peak.
As of Friday, that meant that the S.&amp;P. 500 had rallied for 305 trading days without what Wall Street calls a correction, defined here as a fall of 5 percent or more. Such a decline is usually nothing to worry about. Instead of signaling the end of a rally, a sell-off of that size can let the market consolidate and evolve into the rally's second leg. Already, this is the 11th-longest run without a correction for the S.&amp;P. 500 since 1932, according to Birinyi Associates, a money management firm in Westport, Conn. If the uncorrected rally continues to Feb. 23, it will be the 10th longest. A run to March 9 would move it up to No.9.
Analysts have been wondering when the inevitable correction will come. The strong earnings reports coming in for the fourth quarter of 2003 should support the rally, maybe helping to put it in the top 10. But the Federal Reserve's surprise hint last week about interest rate increases, and the fact that February is traditionally not a good month for stocks, won't help.
The biggest decline for the S.&amp;P. 500 since last March 31 has been 4.57 percent, which took place from June 17 to Aug. 5. The biggest sell-off for the Dow Jones industrials since March was 3.98 percent, from Sept. 18 to 30. The Nasdaq composite index, however, has already had several declines of at least 5 percent, the largest being a fall of 6.42 percent, also from Sept. 18 to 30.
Since last Monday, the recent high for all of these market indexes, the Nasdaq has fallen by 4.1 percent, the Dow by 2 percent and the S.&amp;P. 500 by 2.1 percent. Most of these declines came in the sell-off after the announcement on Wednesday of the Fed's policy shift.
On the bright side, the more than 300 companies in the S.&amp;P. 500 that have reported fourth-quarter results had overall earnings growth of 26.3 percent, compared with the corresponding quarter a year earlier, according to Thomson First Call. If that performance holds up, it will be the best since the third quarter of 1993. Companies in the capital goods sector, including United Technologies, and technology companies like Advanced Micro Devices have been leading the onslaught of better-than-expected earnings.
Earnings expectations for the first quarter this year have also risen modestly, The forecast for the S.&amp;P. 500 is now 14 percent, up from 13.4 percent at the end of last year.
Fed policy makers have clouded the outlook. At the regular meeting last week, they left their benchmark short-term interest rate at 1 percent. But they took away the pledge they made in August not to raise this short-term rate for ''a considerable period.''
Many analysts have expected the Fed to raise this benchmark rate between late this spring and the middle of next year, but the withdrawal of the interest rate promise has made an increase seem more imminent. And after such a long, uninterrupted stock rally, just a heightened awareness of interest rate increases could upset stocks.
THERE is also a historical reason to worry about the rally. February is one of only two months when the market declines, on average. (September is the other.) And in presidential election years, February is the only such month, with a decline of 0.12 percent, on average.
History also shows that a decline after such an uninterrupted run can be painful. The average decline after long runs is 9.8 percent, according to Birinyi Associates. After the most recent correction-free rally, which ended in May 1996, the decline was 7.6 percent before the rally resumed.
William Rhodes, the chief investment strategist at Rhodes Analytics in Boston, says a sell-off is coming but should not be feared. The continuation of strong earnings should cushion the fall, he said, making it unlikely that a bear market will follow.
PORTFOLIOS, ETC.
