Ex-Officer Pleads Guilty In Computer Associates Probe
Lloyd Silverstein, a former senior vice president for finance at Computer Associates International in Islandia, has pleaded guilty to a charge of obstructing justice in the continuing federal investigation into the company's accounting practices.
Mr. Silverstein neither admitted nor denied charges of accounting fraud made by the Securities and Exchange Commission. According to terms of the settlement, he is barred from working as an officer or director of a public company. No sentencing date has been set.
In announcing the guilty plea on Jan. 22, Roslynn Mauskopf, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, called it the ''first step'' in unraveling ''a corrupt conspiracy at Computer Associates.''
Ms. Mauskopf said Mr. Silverstein participated in a conspiracy to ''thwart and obstruct the investigations'' currently being conducted by the Justice Department and the S.E.C.
The day before the guilty plea, Computer Associates announced its fiscal third-quarter results, posting a profit of $22 million on the strength of rising software licensing fees and advantageous currency fluctuations. The profit reversed a loss in the same quarter last year of $44 million. The results were in line with the company's earlier guidance to investors.
Veeco Files a Countersuit
Asylum Research of Santa Barbara, Calif., an instrument company formed by three former employees of Veeco Instruments (Nasdaq: VECO) of Woodbury, has named Veeco in a patent infringement lawsuit filed Tuesday in Federal District Court in Los Angeles.
Both companies claim ownership of the technology used in a three-dimensional atomic-force microscope built and sold by Asylum. The suit comes four months after Veeco named Asylum as the defendant in a lawsuit claiming patent infringement on the same technology.
Veeco, which makes nanoscopic measuring devices, asked for unspecified damages and an injunction to force the product off the market. Asylum said Tuesday that its MFD-3D did not infringe on Veeco's patents.
Jason Cleveland and Roger Proksch, who were Veeco scientists, and Richard Clark, Veeco's senior lawyer, left the company in 1999 to form Asylum.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
