SEMICONDUCTOR stocks have often taken investors on a roller-coaster ride. For the last year, the sector has been climbing, but those who recall its gut-wrenching plunge during the bear market may wonder whether these shares are worth buying.
Some of them are, many analysts say, for investors who are comfortable with risk.
A good way to sift through the group for values, one line of thinking goes, is to search for companies that have their own chip fabrication plants. During the chip slump from 2000 to 2002, companies that had invested heavily in fabrication plants, known as fabs, were weighed down with huge depreciation charges that depressed earnings.
As the industry strains to meet renewed demand, however, these same factories may offer a competitive advantage, said John Lau, an analyst at Banc of America Securities. Intel, Advanced Micro Devices and Agere Systems all have substantial in-house capacity that should allow them to expand profit margins over the next year, Mr. Lau said. The market, he added, has ''not yet fully recognized'' that potential.
Shares of Intel, for example, now at $30.52, should reach $39 this year, Mr. Lau said, based on his full-year earnings estimate of $1.32 a share. That compares with 85 cents a share reported in 2003.
David Wu, an analyst at Wedbush Morgan Securities, also says companies with fabrication plants can prosper. ''Rich men have fabs; poor men don't,'' he said, adding that analog chip makers like Linear Technologies, Maxxim Integrated Circuits and Analog Devices had the capacity to fully exploit rising demand. (Analog chips, which process signals as continuous streams of current or voltage, are used in cellphones, digital cameras, power supply units and many other devices.)
The stock of Analog Devices, now at $47.85, has the potential to grow by 30 percent to 40 percent this year, Mr. Wu said.
Another possible beneficiary of an upturn in demand is I.B.M., though it is not often regarded as a chip company. It says its technology group should report a profit this year after two years of losses, as a $2.5 billion chip-making plant in East Fishkill, N.Y., enjoys strong demand from I.B.M.'s computer division and from outside customers. I.B.M.'s technology group reported losses of $252 million last year on $3.7 billion in sales.
As a group, however, chip stocks are certainly not cheap. Those in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index trade at a price-to-earnings ratio of 69, on average, compared with a multiple of 24 for the overall index. The Philadelphia Semiconductor Index, which includes a broader range of chip stocks, has no P/E ratio because so many of its companies have reported losses. Yet over the last 12 months, in anticipation of surging chip demand, the index has risen 88 percent, compared with 34 percent for the S.&amp;P. 500.
OF course, an economic slowdown, whenever it comes, may cause chip-company shares to plummet, said Michael T. Masdea, a chip analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston, who warned that there was a strong correlation between global economic growth and the price of chip stocks. Although global growth is strong now, he said most forecasters predict it will cool in 2005. Such a slowdown, he said, would be ''enough to suggest a peak in semiconductor revenue growth and valuations.''
As more chips are bought by cellphone and PC makers -- as well as broadband and wireless network builders -- the chip makers that can expand output are poised to profit from their investments in plants and equipment, some analysts say. Chip makers without their own factories, by contrast, must rely on outside contract manufacturers, known as foundries, most of them based in Asia. The foundries are generally operating near full capacity and turning away some customers.
Bob Bailey, chief executive of PMC-Sierra, a designer and marketer of communications chips, expects a capacity shortage in the industry in coming months. ''Our industry has a history of ratcheting between glut and shortage, and the equilibrium in between lasts short periods of time,'' Mr. Bailey said.
In a similar vein, Andrew Micallef, vice president for supply chain management and quality at Agere Systems, said, ''There are a lot of indications capacity will become very tight over the next two quarters.'' One sign is that some Agere customers, notably telecommunications companies, are placing their chip orders several weeks before they ordinarily would, hoping to ensure a supply.
Roughly three-quarters of the costs of semiconductor fabrication are fixed, resulting from the expense of building and maintaining factories, noted Sumit Sadana, director of strategy for I.B.M.'s technology group. Only the remaining 25 percent -- mostly for added materials, silicon wafers and labor -- rise along with production. When production climbs, profit margins at companies with their own plants tend to grow faster than at competitors that rely on foundries. Those without their own plants may actually suffer shrinking margins if the foundries raise prices.
All of this is reflected in gross margins, which are revenues less the cost of goods and depreciation. Intel's gross margins, which fell below 50 percent in 2001, should surpass their record high of 65 percent by year-end, Mr. Lau predicted. (He said Banc of America Securities and its affiliates own at least 1 percent of Intel shares.)
The difference in gross margin leverage between fabs and fab-nots is illustrated by comparing AMD, which produces its own chips, and the Broadcom Corporation, a developer and marketer of communications chips without its own fabrication plant. Broadcom has grown swiftly and is ''an excellent company,'' Mr. Lau said, but he added that even rising sales would not allow it to expand gross margins this year. Those margins, which were 50.8 percent in early 2002, will level off at just 50 percent in the second half of this year, he estimated.
But AMD, even with rising depreciation charges, is likely to reverse recent losses and turn profitable this year, Mr. Lau said. Gross margins bottomed at 7 percent in the quarter that ended in June 2002, but they should reach 40 percent by the end of this year, he said. The stock now trades at $14.86, and he said it could easily rise to $19 this year, based on its valuation in previous rallies.
More than 500 companies design and market chips but use outside contractors like Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing and United Microelectronics, also in Taiwan, to produce their designs. At Taiwan Semiconductor, the world's largest chip foundry company, ''capacity utilization is currently in the mid-90's,'' said Chuck Byers, director of worldwide brand management for the company. For some of the most advanced chips, he added, ''we're running at close to 100 percent.''
A capacity shortage could be especially serious for companies without their own production, because traditional powerhouses like Texas Instruments and Motorola have been cutting back on investment in factories and are now competing for the same outsourced production lines. Texas Instruments, for example, spent $2.7 billion on plants and equipment in 2000. Last year, it spent just $760 million, according to a Citigroup Smith Barney estimate.
''You've got demand coming on,'' said Jodi Shelton, executive director of the Fabless Semiconductor Association, a trade group. ''You've had three years of cautionary spending. Of course there's going to be a crunch.''
Even as capital spending withered, technology marched on. Companies like Intel, which invested more than $15 billion from 2001 to 2003, have more than just brute capacity; they can also make advanced chips at a low cost. Intel's newest chips have circuit lines just 90 nanometers thick -- meaning 90-billionths of a meter -- compared with 180 nanometers for the chips of many companies. The latest equipment churns out wafers that are 300 millimeters in diameter -- up from 200. Producing tiny chips on larger wafers allows five times as many chips per wafer at an increased cost of just 30 percent to 40 percent, said G. Dan Hutcheson, chief executive and president of VLSI Research, which tracks chip manufacturing.
INTEL and I.B.M., along with the foundries of Taiwan Semiconductor and United Microelectronics, are leaders in moving to 300-millimeter production. Intel produces chips for itself, and I.B.M. produces them for other companies as well as for its own computers. I.B.M.'s chip capacity use is probably running at 90 percent to 92 percent, said Len Jelinek, an analyst at iSuppli, a market research company.
As the top foundries fill up, some business is being diverted to fabrication factories in China and elsewhere, but these plants do not yet have the most advanced and efficient equipment and processes.
By next year, China is expected to assert itself as a bigger force in chip production. As Chinese foundries acquire the most advanced equipment and processes, the industry's capacity problems may ease, eroding the advantages of companies that have their own factories.
Still, for the next year or so, the fabs may enjoy the chip recovery a whole lot more than the fab-nots.
