ST. JOHN'S 71, U.C.L.A. 55
After each loss, some of which were excruciatingly close, a frustrated collection of St. John's players insisted that a breakthrough was near. Keep knocking on the door and eventually it will open, they said. Yesterday it finally happened, and in a way no one could have expected.
The same team that could not beat Hofstra or Fairfield and has yet to win a Big East game in seven attempts hammered U.C.L.A., 71-55, in front of a crowd of 9,077 at Madison Square Garden.
This is not a particularly good U.C.L.A. team (9-8), and yesterday's loss was its sixth straight, but this was not the case of the Red Storm taking advantage of a wounded opponent. St. John's shot well, did a terrific job on the boards and played with the sort of confidence that no team riding a seven-game losing streak should have.
What happened?
''I think this was a day where we did a good job as a team,'' said St. John's interim coach, Kevin Clark, who is 3-9 since replacing Mike Jarvis in December.
But yesterday was not the time to start delving into the mysteries of this performance or trying to figure out where this team had been all season. For the Red Storm, it was an occasion to celebrate a victory that had to go a long way toward easing the pain of what has been a torturous season. The only other time St. John's had lost seven consecutive games was in 1918-19.
''This felt great,'' said forward Kyle Cuffe, who had 13 points and a career-high 15 rebounds. ''I know I was tired of always saying we fell short and we should have gotten it. It was time to go out and get it.''
St. John's (5-13) won the game in the opening 20 minutes. It was still tight when the Bruins' Janou Rubin hit a baseline jumper with 8 minutes 13 seconds left in the first half, cutting the St. John's lead to 25-20. But the Red Storm rode the hot hand of guard Elijah Ingram and closed out the half with a 16-4 run, making the score 41-24 at halftime. Ingram had 18 of his 21 points in the half, 9 of them during that run.
''In the first half in particular, Ingram was just absolutely spectacular,'' U.C.L.A. Coach Ben Howland said. ''He was coming down and pulling up for the 3 on the break and it was money in the bank every time he shot it. He's a good player.''
U.C.L.A. got no closer than 11 points in the second half. It was beaten in every area of the game, no more so than on the boards. The Red Storm outrebounded U.C.L.A., 49-30, and had 16 offensive rebounds.
The Bruins could not gather any momentum. Toward the end of the game, they seemed eager just to get it over with. St. John's was so comfortably in front that Clark played his walk-ons in the final minute, giving three of the four players their first action of the season. Joe McDonald took advantage of the opportunity by hitting a 3-pointer at the buzzer, capping off an unusual day.
''This was a long time coming for us,'' Clark said. ''I am very excited for our team, especially the older guys. It was a terrific team win. Everybody that got into the game today, right down to the walk-ons, made a great contribution. I hope these guys celebrate this one, replay this one, and take good lessons from it.''
Ingram's 21 points led St. John's. The freshman Trevor Ariza led U.C.L.A. with 19.
The Red Storm will hope to ride any momentum created by yesterday's victory, but it plays on Wednesday at No. 7 Pittsburgh, a tough place to build a winning streak.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
