NINA Watt, who has had a 30-year career performing with the José Limón Dance Company, recently formed an artistic alliance with Doug Varone -- a choreographer whose work calls for just the kind of burnished interpretive skills that won Ms. Watt a Bessie Award in 2002 for sustained achievement in dance. She will appear with Doug Varone and Dancers this week at the Joyce Theater, performing in ''Bottomland.'' But more to the point, she will perform with Mr. Varone in his ''Short Story,'' a five-minute duet danced to Rachmaninoff, on Wednesday.
Dedicated to Ms. Watt, the duet has become a signature piece for the two, drawing as it does on two reflective lifetimes in dance. Ms. Watt is that rare performer who seems simultaneously to embody both control and abandonment. She is often photographed in leaps, feet occasionally tucked under like a bird at take-off. Her soaring ascent is inherently joyous, but the folds of her costume and lines of her body look as precisely articulated as if she had sculptured them.
''Short Story'' reveals just ''a little moment of a relationship,'' Ms. Watts said. ''I see it as opening and closing the curtain on a moment in two people's lives.''
Mr. Varone created the intense, highly distilled duet for Ms. Watt in 2001, just before she went on a leave of absence from the Limón company. She has since taught, staged Limón works, performed and returned to college to complete studies interrupted by the invitation to join the Limón troupe in 1972.
Ms. Watts sees similarities in the styles of Limón, his mentor Doris Humphrey and Mr. Varone, who performed with the Limón company in the late 1970's and has choreographed for it. Like Humphrey, Ms. Watt said, Mr. Varone focuses on the drama inherent in motion and emotion. ''So part of what you're working with are the forces of nature that are acting on the body or from it,'' she said.
''In good choreography, the movement will do it,'' she added. ''If you have to be acting on top of it, then the dance isn't doing its job. I believe that Doug's movement very much does what it needs to tell the story.
''The key for me with Doug is to be willing to take the ride until you discover where you're being taken. It's best not to impose too much, maybe ever but certainly not right away. He mostly suggests, and I like that. I like to have a sense of what the picture is and to be able to fill in the details myself, in the privacy of my mind.''
JENNIFER DUNNING
DANCE: THIS WEEK
