THE streets in this tired industrial town are framed with grand Victorian homes -- some regal under fresh paint and attention, others rotting. These days, the mood of residents is equally mixed with tenuous hope and resignation.
It is here in this unlikely town of 4,800, on the banks of the Delaware River and in the shadows of a hulking DuPont chemical plant, that two developers envision a $100 million waterfront hub of stores, restaurants and a casino.
One developer has proposed a pavilion-style complex that would seem more at home in Cape May. Well-heeled tourists from Philadelphia and Delaware, with luck, would flock there for shopping and seafood dinners with a sunset view. And another has come up with a more far-fetched notion -- a casino and club floating on a barge offshore, drawing visitors and dollars to the area.
Yet fulfillment of this glittery vision is largely out of the hands of these New Jersey residents, who have been teased before with the false hope of fame and prosperity. Because of a quirk in the state boundary, the fate of this tiny borough in Salem County could be decided across the river. A boundary established in 1682 by the Duke of York in his land grant to William Penn put the New Jersey state line just a few steps from the edge of Penns Grove's waterfront. Consequently, any floating casino would be in Delaware.
If lawmakers in Delaware give the floating casino a green light -- something the governors of Delaware and New Jersey both say they oppose -- the hope here is that 50 years of decay will be reversed. For now, the legislation is bottled up in a House committee.
''If you live in Penns Grove, you've got to have hope,'' said John Bibeau, 40, owner of Willis Hardware, one of the few stores near the waterfront site that is actually occupied. ''But it comes down to the willingness of the people who were elected to make the decisions. And, in this case, it's funny because we didn't elect those people.''
The fortunes of this slouching South Jersey community have long been intertwined with those across the river.
In 1891, E.I. duPont de Nemours &amp; Company, the giant chemical company across the river, in Wilmington, Del., transformed Penns Grove -- primarily a port and fishing village -- into part of the company's sprawling empire. DuPont built an explosives factory along 150 waterfront acres in Carneys Point, just to the south. Not long afterward, at the height of the First World War, the plant employed 20,000 people and supplied two-thirds of the country's gunpowder. In 1917, on 1,350 acres in Deepwater -- a patch of land just south of Carneys Point -- DuPont built Chambers Works, a chemical factory that provided 9,000 jobs during World War II and now brews ingredients for products like Kevlar and Stainmaster carpets.
As DuPont prospered, so did Penns Grove. The company filled the streets with homes for its workers to rent, expansive executive residences, schools, a country club and a Y.M.C.A. where workers could bowl or dance on a Saturday night.
''DuPont fed the town,'' said 47-year-old Donna Federanko-Stout, whose grandfather immigrated here from Russia in 1904.
But prosperity was not to last. The ferry service that shuttled people and products between Penns Grove and Wilmington ceased in 1942. And in 1951 the first span of the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened, making the ferry from Pennsville, just south of the bridge, to New Castle, Del., obsolete. Then in the 1960's when Interstate 295 was opened, the area was bypassed altogether.
''We went from being a town that you had to go through to get other places to a town that didn't even have an exit off of 295,'' said Ms. Federanko-Stout.
It was not until 1972 that an exit leading to Penns Grove was built. But by then DuPont had begun to downsize there. Led by changes in business and technology, the company dismantled its explosives plant in the 1970's. Hundreds of jobs at Chambers Works vanished, and the work force was whittled to 1,100.
These days the city is not only remote but underpopulated and poor, perennially showing up on the list of the state's 10 most distressed municipalities. Many of the houses that went up during the prosperous years were sold or left vacant; the Y.M.C.A. fell into disrepair. From 1980 to 2000, the population of Penns Grove fell by 17 percent, even as New Jersey grew by 14 percent. In 20o2, the last year for which figures were available, the unemployment rate was 13.8 percent, more than twice that of the county and the state average, and more than 30 percent of its residents live below the poverty line.
The few plants remaining in the area provide the best opportunity for employment. Anchor Glass, which was founded in 1863 and has floundered over the years, employs only about 300 people today, down from 1,800 in the 1970's. And the Salem nuclear plant in nearby Hancocks Bridge, which has been in operation since 1977, has about 1,800 workers.
Still, politicians and developers dream of revival. In 1994, a plan for a marina and waterfront restaurant won government grants and a developer's commitment. But those plans were never pursued because the next year Bruce Willis -- like the action movie hero he is -- returned to his hometown with plans to invest $50 million for redevelopment.
Mr. Willis bought 11 waterfront acres, the dilapidated Penns Grove National Bank and Trust, a Masonic Lodge and a stately stone home on Main Street. The movie star paid thousands of dollars worth of back taxes owed on the properties, got the grass mowed, and renewed the borough's sense of confidence.
And he drew up his own plans for a marina, hotel, shops and theaters.
''When he bought the property, the town came to life,'' said Paul Morris, 51, the borough's former mayor.
On Broad Street, for instance, Michael DiPaolo transformed his family's 30-year-old delicatessen into an upscale Italian restaurant, with $30 entrees that still draw diners from Philadelphia and Wilmington. Across the street, Armondo Verdecchio, a contractor, bought and fixed up four retail buildings.
But by 1997, Mr. Willis lost interest. When word got out, prospective investors evacuated and many of the new businesses were emptied and boarded up again. The properties Mr. Willis had bought sat for another three years, until George Kearns, a Woodbury developer, bought the waterfront site and other ramshackle buildings on Main Street.
''After so many years, somebody keeps saying next spring, next spring, next spring,'' said Mr. Verdecchio, 57. ''Whatever the developer does down on that property, we still have a town to deal with.''
Today Mr. Kearns envisions a 200,000-square-foot complex of shops, restaurants, hotel and office space called the Riverwalk. He says that with the right tenants and a water view, the revived waterfront could become a regional shopping destination. A feasibility study by C.B. Richard Ellis, a commercial realtor, showed that potential sales for the Riverwalk could amount to nearly $50 million a year.
Mr. Kearns estimates that it would take about $28 million to build the complex, which he would pay for with bank financing. The borough has already received pledges for $5 million in state and federal grants to build a pedestrian walkway on the property as well as to add landscaping and lights and clean up the surrounding properties.
So far, Mr. Kearns says, he has spent five years and about $4 million buying property and wading through a maze of permits and studies required by government agencies.
He says his project would fit into a wave of economic development that has found its way down to Salem County -- the least densely populated county in New Jersey. The Delaware River and Bay Authority built an office park in Carneys Point in 1999, and that same year Conectiv Power put up a customer service office there that employs 500 people. This spring, McLane Grocery Distribution, based in Temple, Tex., plans to open a 220,000-square-foot warehouse in Carney's Point that will provide another 300 jobs.
But where Mr. Kearns's vision ends, another begins. An investment group in New Castle, Del., Hannalily LLC, wants to build a $70 million casino on a barge attached to the pier that would extend from the riverfront complex.
The developers estimate that slot machines would generate almost $150 million a year. Of that, Delaware would get a 38 percent share of that money, plus additional proceeds to pay for programs like long-term care and open space preservation. Penns Grove would get 1,200 new jobs at its doorstep and a tourist attraction in its back yard.
The Hannalily developers are trying to sell the project to Delaware politicians as a way to defend the state from competition looming in Maryland and Pennsylvania. Nearly two-thirds of the gamblers at Delaware's three casinos -- Dover Downs, Delaware Park and Harrington Raceway -- live in the state. If Pennsylvania and Maryland legalize slot, the Delaware Department of Finance says, the state stands to lose about $120 million a year.
Slot machines have been a veritable jackpot for Delaware since the state sanctioned them in 1994. The state's share of gambling dollars amounted to $180 million last year, making slots the third-largest source of revenue in its general fund.
The Hannalily developers hope lawmakers will approve their project to stem those losses. But they have yet to do that. Legislation allowing the project was introduced in 2001, but it has languished in a House committee since then.
''The state has to do something to maintain that $180 million,'' said Mark Kleinschmidt, a consultant for the project who is New Castle County's former economic development director. ''Right now there's only the threat of competition. When real competition comes, they'll have to act differently.''
But they could be in for a tough political battle.
Ellen Mellody, a spokeswoman for Governor McGreevey, said recently that he would vigorously oppose anything that threatens New Jersey's gaming economy. And the governor of Delaware, Ruth Ann Minner, says she opposes any expansion of gambling. The Republican majority leader of the House in Delaware, Wayne A. Smith, an opponent of gambling, said that with resistance from Delaware's three existing casinos and the anti-gambling lobby, the chances of the bill passing are ''slim to none.''
While the bill's leading sponsor, Representative Joe Miro, acknowledged that passage of his measure would not come easily, he remained optimistic. ''If it doesn't happen this year it will come back,'' Mr. Miro said. ''They evolve with the economic needs.''
For his part, Mr. Kearns insisted that his development does not need the slots to survive and prosper. He said he expected to receive permits for his shops and restaurants by summer, and that he would quickly break ground -- with or without a casino bobbing in the water.
''It would certainly make it so much better if it's there,'' Mr. Kearns said of the casino. ''But the project was thought through, designed and planned in such a way that it would be fine without it.''
Others too are hopeful that some change - any change - is just around Penns Grove's tattered corners.
''We're hopeful things might turnaround,'' said Mr. DiPaolo, the restaurateur. ''I always thought whatever they did down there would be a plus.''
But as residents have waited for dirt to turn on Penns Grove's waterfront, many have become skeptical of the chances for a revival.
''We'd have meetings at the site and people would drive by and yell out of their car windows, 'It's never going to happen,''' said Ron Rukenstein, a consultant from Titusville.
As Fred Palfrey, a 71-year-old retired DuPont chemist, put it, ''We aren't holding our breath on that anymore.''
New Jersey
