Baraka Cheeseboro noticed something going on behind the poinsettias. While prayers were raised and the choir sang on a recent morning at the Community C.M.E. Church in Columbia, S.C., Howard Dean was chattering away on the altar with Representative Jesse Jackson Jr. Labrena Aiken noticed it, too. ''Baraka,'' she leaned in to whisper, ''those flowers need to be moved. We want to see his face.'' The service was well under way, but a sign from Cheeseboro to an usher, a quick word with the pastor, and the flowers came down. Dean, now in plain sight, assumed a respectful mien. A bit later the two women were joined in the pew by a third, and the young pastor, the Rev. Joiquim Barnes, acknowledged for his audience the arrival of Gilda Cobb-Hunter.
''You do know what they call those three -- Gilda, Labrena, Baraka,'' a friend long involved in South Carolina politics said afterward. ''They call them the Marvelettes.'' If you want something to happen politically, especially in their home base of Orangeburg County in the heart of the state's Black Belt, you need to know them.
Like every candidate trolling for votes in the Feb. 3 Democratic primary -- the first in the South and the first with a substantial black electorate -- Dean had eagerly sought Cobb-Hunter's endorsement, and like every one, he had failed. At the church doors he embraced her, this six-term state representative, former minority leader of the State Legislature (the first woman and first African-American to hold the job), member of the Democratic National Committee, superdelegate to the 2004 Democratic convention. He said he hoped to see her at a meeting of black leaders he was holding later that day. Cobb-Hunter smiled her most gracious smile, her lovely silver-ringed fingers light against his shoulders. Aiken smiled, too, and gave him a professional handshake, the one she has used to greet politicians of no particular favor since back when she was an officer in the county Democratic Party. Officially, she doesn't have, as she puts it, ''a dog in this race''; neither, at the time, did Cheeseboro, who has been mobilizing Democratic voters in Orangeburg County since she was 9. At a subsequent hotel rally awash with white faces, ''the girls,'' as some call Aiken and Cheeseboro, weren't interested in sticking around to lend their assent to all those signs proclaiming ''African-Americans for Dean.'' But Cobb-Hunter stayed on.
Cobb-Hunter said she was impressed that Dean had chosen a small church (membership, 85) and that even 20 to 25 African-Americans showed up in the crowd of 400 for a Sunday-afternoon rally. She said she was also impressed by the directness with which Dean told them all: ''In 1968, Richard Nixon won the White House. He did it in a shameful way -- by dividing Americans against one another, stirring up racial prejudices and bringing out the worst in people. They called it the Southern Strategy. . . . Nixon pioneered it, and Ronald Reagan perfected it, using phrases like 'racial quotas' and 'welfare queens.''' White candidates never talk like this in public, Cobb-Hunter suggested. As for why she didn't attend the black leaders' gathering after the rally, though, she drew up her mouth, arched her brow and said in a been-around-this-pony-show-before kind of way, ''I'm not on the Dean plantation.''
If the Marvelettes are an indication, there's trouble for the Democratic Party in black America. Most people don't have a passion for politics to offset the skepticism born of being dragooned into service every election cycle to cover the spot on the political gaming table labeled ''the black vote.'' And skepticism reigns among the Democrats' most loyal constituents on the eve of what is being called the ''black primary.'' African-Americans could account for up to half the vote in South Carolina on Tuesday, so for months candidates have been visiting black churches, dropping in at football games and fish fries, collecting black endorsements and welding themselves to the memory of Martin Luther King Jr. or Bill Clinton, sometimes both.
Some say the outcome here will forecast how the candidates will sell to African-Americans nationwide. As of early January, the most compelling message appeared to be ''sellers beware.'' A schoolteacher and choirmaster in the county seat, the city of Orangeburg, told me, ''I'm disgusted with the whole process.'' A store owner said he'd vote for Al Sharpton because ''what choice do we have?'' One 21-year-old hip-hopper wasn't even having that; he said of Sharpton, ''All he's trying to do is manipulate the black people against the white people to vote for him to be leader of black America.'' At a meeting early last month of Concerned Citizens of House District 66, a civic group in the area Cobb-Hunter represents, there was no debate about ''the presidentials,'' as she calls them, but heated words about a sheriff's race in June.
A couple of weeks later the state party reported a heartening uptick of interest among Democratic voters. Still, nobody could guess whether the candidates' shifting fortunes -- and the presence on the ballot of two Southerners, John Edwards and Wesley Clark -- would galvanize the electorate. Some election officials said a 20 percent turnout among all Democratic voters for the primary would be an achievement.
Blacks who vote in South Carolina overwhelmingly want George Bush out. But as one black South Carolinian told me, a party can't just depend on ''a bogeyman'' or identify with a community when it's convenient and expect consistent identification in return.
''The Democratic Party is the party that talks about the black vote and attaining it by any means necessary,'' Aiken said. ''Now, that does not equate with 'We value the black vote' as much as 'We have to attain it in order to get what we want.''' The routine currency in this exchange is emotion -- for white candidates a little soul power soaked up from a gospel choir and shed just as easily. Candidates parade through church, Aiken noted, but, she said: ''Has anyone done a follow-up visit after a campaign? You know, 'I came to your church, asked for your vote, the preacher gave me the pat and we prayed. Now I'm in; I'm going to make one more trip back, at least to thank you.'''
It is commonly recognized that whichever passing churchgoer ultimately becomes the party's nominee, he will not be seen here again. In the Democratic National Committee's markup of battleground and nonbattleground states for November, South Carolina falls definitively into the latter category. (Bush easily won the state in the 2000 election with nearly 60 percent of the vote.) Some Democratic strategists say that the party might be smart to write off not just South Carolina but the whole South (except Florida) and concentrate on states more demonstrably in play. It is less commonly noted that writing off the South, home to 55 percent of the country's black population, symbolically means writing off African-Americans as well.
At a Democratic National Committee meeting last October, members of the D.N.C.'s Southern Caucus confronted the committee chairman, Terry McAuliffe, about the national party's failure to sponsor a single debate in the South and about fears that the region will be starved of resources for November. The D.N.C. insists that this is not the case and that some Southern states are on its target list. But Cobb-Hunter, like every African-American I spoke with, has not forgotten that in 2000 the party pulled virtually everything out of the South to concentrate on Florida, then refused to see beyond hanging chads and go to the mat over the tens of thousands of voters, the majority black and Hispanic, said to have been improperly labeled felons and stripped from the rolls. ''Any message that the Democratic Party wanted to send, they sent in 2000, and '04 is just a continuation of that message,'' she said. ''It's up to the Democratic Party whether they want to change the story. Because if they don't, we will not carry one Southern state. Let me just add that if the Democratic Party is not serious about dealing with the issues of race and class that are so prevalent in this country but particularly in the South, then they may as well write it off, because there's no point in coming in here with cosmetics.''
There's something imposing and at the same time familiar about Gilda Cobb-Hunter, something that makes her seem taller than she is and draws you to feel more acquainted than you have a right to -- but suggests too that it's best to call her Ms. Cobb-Hunter until you get the green light for ''Gilda,'' and that comes pretty quickly. Her district includes Orangeburg, a small city of 12,765, plus the surrounding cotton country and little county burgs. In town, she directs a women's shelter and a center for the prevention of sexual and domestic violence called CASA/Family Systems. On one of my visits, the tiny waiting room, adorned with prints by her husband, Terry K. Hunter, as well as with posters advising that H.I.V. is preventable and ''Real Men Don't Hit Women,'' stirred with the children of a murdered woman, a woman on the ragged edge and a lone bowed man, remanded there by the courts. South Carolina has the highest rate in the nation of men killing their wives, girlfriends and exes. Orangeburg is among the leaders in the state in H.I.V./AIDS, and is high up in all the indicators of illness, stress and financial insecurity.
Cobb-Hunter started as a volunteer with CASA's precursor in 1979, a couple of years after she and Terry moved to Orangeburg. She had once floundered when trying to help a friend who had been raped, she told me, and vowed never to be so powerless again. She started attending County Council meetings because she was bored in a notoriously insular town. She had little political experience beyond some work with the McGovern campaign while she attended Florida A&amp;M University. In Orangeburg, she met Baraka Cheeseboro in a karate class. Cheeseboro was an activist, working against police brutality, and by the early 80's the two were full into local politics. Almost five years ago, Cheeseboro came to work at CASA and is now a case manager there. Labrena Aiken, the agency's deputy director, has been there since 1990, fresh from college.
Temperamentally, the three are a combination, in different measure, of brass and tact. Politically, Cobb-Hunter, who is 51 and has a reputation as both hell-raiser and negotiator, works the state connections and troubleshoots for constituents getting the runaround locally. Aiken, 37, works her circle of young professionals, women who turn off the phone when it's time for ''Sex and the City,'' shun partisan gatherings and won't rule out Republican candidates. Cobb-Hunter says she and Cheeseboro had to pull Aiken into politics, but in the shops along Russell Street, like College Corner, a minimart where her father is among the regulars assessing the shape of things, Aiken mixes pop and politics with the best of them.
Unlike Aiken, whose people are from Orangeburg but whose childhood was spent on military bases, and Cobb-Hunter, who is from Gifford, Fla., Cheeseboro has spent all her 46 years here. She holds ''office'' under a venerable pecan tree in Martha (Bay-Bay) Hooks's front yard in the hard-time neighborhood of Sprinkle Avenue, where locals plan for political campaigns, organize events and gossip. They say Cheeseboro knows everyone and his cousin-once-removed in Orangeburg, and she holds its history close. Back in 1968, when she was 10, her 17-year-old cousin Delano Middleton was among three people shot dead by white Highway Patrolmen at South Carolina State University in one of the civil rights era's bloodiest events; known as the Orangeburg Massacre, it was the first such use of force on an American campus. That attack ripped her world of cowboy shows and country and western on the radio; she never would be so carefree or so unconscious of what people call the state's ''race culture'' again.
Cheeseboro can chart the class matrix and power gaps within white society as well as black, but Orangeburg isn't a place presidentials come to woo the white vote. They come here when they want to be sure of a black audience and sure that their words aren't wasted. The center of a county that is 61 percent black and nearly 100 percent Democratic in elected offices, it is more or less midway between Columbia and Charleston, midway between rural and urban, midway between abject poverty and the high life, meaning that while some African-Americans reside in the suburbia of cathedral ceilings and others live out of rusty vans off a main road, most people occupy the space where dirt alleys of trailers and shotgun shacks seem to melt into potholed lanes of bungalows, which in turn melt into smooth streets of ranch houses and pretty lawns. Just outside the city limits, there are vast medical complexes and factories making ibuprofen, sterile tubing and more lawnmowers and garden tractors than anywhere in the world. Countywide, unemployment is 14.5 percent and the average wage is $8.72 an hour, but a more palpable measure of the area's financial state is the generous presence downtown of pawnshops and all manner of loan-fixer and car-title repurchaser. Candidates rarely, if ever, do walk-arounds through this slice of Americana, preferring readymade audiences across the tracks at the historically black colleges, State and Claflin University.
''The Democrats lost the White House because they forgot the street, the corner, the people who put them in office,'' George R. Dean, who owns a clothing business in town, offered soon after Aiken said he'd have an opinion or two for me. A member of the Chamber of Commerce, he made a straight-up Keynesian argument for investment in infrastructure, education, the environment, small-business relief, ''the needs of the people'': ''The divide in America ain't black and white; it's the haves and the have-nots, and that's the truth, darling. Until we start disbursing this stuff, as we say in the Deep South, us'en in a heap of trouble.''
I'd heard this kind of thing throughout Orangeburg: the Democratic Party is reactive, ''spinally challenged,'' populist only intermittently while the people sink. More than 27 percent of the county's households survive on $15,000 a year or less, a condition of persistent poverty that ensnares so much of the South, especially the rural Black Belt. For some, the drug business is a way out, and Cheeseboro can spot the ''movin' on up'' homes that drugs bought. But more are caught than lucky, particularly if they're black. African-Americans make up 30 percent of South Carolina's population but 70 percent of its prisoners. Officially, one out of 13 black men in South Carolina is barred from voting because he is in prison, on probation or on parole; nationwide the rate is one in 8. And everyone says it: the poor have been written off. The poor, the state, the South. Who's next?
Cobb-Hunter takes this all personally. She, too, can list policy proposals, but talking about party disarray and how it leaves her and her constituents powerless makes her voice burn. For 30 years, Republicans, with ideological clarity, organizational discipline and deft manipulation of cultural insecurities, have been building their power base through sewing circles and school boards, statehouses and small-time talk radio as surely as through their friends at Fox and the Fortune 500. In the past 10 years they've gained control of the South Carolina House, Senate and Governor's Mansion. This year, Ernest F. Hollings's United States Senate seat will open up, one of five vulnerable Democratic seats in the South. Meanwhile, what Cobb-Hunter calls the Democratic Party's ''identity crisis'' filters down to all those more parochial levels where a party needs to give the common person, whatever his or her color, a reason to care.
At lunch one day at a local restaurant, I watched the three women trading the small change of politics as constituents and officeholders, black and white, stopped by the table for a quick word. ''I'm a firm believer, like Tip O'Neill, that all politics are local,'' Cobb-Hunter stressed. ''That's right,'' said Cheeseboro, casually scanning the room, occasionally interjecting a barb at politicians (''No offense, Gilda.'' ''None taken.'') while Aiken listened for her opening and Cobb-Hunter continued. ''If you want to know what's wrong with the Democratic Party, just look right here. There's this perception that there's a strong Democratic toehold in Orangeburg County, but really the party itself is almost nonexistent. There's no real concerted effort to involve young people. And at the state level, until the old guard got thrown out in '02, it was like, to hell with the base vote.''
Separately, each woman noted that the former state party chairman, Dick Harpootlian, who is white, had once quipped, ''I don't want to buy the black vote; I just want to rent it for a day.'' That was in 1986, he told me, an offhand joke that no one takes seriously, adding that as a state and a country, ''we've got to get beyond racial division, and we can't seem to do that.'' Memories are long; the three women were not the first to mention his quotation to me. Nor were they the first to assert that white Democrats would jump party (and have) before accepting black leadership. Or to say they'd felt used by the former Democratic governor, Jim Hodges, who was elected in 1998 with the help of black party activists and who then, some say, ignored black, poor and working-class voters.
Many fault Hodges for skimping on grass-roots campaigning in his 2002 re-election bid. He went down on Nov. 5, Cobb-Hunter's birthday. It was, her friends joked, the best present she got. '''Y'all ain't got nowhere to go,' Dick Harpootlian would tell me in meetings for the 2002 cycle,'' she said. '''Are they gonna vote Republican?''' One of her best friends, a born Democrat, did. More than 10,000 South Carolinians left the top of the ballot blank or, like at least one of Cobb-Hunter's fellow legislators, voted for Kevin Gray, a black write-in candidate. Gray, who later served as an adviser to Carol Moseley Braun's campaign, studied state Election Commission statistics and found that almost 289,000 blacks stayed home in the 2002 election, more than went to the polls.
The state Democratic Party executive director, Nu Wexler, maintains that as a percentage of overall turnout, that was among the better recent performances, which can't be reassuring. In any event, it's hard to overstate the residual bitterness. Just last November the Rev. Hayes Gainey of Edisto Fork United Methodist Church, in Cobb-Hunter's district, got ''amens'' when in a Sunday sermon he mentioned black voters' feeling of being used and abused by the Democrats, specifically noting 2002. It's a sensitivity that carries over in assessing national candidates now. ''John Kerry had his people in Orangeburg one night,'' Gainey told me. ''They were trying to push his platform to a group of us, and one of them says, 'If we decide to use you -.' Well, 'Hold on,' I said. 'You're not going to use anyone in this room. If we decide to support John Kerry's campaign, we'll let you know.' Thought to myself, Man, you talking to us as if you're the pimp and we're the workers.''
Cobb-Hunter said she's hopeful that the new leadership in the state Democratic Party will bring a change. Some 260,000 eligible black voters in South Carolina aren't registered. Added to registered no-shows, that means half a million or so African-Americans are ''missing voters,'' a group sizable enough to turn any statewide election for the Democrats -- if they saw a reason to. But everyone I met who's doing voter registration in town, on campus or in the countryside said they're up against it. Cheeseboro recalled that two years ago, ''folks actually ran me out their yard. They'd say: 'Get out! I'm not voting. I don't want anything to do with it. Ain't nothin' gonna change.' I have heard that over and over again.''
Pessimism didn't seem logical when Cobb-Hunter and Cheeseboro were coming up in the 60's. Both their fathers did janitorial work and their mothers worked as domestics. Cheeseboro's family was not political. With civil rights undiscussed at home, little Baraka (then Diane) imagined Martin Luther King from out of her Westerns, ''a tall, skinny black man in a black suit with six-guns by his side.''
Both women remember their schooling as a fount of possibility. ''Get an education, because the white man can't take that out of your head,'' Cobb-Hunter's people repeatedly told her; and Cheeseboro credits her black teachers, who ''taught unity'' and organized the children to leaflet homes before Election Day, as instilling a sense of communal responsibility. The two girls learned of the full volatility of the period in other ways. From fourth grade Cobb-Hunter was captive to the evening news, and after the horror of the Orangeburg Massacre, Cheeseboro says, ''it was always about trying to make a change somewhere.''
The memory of that world, the hopeful part, is what John Edwards invokes among black audiences in this, his natal state. His pitch may interest middle-agers who work for HeadStart, or alumnae circles where ladies draped in mink cheer the Marching 101 at S.C. State football games or discuss interest rates in the trustees' skybox.
But on their children's campuses at State and Claflin, in the rural streets where young blacks seek distraction, among the many who listed the ''triple evils'' of poverty, racism and war as their chief concerns, the talk was of Sharpton, Dean and Clark; once or twice, of Kucinich, whom one student said he'd support partly as ''a show of dissatisfaction.'' They'd vote for Al Sharpton out of black pride, some young ones told me, or against him for the same reason. Either way, he got marks for talking about the world as it is. Dean got marks for being ''angry,'' for championing ''the democratic wing of the Democratic Party.'' Clark, for sensitivity to veterans and the chance that maybe he'd know how to get out of Iraq.
Particulars aside, what defined those choices was a perception of relative candor and relative independence. As January slid toward King Day, Cheeseboro came out for Wesley Clark. He ''seems open,'' she said, and comfortable in a world of colors. Aiken, who is considering Clark, suggested: ''I think it's the military thing. Not that everyone in the military is okey-dokey, but if he lived on post, and I know he did, he didn't have a choice as to who his neighbor was.'' Aiken said she was looking at Edwards too.
No one I met in the 18-to-35-year-old cohort said, as did James Sulton, at 80 the lion of one of Orangeburg's grand families, ''I'd vote for the Devil if he was a Democrat.'' Often, younger blacks called themselves independent or libertarian or said they thought the two parties didn't differ fundamentally, supporting national data showing that about a third of African-Americans of this age (and almost 40 percent of the men) identify with neither party. Lately, the hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons announced plans to register millions of young voters nationwide, but as in South Carolina, that still leaves unaddressed the turnout question (in 2000, almost two-thirds of registered blacks between 18 and 24 didn't vote) and the matter of whether people believe voting can change anything. In the hamlet of Elloree, in Cobb-Hunter's district, half a dozen hip-hoppers spent four hours telling me about the jobs that were not there, the cops that always were, the runarounds and racial disequilibrium in the smallest things. They said they'd vote (except for one, who had a drug rap), but as I heard repeatedly, you might perform the act without having confidence in it. As for Elloree, ''It ain't ever gonna change.''
Cobb-Hunter winced when I recounted this and remembered the day a maid led a group of girls into her Statehouse office. ''They're in training,'' the maid told her. ''And I just got so depressed, because they were young, 19, 20, early 20's, and they were training to become janitors. That to me just suggests that we -- meaning those of us in leadership positions -- we have really failed our community. We are raising a generation who believes there is no hope, and we can't put the total blame on white folk. Because we aren't any different from white officials once we get in there. We are selfish -- and there are exceptions to every rule -- but in general people of color tend to act just like white folk when they get into power. They're very selective about who they share it with; they're selective about who they bring into the inner circle; and they're interested in taking care of themselves and their own and not much beyond that.''
The last time the question of energizing, even expanding the base came under serious debate in the Democratic Party was in the 80's. Labrena Aiken remembers 1984, when at 18 she cast her first ballot, for Jesse Jackson, as something ''electric.'' She and her friends knew, she said, that he would not win the nomination, but ''even when you know, you still want to believe.'' Cobb-Hunter was a Jackson delegate that year, her first national convention. It's often forgotten that Jackson's campaign registered more than a million voters in 1984 and that two years later the Democrats regained the Senate, picking up four seats in the South. In 1988, his Rainbow Coalition came in first or second in 46 of 54 primary contests, registering another two million along the way. But as Ronald Reagan had in 1980, Michael Dukakis took his general-election campaign to Neshoba County, Miss., to court white votes, never mentioning the murder of three civil rights workers there in 1964. The white Democratic leadership's interest in rainbow populism, never enthusiastic, was officially terminated.
Bill Clinton was supposed to have made up for all that. ''He had the moves,'' Cobb-Hunter said. Her voice had a weariness. ''He'd been around black folk, and he had that cadence; he knew how to speak the language.'' People do like ''Bill.'' In Elloree they have warm hearts for ''Hillary'' too. Yet assessing the Clinton program -- with its signature triangulation, mollifying the base while co-opting Republican themes -- Cobb-Hunter said, ''I'm a realist, honey; I'm not snowed by much.'' Still, Aiken insisted, ''it was a happier time''; nearly 74,000 jobs have been lost statewide since 2000. ''You can't lay that all on George Bush,'' Cheeseboro argued. ''You can't blame Bush for Nafta'' or, as others attested, for ''ending welfare as we know it'' while cutting other social spending. ''There wasn't a war,'' Aiken said. And to that I heard amens all around. It seems the war, and the death of three young Orangeburg men in Iraq, has concentrated attention on issues that Clinton's personality once papered over.
''Bill just rubbed me right,'' Paul Robinson Sr., the 70-year-old patriarch of an establishment called Professional Barber Shops, declared one Saturday. ''But now at my age, I don't need no rubbing. I need action. I'm not a Republican, but I like their strategy: 'If we don't get you today, we'll get you tomorrow.' With the Democrats, it's 'Oh, I lost my ball, I'm goin' home.' It's time that our party stop shucking and jiving and get down to the real thing.''
Against this backdrop the campaign commercials roll, and the only thing anyone knows for sure about ''the black vote'' is that it's not monolithic. The days when African-Americans took cues from the local pol or preacher are passing, according to Cobb-Hunter. It's part of the reason she has been neutral in the primary, she said; to encourage people to decide for themselves. How those decisions play out, not just on Feb. 3 but also down the road, bears watching.
On our last day together, Aiken observed: ''The Republicans have a strong white base, a very strong white base, an unwavering white base. And the Democratic Party is being threatened because we're wavering.'' In 2000 some of her professional friends were impressed by the Republican convention's ''black night.'' She and Cheeseboro watched it on TV from their own homes while talking together over the phone. Cheeseboro wasn't impressed; she was more interested, she said, that apart from ''liveliness'' (where Democrats had the edge), she couldn't detect much difference in what the two major parties presented on so-called black issues. That year Cheeseboro, a county party officer ''raised to vote Democrat or you'd die,'' voted against Al Gore and for Ralph Nader.
I remembered the look on Cobb-Hunter's face when I, surprised, mentioned this -- one of those looks that says, ''Girl, where have you been?'' What she actually said was, ''It's the Democratic Party; it's not a blood oath.''
JoAnn Wypijewski writes about political and social issues for Harper's and The Nation.
