THE ebb and flow of ethnic changes has been much noticed in Flatlands, a neighborhood near the south shore of Brooklyn between Canarsie and Marine Park, but residents say the underlying values of the well-groomed neighborhood have remained constant. Sandy Benet, a secretary at Temple Hillel of Flatlands and a Flatlands resident for decades, said she forgets to lock her door sometimes. ''I feel very safe here,'' she added. ''There's hardly any crime. My mortgage is almost paid up, and I'm not leaving.''
Flatlands is carved out by Ralph Avenue on the east, Flatlands Avenue on the north, Flatbush Avenue on the west and Avenue U on the south, though that border is negotiable, say some real-estate brokers who contend that the section below Avenue N is Old Mill Basin.
The neighborhood has undergone extensive demographic changes in the last decade. Once predominately Jewish, it is now home to Haitians and immigrants from other Caribbean nations as well. These newcomers have made the leap to the middle class and home ownership, supplanting older Jewish residents who, Ms. Benet said, have moved or died.
''We used to have people standing in lines outside to get into temple,'' she said. ''Now we are trying to keep up the membership with fund-raising and get people back.'' She noted that Orthodox Jews are moving in, but the number of members her Reform temple, currently claims, about 90, is far lower than the 700 members it had in the 60's.
''It's a mixed location, integrated,'' said Steven Yamuder, who owns the Sure Home Sales Realty Corporation on Avenue N. ''No group predominates anymore.''
The librarian at the city's Flatlands branch, Antoinette Vasile, has also noticed the population shift. When she started at the library seven years ago, African-Americans and Haitian immigrants were streaming in, prompting the branch, on Flatbush Avenue at Avenue P, to offer French-Creole books. Now an influx of Orthodox Jews is apparent, with many children. Indeed, Ms. Vasile said, a federal reading program for children at her branch was dying two years ago, but now 140 children are enrolled. ''Most of them are Orthodox Jewish,'' she said.
Dorothy Turano, district manager for Community Board 18, which includes the Flatlands, concurred about the ethnic changes. She said incoming residents ''upgrade their properties'' and ''are good neighbors,'' and the community ''hopes to keep them.''
''People move here for the housing,'' Ms. Turano added. ''It's a well-groomed community.''
Ms. Benet said that the city had planted hundreds of trees over the last few years and repaved the streets in Flatlands, eliminating potholes.
Lisa Hughes-Lydon moved to her three-bedroom semidetached house on Avenue L more than a year ago from Canarsie because she said Flatlands was more affordable. ''I'd had a condo,'' she said, ''but we were looking for a house.''
One advantage of Flatlands, she said, is its convenience to the Belt Parkway, which is a 15-minute drive south and speeds her to her job. The Belt, she added, ''gets you anywhere: to Long Island, the city, malls.'' The Kings Plaza Shopping Center and Marina, at Avenue U and Flatbush Avenue, has movie theaters, Macy's and Home Depot and even boat slips.
Residents get around by car or city bus. To take the subway, residents ride the bus for about 10 to 15 minutes, either on Flatlands Avenue, arriving within a block of the L at Rockaway Plaza station in Canarsie, or along Flatbush Avenue, connecting to the No. 2 or the No. 5 train at the Flatbush Avenue station. The trip to Lower Manhatttan takes about an hour.
The Command bus, a private line, operates the BM1, a rush-hour express to Manhattan, stopping along Ralph Avenue and other places. The cost is $4 round-trip and takes 1 hour and 20 minutes to Midtown.
MS. TURANO said that having no subway in Flatlands actually enhances the community. ''It makes it more desirable for families,'' she said. ''It's not as heavily traveled.''
City buses travel frequently on both Ralph and Flatlands Avenues. Ralph is a four-lane strip of outdoor malls selling every commodity imaginable. Flatlands Avenue also has many storefronts with sidewalks, as does Utica Avenue, a haven for showrooms selling household goods like carpeting and flooring.
Housing consists of detached, semidetached and attached houses in brick, vinyl siding, stucco or a combination thereof, mostly two-story edifices with driveways and tidy front yards. (Attached units have houses on both sides; semidetached are sided with one house and open on the other.) Schenectady Avenue, with somewhat larger single-family homes, is considered the crème de la crème. Apartment buildings are scarce.
In the East 50's, the largest part of the neighborhood, semidetached brick houses are two-family homes with a finished basement; the parts are usually a three-bedroom unit over a two-bedroom. These houses were called ''futuramas'' by the developer who built them, and the name lives on in a slice of the neighborhood. Sol Neiman, the president of the Futurama Civic Association, said the homes are concentrated in the area from East 56th through 58th Streets from Avenue J to Avenue L.
Meryl Magadino, a broker with Century 21 Classic Realty, said the futurama homes, built in the 1950's, are 24 feet wide and popular with young couples who want to own a home but need the rental income. Entry for both apartments is inside, and use of the garage and driveway sometimes comes with the rental and sometimes does not. A two-bedroom can lease for $1,000 to $1,200 and a three-bedroom, $1,000 to $2,000. The entire house typically sells for $400,000 to $500,000.
A development of two-family brick homes was finished last year near Flatlands Avenue and East 58th Street. These consist of two-story units with three bedrooms and two full baths in each, as well as finished basements and private driveways. The units started selling for $450,000, but Ms. Magadino said the resale value was now up to $579,000.
The real estate market in Flatlands is flourishing. ''The minute we get a house, it's sold,'' said Arlene Peldman, an owner of the Talk of the Town Realty Corporation on Ralph Avenue. Most houses are 60 or 70 years old, and the turnover is high. Some of the two-family homes attract mothers and daughters, keeping the family close.
''There is a large variety of houses,'' Ms. Peldman said. A one-family house sells in the mid-$300,000's, she said, and a two-family semidetached house can fetch $425,000 to $475,000. The median price for a two-bedroom condominium is $250,000; and for a three-bedroom condo, $329,000. Both types come with garages.
Two Roman Catholic schools attract many children in the neighborhood. Mary Queen of Heaven at East 56th Street and Avenue N has 275 children from preschool to eighth grade. St. Thomas Aquinas, located on Hendrickson Street near Flatlands and Flatbush Avenues, has 240 students in prekindergarten through eighth grade. It is part of a complex of yellow-brick buildings -- with the church, rectory and parish hall -- that dwarf the houses around the parish.
Many parochial-school students continue at Catholic high schools like St. Edmund's or Bishop Ford, said Karen Rutherford, a secretary at Mary Queen of Heaven.
There are a number of yeshivas for children from Orthodox Jewish families.
Public School 203, at Avenue M and East 52nd Street, is popular among parents in the neighborhood. Enrollment is about 1,200, serving prekindergarten through fifth grade. The school offers a gifted program and basketball and tennis, among other sports. In 2002, 52 percent of the students met citywide and statewide standards for math and 55 percent for English.
Another choice is P.S. 207 at 4011 Fillmore Avenue, where 69 percent of the pupils met both the English and math standards, and a gifted and talented program is also available.
The Roy H. Mann Intermediate School, I.S. 78, is outside Flatlands, at 1420 East 68th Street near Avenue T, Mill Basin, but half the students from P.S. 203 go there. The school, with 1,637 students, offers an after-school sports program and the Johns Hopkins math curriculum, which enables better students to move at their own pace. In 2002, 34 percent of the student body met standards in English and 39 percent in math.
I.S. 278 in Marine Park is another middle school, though it is a No Child Left Behind, or failing, school.
South Shore High School, at Flatbush and Flatlands Avenue, has long been the next academic step for Flatlanders. The school's reputation for violence has badly tarnished its image; one student was murdered in the school in 1992 and other stabbings have occurred in the last 10 years. The Department of Education recently announced that South Shore, with 2,279 students, was a target of the citywide effort to provide more security at violent schools. Despite a new athletic field and an honors curriculum, the most recent graduation rate was 55 percent.
Students also attend Midwood, James Madison, Samuel J. Tilden and Sheepshead Bay public high schools; the last is also receiving a special security patrol.
THE section of Brooklyn that includes the present neighborhood was one of five towns in Kings County, named Nieuw Amersfoort, for a city in Holland. After the English took over, they named the area Flatlands. It was chartered in 1667, but Indians and Europeans were farming or fishing there decades before. (Some historical information suggests the town was settled as early as 1623 by French Walloons.)
Among the oldest buildings in the area is the Flatlands Dutch Reformed Church, in Flatbush off Kings Highway, set off on its green corner as if ignored by time. Another, the Lott House, on East 36th Street in Marine Park, is a Dutch Colonial farmhouse with a gambrel roof. The city acquired the house in 2002 and plans to renovate it this spring.
The Dutch grew tobacco on farms and harvested oysters and clams for food in the 1600's. Slavery played an important role in this settlement, and some slaves spoke only Dutch. In 1827, New York State emancipated all slaves; some stayed in Flatlands to continue working on farms, while others left.
The region experienced rapid housing growth from about 1920 to the 60's, when it was modeled on suburban areas like Levittown and certain parts of Queens, with block after block of houses practically bumping up against one another. That close proximity persists, and Flatlands remains a primarily residential neighborhood with one main park, Jacob Joffe Fields at Avenue K and East 58th Street, where the playground and basketball and baseball areas have been redone. For tennis and more ball fields, Flatlanders use vast Marine Park.
If You're Thinking of Living In | Flatlands  Correction:  February 15, 2004, Sunday  An article on Feb. 1 about living in the Flatlands section of Brooklyn referred incorrectly to the status of Intermediate School 278 under standards set by the federal law known as No Child Left Behind. The school is not classified as a failing school.
