''BARBECUE the way it oughta be!'' is the slogan at Smokin' Al's in Bay Shore. The new restaurant features meat that has spent 6 to 13 hours in a smoker until it is fall-away tender and permeated with rich, smoky flavor. This is the real thing, not the slapped-on-the-grill-for-a-few-minutes stuff that New Yorkers call barbecue.
Until Smokin' Al's upped the ante, local barbecue aficionados had very slim pickings. I can count the number of real Long Island barbecue spots on the fingers of one hand. Smokin' Al's, though, got my heart thumping and mouth watering. We could follow our noses to this agreeable storefront. It calls itself a barbecue joint, but it's an attractive one. Sure, the wooden tables are bare, set with paper placemats and topped with a roll of paper towels, but the place has class. Exposed brick walls are home to giant paintings of cartoon pigs in sunglasses as members of a swing band. Other pigs are depicted as torch singers, waitresses and jitterbuggers. The 1930's and 40's music playing in the background is appropriate. It highlights Billie Holiday, Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald.
The hardworking service staff is casual and more friendly than polished. We had to ask for water and the promised corn bread. Beer was served in bottles plunked on the table (glasses on request). Yet, at one meal, when we spilled a glass of water and were ineffectually dabbing at the mess, a keen-eyed busboy rushed over with a dry cloth and a fresh placemat.
Take a hint from the pictures on the walls and the pigs on the menu and go for the pork, the king of barbecue. We tried a combination plate called ribs for all, which included a half-rack of baby back ribs, a half of St. Louis ribs and four monster beef bones. The beef was tasty but not in the same league as the pork. I preferred the baby backs, the best I've had on Long Island, but the larger St. Louis ribs were nearly as delectable and supplied a lot more meat.
We also enjoyed the non-rib platters. Diners can choose one, two or three kinds of meat. Tops were the pulled pork, the chunks of smoked chicken thighs and the flavor-packed smoked sausage. The pulled chicken was not far behind those three winners. Sliced brisket, a tad chewy, was an also-ran.
All these platters came with pork-rind-studded corn bread (slightly sweet and cakey but good) and a choice of two sides. I loved the garlic mashed potatoes. They were the opposite of the bland, pasty ones so often encountered. These were purposely rustic (with lumps and skin) and spicy. The bacon-laced baked beans and long-simmered collard greens also scored. Sweet potato fries, regular fries and creamy coleslaw made the grade as well.
Smokin' Al's sends out a good burger, a juicy, cooked-to-order half pounder, but the barbecue sandwiches are the way to go. The pulled pork sandwich with a topper of coleslaw (or on the side) and a huge helping of French fries is my pick. Any of the barbecue meats can be had with a mantle of French fried onion rings and a melt of cheese.
No one needs an appetizer at Smokin' Al's, but the meal would not be complete without the haystack of the irresistible onion rings. Order one as an opener for the table. Other recommended starters were the very light hush puppies, the platter of nachos topped with fork-tender chopped barbecue beef, and the finger-licking wings. We found the burned ends dry and tough, however.
Barbecue joints are minefields for dieters, but a few options exist on Smokin' Al's menu: six barbecue shrimp (flavorful and recommended) encircling a mound of white rice (listed with the appetizers) and a garden salad with the barbecue meat of choice. The latter was a platter of romaine, sliced fresh mushrooms, red onions and wedges of ruby-red tomatoes with a crown of pulled pork (or other meat). It was a luscious taste of barbecue that, nevertheless, made me feel virtuous.
Speaking of virtue or lack of it, there is a lineup of yummy desserts (made elsewhere). Best were the mud pie with its thick layer of rich ganache and the deep-fried cheesecake, crunchy on the outside, creamy and seductive within.
Smokin' Al's  19 West Main Street, Bay Shore (631)206-3000
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Classy barbecue joint.  SERVICE -- Friendly, caring and casual.  SOUND LEVEL -- Loud when restaurant is full.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Baby back ribs, St. Louis ribs, pulled pork, smoked chicken, smoked sausage, pulled chicken, baked beans, coleslaw, collard greens, garlic mashed potatoes, burger, barbecue garden salad, nachos, wings, barbecue shrimp, haystack of onions, hush puppies, deep-fried cheesecake, mud pie.  WINE LIST -- Five wines by the glass ($5.25 to $5.75), but the beverage of choice for barbecue is beer, of which there's a wide selection.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers $6 to $10; sandwiches $7 to $10; entrees $11 to $26 (for three kinds of ribs, everything else is under $20).  CREDIT CARDS -- All the majors.  HOURS -- 11:30 a.m. to 10 p.m. Sunday through Thursday, till 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- None accepted.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Fully accessible.  REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Feb. 1, 2004.  RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT
