ALTHOUGH Connecticut has never impeached a governor, it came close to impeaching a lieutenant governor -- from Waterbury, of all places -- in the 1930's.
Lt. Gov. T. Frank Hayes, a Democrat, served part time as lieutenant governor and had a day job as the ''reform mayor'' of Waterbury, as he liked to call himself. That job gave him a seven-year opportunity to loot the city treasury of millions of dollars with the help of Daniel Leary, his comptroller; Thomas Kelly, the mayor's executive secretary: and Carl Olsen, the vice president of a small bank that provided money-laundering services.
In 1937, with the city's solvency being questioned, voters re-elected Mayor Hayes by a very slim margin, but Mr. Leary, the comptroller, lost by just 33 votes to Sherwood Rowland, a Republican, who would become grandfather to Gov. John G. Rowland.
It took Mr. Rowland only two weeks to discover his predecessor had cooked the books to hide kickbacks and other payoffs made to the mayor, Mr. Leary, Mr. Kelly and their banker.
According to an account by the governor of Connecticut at the time, Wilbur Cross, in his 1943 autobiography ''Connecticut Yankee,'' a lawyer paid $126,000 to lobby for lower electric rates, cashed his check in Mr. Olsen's bank, received $20,000 and kicked back $106,000 to the four partners. An entrepreneur who owned no trucks received $75,000 to rent trucks to the city and returned most of the money, as did a broker who earned $191,000 to help the city sell bonds and obtain credit in New York City for all of two weeks.
A grand jury was convened and indicted the four and 19 confederates, described in the jury's findings as ''a powerful, ruthless and corrupt group of men who had managed the affairs of the city for personal financial gain.''
Governor Cross quickly asked his lieutenant governor to resign.
''Even the suggestion awakened his indignation,'' Mr. Cross wrote. ''All of the charges against him have no foundation in fact. He was not responsible for acts in which he took no part, he said. The trial, which he hoped would come soon, would exonerate him. All of this was spoken with the air of an honest man whose honor is hurt.''
The governor said he and legislative leaders carefully considered calling a special session of the Legislature to impeach Mr. Hayes, but it was unanimously agreed impeachment could interfere with Mr. Hayes's coming trial.
The Waterbury scandals reached the state level in a bizarre turn. Having invested some of his kickbacks in a company called the Electric Steam Sterilizer Company, the lieutenant governor had a bill introduced requiring the installation of electric steam sterilizers in all of Connecticut's public toilets, Mr. Cross wrote. Coincidentally, the only electric steam sterilizers were manufactured by Electric Steam Sterilizer, the book said.
In his autobiography, Governor Cross wrote that he ''took alarm'' when he learned the bill's sponsors were promoting the sterilizer as ''a laudable means of preventing the spread of venereal disease.'' He asked the state health commissioner to test the machine, and the commissioner reported back that the sterilizer didn't sterilize.
''This news was passed on to the House,'' Mr. Cross wrote. ''Beyond that, I informed the leaders that the proponents of the bill seemed to be altogether too innocent of the way venereal diseases are contracted.'' The Legislature eventually passed a bill requiring only that public restrooms be kept clean and sterile.
Mr. Hayes refused to resign in the summer of 1938, six months before his and Mr. Cross's term was to end, making those final months, ''a period of some tension for the people of Connecticut,'' Mr. Cross wrote. ''The governor of the state had passed the age of 76, an age at which most men are dead. If he should follow in the procession of his generation, then Hayes would take his place at the head of the state.''
The governor remained healthy and he and the lieutenant governor were out of office when Mr. Hayes was tried and convicted in 1939. He didn't go to jail until his appeals were exhausted in 1941.
Meanwhile, two prominent Republicans bribed by Mr. Hayes to help assure passage of the restroom sterilization bill were convicted and spent several months in the New Haven County Jail, which, wrote Governor Cross, had been ''put into better sanitary condition than usual'' by the use of ''funds granted for that explicit purpose.''
