Mike Bibby needs rest after having surgery on his left foot? No problem. Chris Webber has to sit out while rehabilitating his left knee? We will be fine. Keon Clark and Jim Jackson depart via free agency? They can be replaced.
It is almost as if it does not matter who the Sacramento Kings send onto the court. As long as the players wear purple and black and execute their intricate offense, they will win and win big.
Last season, when Bibby, fresh off his coming-out party in the 2002 playoffs, missed the first 27 games of the season, the Kings went 21-6. But that accomplishment pales in comparison with what they have done this season without Webber, who had arthroscopic knee surgery last June.
Moving on as if Webber were a role player instead of their best player, the Kings entered this weekend with a 32-12 record, the best in the league.
Sacramento, which averaged a league-high 104.5 points a game through Friday, has been so good that there is talk of Webber's merely fitting in rather than taking over when he returns, supposedly soon after the All-Star Game break later this month.
''I think when Webber gets back, it's going to be up to him,'' Joe Maloof, one of the Kings' owners, said. ''He's a professional, he's been around for years, and he understands that right now we've developed a certain look for our team, or a certain chemistry, that's really been successful.
''When he gets back, he'll have to adjust his game a little bit to what we've been able to accomplish so far.''
The Kings may be the only team in the N.B.A. that can lose its top player and win at a high clip. Perhaps Dallas could if it lost Dirk Nowitzki, but take Kevin Garnett away from Minnesota, Shaquille O'Neal away from the Los Angeles Lakers or Jermaine O'Neal away from Indiana, and what do you have?
The key for the Kings is not only their depth but also the versatility of their players. In this age of suspect fundamentals, Sacramento has several players who can both pass and shoot with excellence.
Obviously, Peja Stojakovic has been magnificent, averaging a career-high 25.1 points a game, and Bibby has played great, but the sixth man, Bobby Jackson, and the big men, Vlade Divac and Brad Miller, have been equally valuable.
Miller, whom the Kings traded for last summer, has been an incredible surprise, fitting in seamlessly and teaming with Divac to become a potentially history-making tandem.
Divac, averaging a career-best and team-high 5.4 assists, and Miller, averaging a career-best 4.7, are threatening to become the first two N.B.A. teammates 6 feet 10 inches or taller to average at least five assists a game.
The pinpoint passing of Divac and Miller is critical to the Kings' success because the offensive strategy calls for both players to set at the high post and pick defenses apart with sharp passes to cutting teammates.
Some believe that Webber will have to do the adjusting, but Donnie Walsh, the Indiana Pacers' president, says he believes it will be the other way around, with the Kings tweaking their system to adapt to Webber.
Walsh said that their current style might rack up victories in the regular season but that in the playoffs, when teams have time to study their opponents intensely, the Kings would need a low-post presence.
''They're going to have to change some,'' Walsh said. ''I like the way they're playing by bringing their big men out, and Webber likes to play up there, too. But he can also go down low. I think that's what separates teams in the playoffs -- who's got guys inside that opponents can't deal with. Shaq's No. 1, then Tim Duncan, Jermaine O'Neal and Webber.
''When you play a team seven games in a row and don't have to worry about the low post, you can do some things that can cut down on the effectiveness of that offense.''
Webber, who last month became the part-owner of the Great Lakes Storm of the Continental Basketball Association, has been preparing to give the Kings the low-post presence they will need to win a title. While playing with a sore left knee the past three years, Webber honed his perimeter shot to compensate for the loss of some of his leaping ability.
His hope is that the operation and extensive recovery will restore his explosiveness around the basket, enabling him to be more of an inside-outside threat.
With all the questions, one certainty is that Webber, who began practicing with the team in mid-January, will improve the Kings' rebounding, one of their greatest deficiencies.
Phoenix Has Oodles of Cap Room
The Phoenix Suns are taking their lumps now, but this summer, they could be as much as $11 million under the salary cap and in position to steal Kobe Bryant from the Lakers in free agency. Whether they land Bryant or not, the Suns appear to be set at shooting guard.
Finally realizing the potential that scouts raved about when Boston made him a lottery pick in the 2001 draft, Joe Johnson has blossomed since Phoenix traded Stephon Marbury and Penny Hardaway to the Knicks on Jan. 5.
After averaging only 12.5 points on 38.8 percent shooting before the trade, the 6-7 Johnson put up All-Star numbers in his first 13 games after the trade, averaging 21.2 points, 5.2 rebounds and 4.8 assists while shooting 49.5 percent from the floor.
In explaining Johnson's emergence, Bryan Colangelo, the Suns' president and general manager, said that Johnson, who won the starting job over Hardaway early in the season, might have felt uneasy about replacing Hardaway as a starter. With Hardaway gone, Johnson can relax.
''We've said that maybe he got the 300-pound gorilla off his back, and that's not necessarily related to Penny,'' Colangelo, who traded for Johnson in February 2002, said. ''Before, there may have been this notion that he was starting, but maybe he shouldn't have been starting. I think there was some self-doubt. Maybe he felt a little uncomfortable displacing a former all-N.B.A. player from the lineup; maybe there was some general anxiety about his role.''
Colangelo said the relationship between Marbury and Johnson was fine, but he added that their styles of play might have clashed.
''Steph gets people shots, and perhaps Allan Houston is a perfect complement for him because he's a great spot-up shooter,'' Colangelo said. ''That's not Joe's game. He's not a great spot-up shooter. Joe's a creator. He creates shots for himself and for others when he has the ball. Perhaps it was a mix of styles that was not perfect, but by no means do I blame his prior lack of production on Steph.''
It now appears that after trading Marbury, the Suns maintained a powerful three-man nucleus: Amare Stoudemire, Shawn Marion and Johnson. The Suns also have several talented youngsters, led by the 7-footer Zarko Cabarkapa and point guard Leandro Barbosa, as well as Maciej Lampe and Milos Vujanic, who is playing in Europe.
That being the case, the Suns are in position to trade some of their coming draft picks to lower their payroll for free agency. Colangelo cannot discuss other clubs' players (e.g., Bryant) yet, but he is clearly excited about the possibilities.
''There are some good players out there,'' he said with delight.
And apparently, a good future for the Suns.
Rounding Out All-Star Teams
The seven All-Star reserves in each conference, chosen by the coaches, will be announced on Tuesday. The stipulation that two forwards, two guards and one center must be selected will make an All-Star of a mediocre Eastern Conference center and leave deserving guards off the team.
Cleveland's Zydrunas Ilgauskas or New Orleans's Jamaal Magloire, neither of whom is playing at an All-Star level, will probably be named to back up Ben Wallace at center.
Even though six guards in addition to the starters Tracy McGrady and Allen Iverson deserve All-Star recognition -- Jason Kidd, Baron Davis, Michael Redd, LeBron James, Paul Pierce and Stephon Marbury -- only four will be added. The forwards will probably be Kenyon Martin and Ron Artest.
In the West, look for guards Sam Cassell and Mike Bibby to be named reserves, and for Shaquille O'Neal to back up Yao Ming. Peja Stojakovic and Carmelo Anthony are shoo-ins at forward. Dirk Nowitzki, Antoine Walker or Zach Randolph will be denied a deserving bid.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
