THE trick to giving any holiday party is honoring traditions while not getting bogged down in them. Jan Lee, celebrating the second night of Chinese New Year last week, had the lion dancers, the symbolic foods, the red envelopes filled with money. But he also toyed with his own brand of multiculturalism. ''He's always ahead of the game,'' his brother Geoffrey said. ''You can't get to a hipper thing than what Jan chooses.''
One choice has been to avoid Chinese music at the party, held every year since 1992 in his antiques store, Sinotique, a long narrow space at 19A Mott Street. Sinotique is not the usual hodgepodge of touristy ceramics, silk purses and paper fans. It has things like an old cart wheel from Burma, mounted as a piece of sculpture ($485), and old lanterns with handmade paper and pressed flowers (from $150).
For previous parties, Mr. Lee, 38, has hired flamenco guitarists and folk musicians. ''Every year it gets a little harder to top yourself,'' he said. This year there was Indian music. Then he floated red and gold helium-filled balloons to brighten up his store, all trailing long pieces of ribbon. ''Instant decorating,'' he called it.
His guests were an eclectic mix of family members (this reporter isn't one), friends, loyal customers and people who just stopped by, reflecting his own friendships and the changing demographics of Chinatown. ''I'm starting to see it on Craig's List as a selling point,'' Mr. Lee said, referring to the online classified ads. ''It used to be slumming to live here, and now they are bragging about it.''
Chinese New Year brings its own bragging rights. For a holiday that has the import of a combined Christmas and Thanksgiving, and that lasts for 15 days, ending on Friday, feasting is a significant part of the celebration. Throughout the evening, endless platters of homemade food were arriving from Mr. Lee's parents' apartment next door.
''My aunt made the noodles, and the Buddha's food,'' Mr. Lee said, referring to a vegetarian dish. His store has been in his family since his grandfather ran a laundry there 100 years ago. ''My mom is well known for her sticky rice and Chinese sausage,'' he added. At 8 p.m. his parents were still upstairs in their apartment, folding wontons.
Suddenly his older sister, Valerie L. Tom, a community activist, blew in. She had taken the troupe of lion dancers that their family sponsors to New Jersey; now they were back and ready to dance outside. New Jersey had ''lots of fireworks,'' she told her brother. (It's no secret that in Chinatown, Rudolph Giuliani is known as the mayor who banned fireworks on Lunar New Year. Traditionally, the loud firecrackers and fireworks chase away bad spirits.)
Crash! Crash! Crash! A little girl played the cymbals and a boy started beating the drum outside the store at 9:15 as the shivering children put on costumes over their jackets and began dancing. ''You see there, they are bowing three times, and giving a blessing,'' said Lawrence Tan, a guest who is a fitness instructor.
Lion dancers done, the guests hurried back inside. There was some discussion of the arrival of the Year of the Monkey.
''The monkey,'' Mr. Tan said, ''represents the id, and the Year of the Monkey means the id gets tamed.''
Mr. Lee, meanwhile, was trying to explain another animal, the lion in the lion dance, as lions are not native to China. ''The Chinese just made this up,'' Mr. Lee said. ''They had heard of lions, clearly. And the foo dog'' --the Pekingese -- ''is the closest they had, so they based the costume on that.''
Finally Mr. Lee's mother, June, and his father, Shung, arrived with the wontons. His mother was annoyed by the ribbons trailing off the balloons. ''I'm getting out a scissors and cutting these off,'' she said. (Oh, no! One of the taboos on Chinese New Year is using scissors, which cut off good luck.)
In the back of the store, Geoffrey Lee was trying to enjoy the Indian music, despite its being written in a count of 11. A professional musician, he complained, ''I'm trying to relax here.''
The Indian musicians were bringing their song to a frantic climax. ''Aren't we supposed to be whirling like dervishes?'' Jan Lee asked his brother.
Geoffrey Lee said, ''I think it's opium we're supposed to be doing.''
It was 10:45 and the Indian musicians had stepped off the platform for a break. There were 40 guests still sitting, standing, eating, talking, looking at four little fish swimming in an urn. Jan Lee switched on the sound system, and ambient disco music began playing. The party had entered Phase 2.
GOOD COMPANY
