There are creases beneath the eyes of Charlie Weis, deep as the rings on a tree stump. He has spent the last two weeks in a film room watching the Carolina Panthers' defense, looking for tendencies and weaknesses, the design in the tea leaves.
''If there is something that they have done this year, we've seen it,'' Weis, the offensive coordinator of the New England Patriots, said this week. ''It isn't like we've just watched the last four games, we've watched every game they've played. I even went back to watch Giants tape when John Fox was the defensive coordinator.''
Dan Henning, the Panthers' offensive coordinator, has eyes like Weis's, weathered by the long hours in darkened rooms.
''Anytime you play a team that is well coached and aware and technically sound, you have your hands full,'' said Henning, whose film study included a 1999 game between the Giants, with Fox as defensive coordinator, and the Jets, with Henning and Weis as the offensive coaches and Bill Belichick as the defensive coordinator under Bill Parcells. ''But they have to look at what we do, too.''
The task facing the offenses of the Patriots and the Panthers in Super Bowl XXXVIII on Sunday is a brutal trek into the strengths of each team.
The New England defense turns your head and then beats you up. The Carolina defense smothers and swarms you until your air, or the ball, is gone.
But somehow one offense will score more than the other and help lead its team to a Super Bowl title.
The question is how.
For the New England offense, the safest route is away from Carolina's talented defensive front, working the edges and the spaces off tackle, said Andy Reid, the head coach of the Philadelphia Eagles, who played both the Panthers and the Patriots this season.
''What Carolina does is bank everything off that front four -- they can get a pass rush on you with just that group,'' Reid said in a telephone interview from Hawaii, where he will coach the National Football Conference in the Pro Bowl. ''Then if they pressure you with someone else, that's the icing on the cake.
''From the first time to the second time we played them, they're just a more physical team and, really, it's Ricky Manning,'' Reid said of the Panthers' rookie cornerback. ''He's grown up fast.''
Weis said of the Panthers' defense: ''There are no holes, and that's what worries you the most. You look at some teams and you say, 'Well, that's not very good.' This is not one of those defenses. Start with the front four. Which end do you want to pick on? Normally, you can find some guys and say, 'I'm picking on him.' ''
Against a Panthers defense with such strength up front, Weis actually has several options to try to weaken Carolina's defenders by spreading them out.
Weis often lines up his players in five-receiver sets, forcing a defense to use five or six defensive backs to counter it.
Other times, Weis will use a traditional two-back, two-receiver formation and let running back Antowain Smith barrel up the middle or running back Kevin Faulk fly out of the backfield for a well-timed screen pass from quarterback Tom Brady.
With only seconds between play calls, Weis has a limited time to chose a formation.
When you guess curveball and then see exactly that tumbling toward the plate, there is no better feeling. But there may come a time when Weis and Brady guess wrong.
''I said to Tommy, 'If something comes up that we can't handle, get rid of the ball, we'll cut our losses, we'll come back and worry about it the next play,' '' Weis said. ''You can't have an answer for absolutely everything that happens, and you can't give the players more information than they can handle.
''When we set up a game plan, we have enough flexibility where if something doesn't work, we move on. When we played Buffalo, we scored two touchdowns early in the game. The third time down, Tommy got stripped and sacked. They had a pressure we weren't ready for.''
So Weis changed tactics. He shelved the wide-open attack and switched to a ground game.
''All of a sudden, Antowain is pounding it right down at them,'' Weis said. ''You go from those defensive linemen running from sideline to sideline, trying to make a play, to running it down their throats. As long as you give yourself enough flexibility, you won't get pigeonholed into, 'They took this away, what are we going to do now?' ''
Weis's example is sound. On Sunday, it won't be surprising if he continues with the methods that helped hatch New England's 14-game winning streak: spread a defense out early, pound it late.
Reid, whose Eagles defeated the Panthers on Nov. 30, 25-16, then lost, 14-3, in the N.F.C. championship game two weeks ago, said he, too, believed the Patriots might find some success against the Panthers on the ground.
''I don't think their run defense is as good as New England's,'' Reid said.
Carolina's offense will have a chance to refute this theory, but the climb is a steep one.
New England, which struggled against the run last season, has become a terror with acquisitions like safety Rodney Harrison and nose tackle Ted Washington contributing to the cause.
Harrison, one of the hardest hitters in the game, adds smarts and physicality. Washington adds size and knowledge.
''Ted Washington makes a big difference in there,'' Reid said. ''The whole defense just knows what they're doing better than anybody in the N.F.L. They execute that defense. Everybody knows how to adjust. They're physical. You don't see a lot of mess-ups.''
The Panthers' answer? To meet New England's toughness with their own, using the strength and persistence of running backs Stephen Davis and DeShaun Foster; the twosome combined for 33 carries in the N.F.C. championship game and quarterback Jake Delhomme threw just 14 times.
Henning said he believed his offense would set the tone, not the New England defense.
''We dictate the formation, personnel in the game, the snap count,'' said the 61-year-old Henning, whose knowledge of Belichick includes their two years together on the Jets' staff. ''Do we take into consideration what's on the other side? Yes. I don't know which 11 they are going to put out there, the odd front, the even front, the diamond front. But we're going to use John Wooden's theory and worry about our team a lot more than their team.''
While Belichick and his staff are expert at identifying weaknesses and exploiting them, Henning has seen a thousand schemes since his coaching career began at Florida State in 1968.
It is a chess match that is intriguing on many levels and to many people. Kansas City Chiefs receiver Johnnie Morton, in town for the week's festivities, was part of a team that lit up the scoreboard in a 41-38 overtime victory over the Patriots at Gillette Stadium in 2002.
Kansas City's Priest Holmes rushed 30 times for 180 yards and 2 touchdowns.
It was a different Patriots team, yes, but Morton said it revealed some things that the Panthers might be able to use.
''It can be done,'' Morton said of solving New England's defense. ''If you look at our blueprint, and the history of the Super Bowl, the No. 1 thing is establishing the run game, even if you're not successful at first. Stick with it, then you get the eight defenders in a box, and you can attack the secondary.''
It is a safe bet that Henning has watched that game film.
PRO FOOTBALL
