ON Friday, Fox Searchlight will release Bernardo Bertolucci's new film, ''The Dreamers,'' uncut and with an NC-17 rating -- reversing the studio's original plan to distribute it with an R and signaling that after a long, troubled adolescence, the NC-17 may have finally come of age.
''The Dreamers'' is the latest in a short list of major studio films to be released with an NC-17 -- and perhaps the most conspicuous since 1995, when MGM's ''Showgirls'' convinced studios that the controversial adults-only rating was a box-office liability. When the Motion Picture Association of America introduced it in 1990, the rating was meant to redeem adult films from the stigma of pornography. (The first studio film rated NC-17 was Philip Kaufman's ''Henry and June,'' based on episodes in the life of the writer Henry Miller.) But since that time, studios have routinely required filmmakers to cut offending images to secure an R rating, and thereby a wider audience.
Set during the student protests of 1968, ''The Dreamers'' follows three teenage film buffs who experiment with sex in a Paris apartment. When the association rated the film NC-17 ''for explicit sexual content,'' Fox Searchlight, the art house subsidiary of 20th Century Fox, reminded Mr. Bertolucci that his contract obligated him to deliver an R-rated film. Independent studios and distributors of foreign films can avoid the NC-17 by releasing films unrated; major studios like Fox, as members of the association, do not have that option.
''We were in a quandary,'' said Peter Rice, Fox Searchlight's president. ''We had a film from one of the greatest filmmakers who ever made films, and we couldn't release it without a rating.''
Both Mr. Rice and Stephen Gilula, Fox Searchlight's president of distribution, agreed that NC-17 was the appropriate rating for the film they submitted to the association. ''There's full-frontal nudity, both sexes,'' Mr. Gilula said. ''There are a number of simulated sex acts but no hard-core sex. It's just the sheer volume of sexuality.''
Perhaps most provocative are scenes of masturbation and several close-up shots of male and female genitalia, which Mr. Gilula described as ''fairly often and fairly matter-of-fact.'' They are integral to the film ''in terms of surprising the audience,'' he said. ''Startling, I should say. There are three I'm thinking of right now that will catch people off-guard.'' What's more, the characters are young, and two of them are brother and sister.
As the studio weighed its options, the film played at the Venice International Film Festival, where Mr. Bertolucci decried the prospect that it would be ''amputated and mutilated'' by Fox for American audiences.
Mr. Gilula said that Mr. Bertolucci's remarks were not the reason Fox Searchlight abandoned its pursuit of an R rating. But he allowed that Mr. Bertolucci's preemptive objections ''publicized the fact that there would be two versions of the movie'' -- one for American audiences, the other for the rest of the world -- if the company altered ''The Dreamers'' to earn an R. (Britain's film board gave it an 18 certificate, which bars viewers under 18 -- a designation often given to violent films that the M.P.A.A. has rated R.)
Last fall, Fox Searchlight began to study the environment for distributing and marketing adult films. The studio discovered that national theater chains like Loews and AMC were willing to carry such a film. A survey of major cities found that only Seattle prohibits its newspapers from printing advertisements for NC-17 films.
''We found that the conventional wisdom that the rating is a liability is really not the case,'' said Mr. Gilula. ''The issue had become essentially dormant, so it offered us a fresh start.''
Mr. Rice, the company president, said he was inspired by the film culture of the 1970's. ''Films made by important, thoughtful filmmakers for discerning adult audiences were not meant to be seen by children,'' he said. ''Trying to sanitize every film so you can take a 12-year-old to it -- why does that have to be?''
FILM
