NOT long after the fall 2002 release of ''Barbershop,'' Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton threatened a boycott of the film, upset about the caustic jokes a character makes about Rosa Parks and Martin Luther King Jr. It's hard to imagine too many other people had second thoughts about seeing the movie, which grossed $75 million, but ''everybody was freaking out when the controversy was going on,'' said Ice Cube, one of its stars. ''Everybody but me.'' His reaction? ''This is nothing compared to the N.W.A. days or earlier in my career.''
That's putting it mildly. N.W.A., which in the late 80's defined West Coast hip-hop with layered beats and brutal lyrics, probably offended more people before breakfast than most artists do all day; the F.B.I. sent the group's record label a letter expressing its disapproval of the song ''[Expletive] Tha Police.'' After Ice Cube left the group in 1990, his solo albums, like ''Amerikkka's Most Wanted,'' became hits for their urgent beats and cinematic storytelling, as well as cultural flash points for the insults they aimed at women and gays. Scowling through videos that depicted violence in South Central Los Angeles as both unavoidable and cartoonishly alluring, he didn't exactly project mainstream Hollywood appeal.
Over the last half decade, though, Ice Cube, born O'Shea Jackson, has gradually become not only a reliably bankable actor but also a successful screenwriter and producer. The first movie he wrote and produced, ''Friday'' (1995), cost $2.3 million and earned $27 million, and its two sequels also earned substantial profits and became home video hits. Currently he plays a bad-guy biker in ''Torque,'' and ''Barbershop 2: Back in Business,'' which opens on Friday, could solidify his second franchise. Last year Revolution Studios signed a three-year deal to back his Cube Vision production company in movies that Ice Cube will produce and perform in; the studio also has deals with Adam Sandler, Bruce Willis and Julia Roberts. He's now shooting ''Are We There Yet?,'' a family comedy (written with Steven Gary Banks) in which he plays a beleaguered bachelor forced to drive his girlfriend's kids from Portland, Ore., to Vancouver, British Columbia, so they can spend New Year's with their mom. Presumably N.W.A. won't be blasting on the car stereo.
''It's a comedy I would have made at Disney,'' said Joe Roth, who left that studio to start Revolution. He compares Ice Cube to Adam Sandler before he reached a huge audience with ''Waterboy'' or went serious with ''Punch Drunk Love'' -- ''he has the good will of a lot of people but he stayed, unnecessarily, in a confining genre.'' To Ice Cube, 34, who says he wants to become the kind of star who can open movies internationally, ''It's a big step but a necessary step.''
Plenty of hip-hop figures have crossed over to film, but few have chosen roles so far removed from their musical personas. Will Smith, for example, mostly plays the likable everyman he portrayed in his raps as the Fresh Prince, and it's hardly a stretch for Eminem to play a blue-collar rapper from Detroit. Ice Cube's first role, as a thug shaped by circumstance in John Singleton's 1991 movie, ''Boyz N the Hood,'' could have come right from one of his albums. ''I thought every script I would get would be like 'Boyz' ,'' Ice Cube said in a telephone interview from Vancouver. ''I wanted to control what I do on the screen somewhat.''
So with Mr. Singleton's encouragement -- ''he said if you can write a rap you can write a script'' -- Ice Cube began working on screenplays. Then in 1995 he was putting together financing to make ''Friday,'' a comedy he wrote with D. J. Pooh about two stoned buddies in South Central, when New Line Cinema gave him the money he needed for the project. It didn't cause an immediate stir, but ''once it was on home video, it did crazy numbers,'' said Matt Alvarez, Ice Cube's partner in Cube Vision, which is based in Santa Monica, Calif. It introduced Chris Tucker, Ice Cube's co-star, and became a campus classic. At a time when many hip-hop-influenced movies were filled with death and despair, it showed another side of South Central. With a cast of recognizable neighborhood archetypes -- the threatening bully, the sexy woman across the street -- the jokes in ''Friday'' could apply to any block.
As Ice Cube worked to expand his range as a writer, he also won a role set half a world away from Los Angeles, in David O. Russell's Persian Gulf war movie, ''Three Kings.'' In a well-reviewed performance, he held his own with George Clooney and Mark Wahlberg, playing a cynical military officer with qualms about gunplay that Ice Cube, the rapper, would have scoffed at. ''I think 'Three Kings' took my career to another level,'' Ice Cube said. So did forming Cube Vision in 2000 with Mr. Alvarez, then a New Line executive; their first joint project, ''Next Friday,'' made for $11 million, grossed $57 million. So far, all six movies that Ice Cube has produced (and starred in) have earned a profit, in part because the company sets modest budgets and doesn't exceed them. ''It doesn't take us $80 million to make $86 million,'' Ice Cube said. ''I'm proud of that.''
''Barbershop'' was a more ambitious movie, and Ice Cube plays a more middle-class character, the owner of the shop, who's tempted to sell the business he inherited from his father but decides against it when he realizes its value to the neighborhood. Some of the characters don't do much more than provide a support structure for a series of stand-up-style riffs on everything from celebrities to white people who act black. But the film also brought the warm, neighborhood feel of the ''Friday'' movies to a broader audience. In a review of ''Barbershop'' for The New York Times, A. O. Scott wrote that ''the movie's quiet affirmation of neighborhood values gives it an honest, lived-in glow.'' And despite the distinctly urban setting, the film crossed over into the mainstream. ''The longer it stayed in theaters,'' said Chris McGurk, vice chairman of MGM, which distributed the movie, ''the more diverse the audience got.''
''Barbershop 2'' has the same kind of zippy riffs -- the token white barber gets called ''Slim Fadey'' -- but also a more substantial plot. Ice Cube's Calvin Palmer character again must choose between the family business and some easy money, this time from a developer intent on gentrifying the barbershop's block on Chicago's South Side. More than in the first film, the values of Ice Cube's character -- doing right by his neighbors, building a better life for his child -- are the same ones espoused by the groups that were protesting his music 10 years ago. In part, no doubt, this is due to the passage of time: Ice Cube was a teenager when he was in N.W.A., and now he's a married father of four. ''As you get older you get calmer,'' he said.
But he remains angry enough to have a viable career in hip-hop, even if he's no longer one of the biggest stars of the genre. He drops his on-screen smile for his trademark scowl on the cover of ''Terrorist Threats,'' the new album from his group Westside Connection, which has a song, ''So Many Rappers in Love,'' mocking hip-hop stars who croon R &amp; B ballads as sentimental fools, as well as other tracks that are still infused with the socially charged rage of his earlier albums. Asked if the situation in South Central has improved since the early 90's, he thought for a moment, then said: ''It's hard to gauge, but I'm going to say no. America is the great pretender -- they want you to pretend everything is fair. I've made it good for myself, but it's not fair and I'm not going to pretend that it is.''
As for the music he made with N.W.A., he said: ''Those records are time capsules in a way, pieces of the year that was -- who I was and where I was. I have no regrets.''
Anyone wondering whether Ice Cube can be credible as both an angry rapper and a star of family films might consider that he worked on ''Terrorist Threats'' last summer in Chicago at the same time he was beginning work on ''Barbershop 2.'' Every night he would spit out lyrics about what one cut on the album calls ''Gangsta Nation,'' and every day he would arrive at the set and play the friendly family man, all while making sure the filming went smoothly in his role as executive producer. ''The album is full of fire and passion -- it's dark and hard,'' said Kevin Rodney Sullivan, the film's director. ''Then you have this guy who's a great actor and he's running a serious company. Music is only one dimension.''
To the extent that hip-hop personas are roles in their own way, Ice Cube came by his naturally -- he grew up living it. ''Those records are about real feelings deep down inside of you when you're trying to understand what the world is about coming from any kind of neighborhood like I came from,'' he said. But now that's no longer all he lives -- sometimes he has to pile the kids in the car, too. ''It's not like I'm trying to be someone different to do those movies,'' he said. ''All of it is me.''
FILM Robert Levine is a New York-based senior editor at Wired magazine.
