DOES the quality of a company's earnings bear any relation to the performance of its stock?
The answer, of course, is usually a resounding yes. But after the stock market's behavior last year -- when shares of many companies with low-quality earnings outperformed their higher-brow brethren -- investors can be forgiven for wondering whether it still pays to be choosy about the caliber of a company's earnings.
David Bianco, accounting analyst at UBS, has a message for the doubters out there: It still pays, big time.
In an analysis of earnings quality among companies in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index, Mr. Bianco found that since 1998, stocks of the highest-ranking companies outperformed the index by a considerable margin. While the index returned 3.3 percent, annualized, during that period, the 50 companies with the best-quality earnings generated average annual returns of 12.3 percent, including dividends. Conversely, shares of the bottom 50 companies showed zero return, on average, over the same time.
Mr. Bianco's measure of earnings quality takes into account one-time or special charges that companies often take to reflect what they consider unusual events, like major restructurings or widespread layoffs.
But many companies take such charges all too regularly. And they often do not reflect them in their so-called pro forma earnings, the results they want investors to focus on. So, Mr. Bianco's view is that the more significant the charges over time at a company, the more questionable its quality of earnings.
Studying companies' reports from 1991 to the present, Mr. Bianco found eight companies that have ranked consistently in the top-quality earnings camp. (See table.) Five companies that regularly formed the bottom of the pack were the Ball Corporation, maker of metal and plastic packaging; Safeco, the property and casualty insurer; Symantec, a provider of Internet security technology; Unisys, the information technology concern; and Whirlpool, the appliance maker.
Although special charges are now ubiquitous at many companies, Mr. Bianco said the practice actually did not become prevalent until the 1990's. And in 2001 and 2002, such charges soared, which was perhaps predictable, given the economic slump. But the fact that the one-time charges just keep on coming at some companies, even in the improving economy of recent months, is plenty surprising.
''A lot of investors say, 'Isn't the one-time issue going away or getting better?''' Mr. Bianco said. ''But there's no evidence it's going away. We are still collecting numbers for 2003, but I think there is going to be just as big a level of one-time charges as there have been, on average, since 1991.''
THE evidence in Mr. Bianco's study confirms what some investors have long suspected: that calling these charges nonrecurring is laughable. In fact, he found that companies taking ''one time'' charges tend to do so repeatedly.
For investors, this makes poor historical earnings quality a pretty good indicator that more of the same can be expected from a company in the future, according to Mr. Bianco. Companies with high-quality earnings also tend to be consistent over time.
''I think a lot of investors think that in 2003 doing this type of work hurt your performance, that in 2003 it helped to own the junk,'' Mr. Bianco said. ''But earnings quality does outperform over long periods of time.''
Paying attention to earnings may not be sexy. But this much is clear: Investors who ignore the caliber of a company's earnings do so at their peril.
MARKET WATCH
