ARE your freshly washed clothes hard and scratchy? Is your just-shampooed hair sticky and dull? Are there spots on your clean dishes and glasses?
If so, you may have a case of the curds -- the unpleasant byproduct of soap dissolved in hard water.
There is a cure for the curds, of course, and that is making your hard water a little bit softer.
''Hard water interferes with almost every cleaning task,'' said Sharon Skipton, extension educator for the University of Nebraska Cooperative Extension in Lincoln. Ms. Skipton explained that water is a good solvent and picks up impurities easily; as it moves underground through soil and rock, it dissolves small amounts of minerals and holds them in solution. Calcium and magnesium, she said, are two of the most common minerals that make water hard.
It should be noted that hard water is not a health hazard. In fact, according to the National Academy of Sciences' National Research Council, hard drinking water generally contributes a small amount toward dietary needs for calcium and magnesium. And a Finnish study suggests it may play a role in reducing heart disease.
Nonetheless, hard water is generally considered a nuisance. For example, Ms. Skipton said, clothes washed in hard water may look dingy, feel scratchy and develop a sour smell. Dishes and glasses washed in hard water may be spotted. Shower walls and doors, bathtubs and sinks may acquire a hard-to-remove film. Hair washed in hard water may be dull, lifeless and difficult to manage.
All those problems, she said, are the result of the interaction between soap and the hard water. ''Bathing with soap in hard water leaves a film of sticky soap curd on the skin,'' Ms. Skipton said. The film may interfere with the removal of dirt and bacteria and leave a deposit on hair, clothes and plumbing fixtures. (At the same time, Ms. Skipton said, bathing with soap in water that is too soft may leave skin feeling somewhat slippery. That, however, is generally not the result of soap being left on the skin, but is instead attributable to the absence of any soap curd remaining.)
John M. Jemison Jr., water quality and soil specialist for the University of Maine Cooperative Extension in Orono, said hard water can cause problems with plumbing. For example, he said, hard water can reduce the useful life of things like dishwashers, washing machines and water heaters; can create scale on water coils in water heaters, thereby decreasing efficiency; and can restrict the flow in water lines throughout the house.
Accordingly, Mr. Jemison said, homeowners who have hard water usually want to have it softened. The first thing to do is find out just how hard your water is. In fact, he said, it is probably prudent for anyone who is considering purchasing a home -- particularly one that has its water supplied by a well -- to have a test conducted not just to determine the water's hardness, but also to check other qualities and contaminants.
''You certainly want to test for the presence of bacteria and nitrates,'' he said, adding that if testing is not available from a state agency, there are a number of reputable water testing laboratories that will perform such tests.
Mr. Jemison said the test results express the hardness of water in one of two ways: either as ''milligrams per liter'' (parts per million) or as ''grains per gallon.'' Generally, he said, water is considered soft if it contains zero to 60 milligrams per liter or parts per million; moderate if the measurement is 61 to 120; hard if it is 121 to 180; and very hard if the measurement is over 180.
When the measurement is expressed as grains per gallon, soft water contains zero to 3.5 ''g.p.g.''; moderate water contains 3.5 to 7; hard contains 7 to 10.5; and very hard is anything over 10.5.
If the test shows you have elevated levels of minerals -- over, say, 100 milligrams per liter -- and the water is considered to be a nuisance, then it may be time to install a water softener. ''There are a number of water softeners on the market today,'' Mr. Jemison said, adding that most water softeners employ the principle of ''ion exchange'' to remove minerals from water. With that process, he said, the water is passed through a bed of resin beads that have been saturated with sodium. As the water passes through, he said, the minerals become attached to the beads and the sodium is released into the water. And while the amount of sodium released into the water is not enough to be noticeable, the process nonetheless removes most minerals in the water. (People who are on a low-sodium diet may need to use a different chemical, potassium chloride, to soften the water.)
There is one caveat with all such systems, however. The minerals eventually have to be flushed from the system and the sodium must ultimately be replenished; this could mean work for the homeowner.
Tom Bruursema, general manager of the drinking water treatment unit program at the National Sanitation Foundation, a testing and certification group in Ann Arbor, Mich., said that a vast majority of water softeners use the ion-exchange system and that there are a number of technologies used to clean the units and replenish the sodium.
The most basic water softener, he said, requires the homeowner to take a number of steps to ''regenerate'' the unit. Generally, this involves ''backwashing'' the unit to remove accumulated minerals, ''brining'' the unit to resaturate the resin beads with sodium and replenishing the sodium when necessary.
Another type of water conditioner, Mr. Bruursema said, is a semiautomatic unit. With such a device, he said, once the homeowner initiates the regeneration process, the machine completes most of the job itself.
With a fully automatic softener, the unit is typically equipped with a device that starts the regeneration process according to a preset time schedule and then completes the process on its own.
The most sophisticated systems, Mr. Bruursema said, initiate and complete the regeneration process either by measuring the amount of water that passes through the system or by sensing a change in water hardness.
Mike Barone, a sales manager for Culligan, a water-softener manufacturer based in Northbrook, Ill., said ion-exchange water conditioners made by his company cost about $1,000 to $2,000 installed, depending on the size and sophistication of the unit and local labor costs.
And while it is possible to find water conditioners for $400 or even less, such machines typically cannot soften the water as efficiently as larger machines. ''A $400 unit might have a flow rate of five gallons per minute,'' Mr. Barone said. ''But you put that in a house with three bathrooms and you're going to have a problem.''
Smaller machines, he said, generally have relatively small built-in sodium reservoirs that require refilling every two to four weeks.
Larger water conditioners can treat up to 25 gallons per minute. And some of the more sophisticated models may not require replenishment of the sodium for up to a year.
Homeowners who are in the market for water softeners may also discover devices that do not use sodium to remove minerals.
Tom Palkon, director of product certification for the Water Quality Association, a trade organization in Lisle, Ill., said some devices, for example, allow the minerals to remain in the water while changing the characteristics of the water to make it act like soft water. Others, he said, use magnets installed on the water lines to eliminate the problems associated with hard water.
And while such devices may work in some situations, Mr. Palkon said, there is no technical standard yet in the United States for evaluating their overall performance. As a result, he said, consumers are basically on their own when attempting to compare such units.
''Some people swear by them,'' he said. ''And some people swear they don't work.''
YOUR HOME
