A Staten Island fire captain who tried to cover up a firehouse altercation that left a firefighter critically injured will retire under an agreement in which he made a full confession and agreed to pay a $90,883 fine, the equivalent of a year's pay, Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta said yesterday.
Besides the fine, the captain, Terrence M. Sweeney, who will retire on Feb. 10 after 26 years with the department, accepted demotion to the rank of firefighter, a symbolic penalty as his pension will be based on his last three years' pay. He agreed not to appeal any aspect of the deal and to continue cooperating with investigators, the commissioner said.
But the resolution of Captain Sweeney's case hardly ended the turmoil that began with the altercation, which occurred on New Year's Eve and ended with one firefighter in critical condition and another under arrest and exposed a culture of scorned regulations and flawed leadership at the firehouse.
Yesterday, with his department facing a series of alcohol-related incidents involving firefighters on duty in recent weeks, Mr. Scoppetta signaled a crackdown by announcing that all 50 members of Captain Sweeney's Tottenville station -- Engine 151 and Ladder 76 -- would be reassigned to other firehouses and replaced by a new crew of firefighters.
Hours after Mr. Scoppetta's announcement, the leader of the union that represents the city's fire officers angrily charged that Captain Sweeney had been bludgeoned into confessing by senior fire and city officials who, he said, had reneged on a deal that would have been more favorable to the captain. The president of the Uniformed Fire Officers Association, Peter L. Gorman, accused Mr. Scoppetta of caving in to pressure from City Hall and said the commissioner had lost the confidence of the union and its members.
Mr. Gorman said the union did not condone Captain Sweeney's actions at the firehouse, but insisted that he did not deserve to be humiliated. ''It amounts to nothing more than a public humiliation, a public flogging,'' he said of the demotion.
By accepting the arrangement -- which was worked out by senior fire officials, city investigators and Staten Island prosecutors and offered to the captain Friday night after his testimony was completed -- Mr. Sweeney will avoid a departmental trial that was to have begun tomorrow, with dismissal and a loss of his entire pension as possible penalties, and he will not face criminal charges, Mr. Scoppetta said.
The city, for its part, extracted a confession that sharply clarified the events of Dec. 31 and Jan. 1 at the firehouse in Tottenville -- before and after Firefighter Michael R. Silvestri, 41, slammed a metal chair into the face of Firefighter Robert Walsh, 40, fracturing his jaw, nose and other facial bones. In the ensuing chaos, Captain Sweeney admitted, notifications to superiors were delayed, lies were told and records were falsified in a cover-up that quickly came apart.
Captain Sweeney, who was just going off duty when the assault occurred, was one of the firefighters who took Firefighter Walsh to Staten Island University Hospital, where he was listed in critical condition and where doctors were told he had fallen down a flight of stairs, a lie that was later mirrored in the firehouse's official journal. Firefighter Silvestri, though, was arrested on Jan. 1. He has pleaded not guilty to charges of assault, harassment and possession of a dangerous weapon.
The agreement announced by Mr. Scoppetta will also give the authorities a significant witness in any further legal proceedings against other firefighters in the case, including several officers who have been reassigned to administrative duties in the widening investigation. Beyond his admissions, Captain Sweeney agreed to continue cooperating with investigators and prosecutors, presumably even testifying in court.
''Whether an officer is leading his or her members into a fire, or setting the tone of a firehouse, we expect behavior that is befitting of an officer and reflects the highest levels of conduct,'' Mr. Scoppetta said at a late morning news conference.
Explaining his decision to clean house at the Tottenville station, the commissioner said the chaotic events there on New Year's Eve suggested that rules were routinely abused. ''That night for sure is symptomatic of what may have been going on,'' he said.
At his news conference, Mr. Gorman, the president of the fire officers' union, suggested that City Hall had scuttled what he called the framework of an agreement that he had worked out with city officials in recent weeks, which would have given the captain a fine of only six months' pay, not a year's salary, and full retirement benefits in exchange for his cooperation.
''The Uniformed Fire Officers Association is deeply troubled by the actions of the mayor's office and the fire commissioner in the Captain Sweeney matter,'' Mr. Gorman said. ''I persuaded Captain Sweeney to testify truthfully to all investigative bodies here. I framed an agreement that called for Captain Sweeney's resignation and a fine of six months' salary.''
Under the arrangement, the captain testified twice last week -- on Tuesday and on Thursday -- before a battery of officials from the Police and Fire Departments, the Department of Investigation and the Staten Island district attorney's office.
Mr. Scoppetta said Captain Sweeney had specifically admitted witnessing the assault, failing to report it promptly, failing to supervise members of his command and failing to get the injured firefighter immediate medical help, and generally admitted neglecting his duty and violating his oath of office. ''Captain Sweeney was extremely cooperative and candid,'' Mr. Scoppetta said.
The first deputy commissioner of the Department of Investigation, Walter M. Arsenault, told Mr. Scoppetta in a letter dated Thursday that Captain Sweeney ''was candid in recounting the events of Dec. 31 and Jan. 1'' and had been ''cooperative and useful in both the DOI's investigation of the incident and the Richmond County District Attorney's criminal case against Firefighter Michael Silvestri.''
On Friday, a day after the captain completed his testimony under a deal that he and his union had regarded as a commitment from the city for a fine equal to six months' pay, the terms were changed abruptly, Mr. Gorman charged.
At 5 p.m. on Friday, Mr. Gorman said, Mr. Scoppetta gave him ''the terms of the new deal.'' Mr. Gorman said he argued against them, to no avail. He then informed Captain Sweeney.
''What choice do I have?'' he quoted the captain as saying.
Mr. Scoppetta disagreed with Mr. Gorman's account. ''There was no reneging,'' he said when asked about the union leader's assertions. ''There was no misrepresentation from the very beginning of these discussions.'' He did not elaborate.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Gorman said in a telephone voice-message to his members that he and Captain Sweeney had been betrayed by Mr. Scoppetta. He said he had apologized to the captain. ''He does not blame us,'' Mr. Gorman said. ''But I feel a personal responsibility for this disappointment.''
A woman who answered a call to Captain Sweeney's home on Staten Island yesterday said he was not home or available for comment.
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  An article in some copies on Sunday about a Fire Department captain who agreed to resign after admitting that he tried to cover up a brawl at a Staten Island firehouse misstated a point in Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta's summary of the agreement to dismiss departmental charges. It still allows for criminal charges by the Richmond County District Attorney's Office, which is investigating. He did not say it ruled them out.
