HERE at Super Bowl XXXVIII, we are made to feel as if we are covering something astoundingly far-reaching, truly global and universally profound.
We are apprised of the growing number of countries carrying tonight's prized television feed, aiming for millions of wide-eyed admirers of the United States in 229 countries who will be screaming ''Go for it!'' in 21 languages and fighting serious sleep deprivation to not miss Janet Jackson in the halftime show.
No fewer than eight Carolina Panthers and New England Patriots have been reminiscing about how they persevered in N.F.L. Europe only to be handsomely rewarded by fateful bounces of the odd-shaped all-American ball. International journalists abound deep in the heart of Texas, an estimated 400 in all, reaching the apex of Super Bowl recognition: their very own party with a bulked-up buffet.
''One of the greatest sporting occasions in the world,'' raves Zhigong Shi, producer of the first Chinese Super Bowl broadcast team from CCTV, in a dispatch on NFL.com.
But I wonder: Is this really the way it looks around the world, or is it more a case of bombast without borders, a satellite-fueled extension of the now-legendary Super Bowl week hype? With all due respect to Zhigong's claim, why am I reminded of my former colleague Maury Allen, who years ago had a standard line while packing up after a quick filing on deadline: ''There's a billion Chinese who don't give a damn.''
The most famous of them, at least in this country, considered my American football question with a wry smile for a few seconds the other night and pretty much came to the same conclusion.
''I don't think there's a big chance that the Chinese people would get too interested in this,'' said Yao Ming, relaxing in the Houston Rockets' locker room before a game. ''Not just because of the physique of most people, but the way people think about the game, the way they think about sports and life.''
In other words, while some may hook into American football for the cultlike experience and others may be intrigued by the Academy Awards-like pageantry of the Super Bowl, popularizing our gladiatorial (and gambling) obsession as a game for the global masses may be akin to selling the sport utility vehicle as economically and environmentally prudent.
''It's like soccer here, football there,'' said Joe Andruzzi, the Patriots offensive lineman from Staten Island, who played one season for the Scottish Claymores in N.F.L. Europe. ''Soccer is coming up here a little bit; football is up and coming over there.''
Andruzzi recalls bands of hard-core fans chasing their hometown teams around the continent, wearing cheesehead-type paraphernalia, becoming fluent in football military speak. The six-team N.F.L. Europe still exists after several years as a developmental vehicle, so it must be resonating with some segment of the European sporting public.
But there's a difference between soccer here and football there that stretches as far as the Texas plains. However marginal on the American professional level, soccer is a grass-roots phenomenon in the United States, practically a suburban rite of passage for the athletic boy and girl.
Basketball and hockey are played by young people on a far more diverse scale and therefore are the more appropriate North American exports to compare with soccer. When young people play, they are more likely to develop some interest in watching the world's best.
In line with the global celebration and the party line, youth teams have been trotted out here this week from Russia, Japan and Mexico to compete in the N.F.L. Global Junior Championship VIII. The first round of games on Wednesday served its purpose as a catchy television sound bite. But it's difficult to imagine too many countries where the youngsters are running down-and-outs and where the Super Bowl feed won't mainly service American combat forces and citizens living abroad.
One possibility is Israel, where readers of The Jerusalem Post this morning were encouraged in a short commentary to root, root, root for the Patriots tonight -- or tomorrow morning, which is when the game will be shown in the Middle East -- by a former New Yorker, Steve Leibowitz, a television news editor and president of American Football in Israel, or A.F.I.
Robert K. Kraft, the Patriots' owner, is the majority shareholder of Israel's largest packaging plant, and he and his wife, Myra, are known for their philanthropy with Jewish causes in the United States and in Israel. In 2000, Kraft donated $250,000 to build a sports complex called Kraft Family Stadium, where Leibowitz operates his 54-team, 500-member flag football league, whose four-month season ends next month with the annual Holyland Bowl.
''I built it, he paid,'' Leibowitz said by telephone from Jerusalem. ''More recently, he's put up another $250,000 for an artificial surface, and Myra is funding our women's national flag team, which is going to the World Cup of Flag Football.''
Flag, Leibowitz said, is the ''international standard'' for American football and an area the N.F.L. has actively promoted in the United States and abroad. The league, Leibowitz said, makes a donation every season to A.F.I.
It's a canny marketing strategy, given the costs and risks of tackle football, and, internationally, the less flattering perception of the spectacle that tonight will transfix Americans everywhere.
''Rugby for sissies,'' one British journalist here was overheard describing our most macho team game. That's a characterization not soon to be posted on NFL.com.
Sports of The Times
