Stephon Marbury did not allow himself a smile until the final buzzer. Playing with a determined glare, he stopped and popped the Suns' future, showing he was the one passing it by.
The Suns traded Marbury and Penny Hardaway to the Knicks nearly four weeks ago to focus on youth and to cut costs, a franchise direction Marbury said he understood. Last night, in the Knicks' 110-105 victory at Madison Square Garden, Marbury fell into a rhythm, outplayed his replacement and continued to change his new team's direction.
Leandro Barbosa, a 21-year-old rookie point guard from Brazil who filled Marbury's shoes after the Jan. 5 trade, slid out of them each time Marbury stopped on the run, faked him and pulled up for a 3-pointer.
Marbury, who finished with a game-high 35 points, scored 11 straight points in his 18-point second quarter and 9 straight in the third. He scored only 2 in the nerve-racking and mistake-plagued final quarter.
Hardaway preserved a satisfying victory for the former Suns by sinking two free throws with 15.8 seconds left.
''I think he was really focused on showing them: 'You never should have given up on me,' '' Hardaway said of Marbury. ''Whenever you hear a team say we want to go young, and you're still young and you're the go-to guy on the team, it's kind of an insult to be traded.
''When they did that to him, he felt like, 'Hey, you guys did me a favor, but every time we play, I'm going to try to put big numbers up on you.' ''
Had Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens not rested Marbury until 6 minutes 15 seconds remained in the fourth quarter, his numbers (he also had 8 assists) might have been better. He and Keith Van Horn each hit five 3-pointers.
Van Horn had one of his best all-around games with the Knicks (22-27), finishing with 30 points, 12 rebounds and 7 assists.
For the second straight game, they compensated for the absence of the Knicks' captain, Allan Houston, who said he would most likely be out of action to rehabilitate his knee until after the All-Star Game break.
If Marbury had extra motivation for last night's game, he did not express it, even going out of his way to sidestep a controversy with Phoenix (17-32).
''I wanted to win the game,'' he said. ''I don't have any vendettas against them. I understand the decision they made. I have no hard feelings toward them.''
Marbury said he was happier for Hardaway, whose big contract the Suns had been trying to unload for a while. Hardaway scored 13 points, equaling the output of Howard Eisley, the Knicks' former point guard, who was also involved in the trade.
Marbury seemed to channel all of his emotion into the game, allowing the Knicks a sigh of relief when they improved to 22-27.
''There's something in the back of your head, you want to get the win, it's a pride thing,'' Van Horn said. ''Stephon and Penny probably wanted to show that organization what they lost. They played great.''
The Knicks held a 106-102 lead with 38.8 seconds left when Shandon Anderson (starting in place of Houston) turned the ball over. The Suns' Joe Johnson (31 points) hit only the first free throw. He missed the second, but as Van Horn grabbed the rebound, Casey Jacobsen stripped him of the ball.
Van Horn fouled Jacobsen, who missed both free throws with 18.9 seconds left. This time, Van Horn made sure to cradle the ball after rebounding the second free throw. He was fouled and converted both for a 108-103 lead with 17.2 seconds left.
Shawn Marion hit two free throws, cutting the Knicks' lead to 108-105 with 16.9 seconds left. But Hardaway made his free throws and Jacobsen missed a 3-pointer with 7.9 seconds left.
Each time the Knicks sagged last night, Marbury was there to pick them up. ''Stephon has the ability when we need points, he can get them quickly because he has an amazing ability to break guys down,'' Van Horn said.
Marbury took command of the game in the second quarter after scoring just 4 points in the first quarter and shooting twice.
After hitting one 3-pointer, Marbury -- with his crossovers and quick shots -- heard the adoring oohs and ahhs from the crowd that he has come to savor.
REBOUNDS
KURT THOMAS jammed the pinkie finger on his right hand in the first quarter, but X-rays at halftime were negative. He scored 8 points in the third quarter with two fingers taped. . . . Guard ALLAN HOUSTON is shooting for a Feb. 17 return, the first game after the All-Star Game break. ''That's what I kind of have in my mind, but at the same time, it could feel really good before that, I just don't know,'' Houston said. . . . The rookie MIKE SWEETNEY was activated from the injured list when BRUNO SUNDOV's 10-day contract expired without the Knicks re-signing him. He played four minutes Friday night in Boston, his only game for the Knicks. . . . ANTONIO McDYESS dressed in a tan suit on the bench. He expects to stay on the injured list until after the All-Star Game break. ''I'm disappointed they gave up on me so soon,'' he said of the Knicks. McDyess said he was upset by the way ISIAH THOMAS, the Knicks' president for basketball operations, treated him at the end. He will be a free agent this summer and said he would not consider going back to the Knicks, at least ''not how it was when I left.''
PRO BASKETBALL
