WHEN the jurors for the World Trade Center memorial competition announced that they would consider designs from anyone who wanted to submit one, they were acting on principle. But for many of the people who responded to that invitation, the matter was deeply personal. Working on their own initiative and against lousy odds, determined to express themselves and to keep memory alive, they spent countless thousands of hours conceiving, drafting, revising and explaining their visions.
All told, 5,201 designs were submitted, from 63 countries and 49 states, from individuals of all ages, many without any design experience.
An unscientific survey revealed everything from scaled-down twin towers to classical references to sources at which observers can only guess. Here is a sampling of 10, culled from Web sites, blind submissions to The New York Times and word-of-mouth recommendations. In the coming weeks, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation will launch a Web site showing all the entries; they are also considering whether to display them in New York.
JULIE V. IOVINE
ENDURANCE MEMORIAL  Stuart Gosswein
BY day, Stuart Gosswein, 50, works for an automobile trade group in Washington, but his avocation is to be an artist of portraiture and sculpture made of found materials. On 9/11, Mr. Gosswein rode his bike to the Pentagon to see where American Airlines Flight 77 had hit and then to the White House to see President Bush arrive by helicopter. ''I had a vision on Sept. 12 of this design,'' said Mr. Gosswein, who worked day and night for a month on the details.
His idea is decidedly literal: a large fountain in the shape of the twin towers, standing 275 feet high, would be positioned between the two footprints. Water would pour down the sides into two pentagon-shaped pools of glass intersecting the towers; the lower pool would be supported by 51 columns, one for each state and the District of Columbia. Stairs within the fountain would lead to four observation decks. Visitors climbing up and down would be able to experience ''what it was like trying to get out by stairs.'' In the plaza surrounding the fountain there would be free-standing 10-foot glass panels engraved with the names of all those who died. Beyond that the landscape would be planted with trees and shrubs native to Shanksville, Pa., where United Airlines Flight 93 went down.
ART/ARCHITECTURE
