WHEN Texas was young, Galveston was a star: a major port for cotton, coffee and tin. Trade was so vigorous that the Strand downtown was called ''the Wall Street of the Southwest.''
It was not to last. By the mid-1990's the port was faltering, and for many, the only thing that came to mind when they heard the word Galveston was Glen Campbell's melancholy ballad.
But now the port of this beach town on the Gulf of Mexico is in the midst of a renaissance. On a recent Saturday morning two massive white cruise ships, stacked and gleaming like wedding cakes, disgorged passengers at the wharves, then loaded up the next batch and headed out again. Two more ships were scheduled to arrive the next day.
Five years ago Galveston was not a home port for cruise ships. This year, seven cruise ships will call the city home for at least part of the year, and 384,000 passengers are expected to embark here, which would make Galveston one of the top 15 cruise ports in the world.
The city had a lot going for it as a potential port. Its 40-foot-deep channel can accommodate the biggest boats. The piers are about 30 minutes from open water, which saves time. Galveston, a popular summer sandbox for Houston residents, already has plenty of hotels and attractions as well as a historic downtown of Victorian-style buildings within a block of the ships.
Most important, 30 million people live within a 500-mile drive of the cruise ship terminal, including nearby Houston, the nation's fourth-largest city. And ''Texans love to drive,'' said Melody Smith, director of tourism for the Galveston Island Convention and Visitors Bureau. At least 70 percent of Galveston's cruise passengers drive here, said Michael Mierzwa, the port's director of facilities and operations.
Galveston is perhaps the most dramatic example of a national trend. In a push to literally bring cruising to a wider public, cruise lines are no longer concentrating their ships in a few hubs like Miami or San Diego. Instead, they are placing more ships in second-tier or industrial ports around the nation that historically are known for longshoremen, not the Love Boat. Cruise ships today sail from almost anyplace that has a deep-water port: Galveston; Charleston, S.C.; Philadelphia; Bayonne, N.J.; Norfolk, Va.; Seattle; New Orleans.
Many factors are driving this expansion. Cruising is the fastest-growing segment of the travel industry, according to the Cruise Lines International Association, with an estimated 8.3 million people -- a record -- taking cruises from North America last year. Eighty new ships set sail in the 1990's; some 50 more will have joined the fleet by next year, including some megaliners that can carry 3,000 passengers or more.
But use of regional ports is about more than a need for more docks. The industry is keen to entice the estimated 85 percent of Americans who have not cruised before, especially those who fall outside the traditional cruising demographic that is sometimes disparaged as ''the overfed, the nearly dead and the newly wed.'' The added cost of flying to established ports like Miami, Fort Lauderdale or San Diego has been a deterrent, said Len Polsky, a spokesman for the cruise association. Regional ports give more passengers the option to drive to their ship, something skittish fliers seem to appreciate since the terrorist attacks of 2001.
''We're bringing cruising right to the consumer,'' said Bob Dickinson, president and chief executive officer of Carnival Cruise Lines. This year Carnival will have 20 ships in 19 locations around the country, including new home ports like Jacksonville, Fla., Baltimore and Mobile, Ala. (Carnival sold out three ''test market'' cruises from Mobile in eight hours, a record for the company.) The regional home ports help Carnival compete with destinations like Las Vegas and Orlando, which the cruise line considers its main competition, said Mr. Dickinson.
Offering cruises from ports nationwide also saves consumers time, said Mr. Dickinson. As Americans take shorter vacations, the demand for two- to five-day cruises has grown to more than a third of North American cruises. Someone who lives in Seattle can board a flight to Galveston on a Thursday morning, catch a four-day cruise leaving for Cozumel, Mexico, in the afternoon and return to Seattle on Monday.
Technology has also helped redraw the cruise map. For years Seattle couldn't wrest a share of the popular Alaskan cruise market from Vancouver, British Columbia, in part because liners couldn't reach Alaska and return in seven days. But the recent introduction of new, faster ships means that United States passengers can now leave from Seattle instead of taking an international flight to Vancouver or taking a four-hour bus ride across from Seattle's airport. This year the Port of Seattle expects a 40 percent increase in the number of sailings to Alaska, to 140; five years ago there were just six cruise ship calls.
New York City, Bayonne and Philadelphia have also had more cruise business thanks to faster ships. In May Norwegian Cruise Line's newest ship, the Norwegian Dawn, became the first cruise ship in decades to make New York its year-round home port. Cruising at 25 knots, or 20 percent faster than older ships, the Norwegian Dawn can stop in Florida and the Bahamas and return in seven days.
Among the many changes, though, Galveston's transformation stands out. ''If you go back to the mid-1990's this port was really struggling,'' said Steven Cernak, the port's director.
In 1999 Carnival committed to using Galveston as home port for 72 cruises the next year. With that commitment in hand, the port began an ambitious program of improvements to docks, terminals and parking lots that will total $35 million by the end of this year, said Mr. Mierzwa, the Galveston port official. Other lines followed, with Royal Caribbean and Carnival lending the port money for the upgrades. This year Carnival offers four-, five- and seven-day cruises to the western Gulf of Mexico with stops in places like the Yucatán Peninsula, starting at $429. Royal Caribbean offers trips of up to 12 days. Celebrity also calls Galveston home this year, and Princess Cruises' Grand Princess will be Galveston's largest catch yet when it arrives in November: a ship taller than the Statue of Liberty, nearly 1,000 feet long and able to carry 2,600 passengers.
The city has hitched its wagon to the cruise industry. ''We're not doing anything else with our port; why not make it the cruise ship capital of the Gulf Coast?'' said Pat Healy, a lifelong Galveston resident and co-owner of Morgan's on the Strand, a dress shop within sight of the boats. Mr. Healy said his business had increased ''probably a good 10 percent or so'' since the big ships started arriving.
Tourism and business officials are working to get more passengers to arrive before their cruise, or stay afterward, to tour Galveston. Statewide, the cruise industry contributed $445 million to the Texas economy through direct purchases in 2002, according to a recent study commissioned for the International Council of Cruise Lines, which represents 15 major cruise lines.
One day last month Royal Caribbean's 2,076-passenger Splendour of the Seas and Carnival's 1,486-passenger Celebration loomed at the Galveston wharves, both so mammoth that it was hard to say whether the ships were moored to Galveston or the city to them. Longshoremen wearing Hawaiian shirts pushed baggage carts through debarking crowds.
''Since 9/11 anything you can drive to is a benefit,'' said Lynne Billman, looking slightly toasted and relaxed, as she waited for her husband to retrieve the car. The Billman family had driven from Charlottesville, Va. Its 12-night cruise on the Splendour of the Seas included climbing Maya ruins in Belize, eating formal dinners at sea and entering the Panama Canal. Mrs. Billman said the canal was the biggest draw, but she was also glad to avoid the crowds and annoyances of Miami's large port.
''Part of the attraction of coming here was that we knew the people would be classic Texans -- warm and open and genuine,'' she said. Her son Tom, 15, agreed, and said he liked ''the quickness to the first port'' -- Cozumel from Galveston.
SOON after the Billmans departed, Peggy and Wendell Neufeld were aboard the same boat, tucking into spiced salmon and chicken in the Windjammer Cafe atop the ship. ''It was even easier to get here than Miami or Fort Lauderdale,'' said Mr. Neufeld, who is 63 and a retired wheat farmer from Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. When the couple's cruise ended, he added, they will be able to fly home the same night.
The Neufelds' view from atop the ship is a snapshot of the changes at hand in Galveston. Out one window, past an ice sculpture and the buffet line, a shrimper motored past a retired off-shore oil rig that listed drunkenly on rusty feet. Through the near window, just steps from the gangway the Neufelds had crossed, construction scoops clawed at the remains of an unused grain terminal that has been razed to make way for expanded cruise facilities.
''The indications from the cruise lines are that we should start planning Terminal No. 3,'' Mr. Cernak, the port director, said later. A new terminal, he said, could be needed in just two or three years.
SPRING-SUMMER CRUISES CHRISTOPHER SOLOMON lives in Seattle.
