EVEN with its buildings gone, the site where General Motors once produced minivans still dominates the landscape here, its concrete foundation stretching to the Hudson River, and a quaint lighthouse that reflects a bygone era.
This is the town's future, an empty canvas offering nearly 100 acres of prime riverfront real estate in the shadow of the Tappan Zee Bridge.
Roseland Property, the New Jersey company selected to develop the site, has devised a plan calling for 1,532 condominiums or apartments, a 150-room hotel, restaurants, a boutique grocery, a fine arts theater and possibly a train station. A ''green crescent'' of open space curves around the project along the river and connects it with adjacent parkland. The historic lighthouse at the tip of the property sets the tone for the development known as Lighthouse Landing.
Groups concerned about preservation along the Hudson River say what happens here will have repercussions well beyond the village's borders as old industrial sites along the river in Westchester County and above make way for new opportunities. Along the county's 49 miles of riverfront, towns from Yonkers to Peekskill are looking to develop Hudson River property, not to mention towns across the river in Rockland County and to the north in Putnam County.
''The General Motors site, in close proximity to some of the most significant cultural and natural resources in Westchester County, is going to be a signature development that will set the tone for what happens both in Westchester and throughout the Hudson Valley,'' said Ned Sullivan, the president of Scenic Hudson, a river preservation group. ''We have an opportunity to make our waterfront a national model of thoughtful development, a once-in-a-generation opportunity to shape the Westchester waterfront for the entire century.''
During most of the 20th century, the Hudson's shores were dominated by factories making everything from bricks to cable, carpet to sugar. During those years, as the historian Roger Panetta likes to say, the river was ''both a highway and a sewer.''
But with the passage of the industrial age and the success of decades of efforts to reclaim the Hudson River, new decisions are necessary. Those decisions, over the next handful of years, will lay down the look of the riverfront for decades to come.
''We're at a critical juncture,'' said Alex Matthiessen, the executive director of Riverkeeper, an environmental group formed to protect the Hudson. ''Really, good or bad, the decisions that we make today are the ones were going to have to live with for the next century.''
But Mr. Matthiessen and others voiced concern that too many towns and villages are going about their development without any kind of overall plan for the waterfront and how it should be utilized. ''It's a good news, bad news story,'' he said. ''The good news is there is a concerted effort being made to reclaim the waterfront and use the development to revitalize communities. The problem is that no one has thought about it from a comprehensive standpoint.''
Specifically, he voiced concern over a lack of oversight by both the county and the state and the failure to develop a regional plan showing how much housing will be needed in the future, where such housing should be situated and what are the best locations for green space and recreational opportunities.
''We'd hate to see the equivalent of strip malls along the Hudson River front,'' he said. ''I think a lot of these developers are trying to squeeze as much office, residential and commercial space as possible at the expense of open space.'' Developers like Roseland say they are working with public officials and environmental groups to integrate their plans with the existing buildings and to avoid overdeveloping areas. Mr. Sullivan of Scenic Hudson estimates that in the next five to eight years the Westchester waterfront will be fully developed, in some cases transforming towns and creating thousands of housing units.
Thirty-seven projects are currently being developed along the Hudson River in Westchester County, 10 of them in Yonkers alone, according to information compiled by the county's Department of Planning. The developments will cover about 300 acres and create nearly 4,400 units of housing. They range from a 16-unit development in Ossining called Birches to the Lighthouse Landing project in Sleepy Hollow with its more than 1,500 units. ''Now is the time for us to work with citizens, public officials and developers to ensure that public access to the river is secured at every development,'' Mr. Sullivan said.
Although the county has no veto power over what localities do with their land, planning officials said they are working with towns and villages with the hope of securing public access within a diverse mix of housing, business and cultural opportunities. Also playing a role is a voluntary group of 13 villages and cities that make up the Historic River Towns of Westchester, an organization formed 10 years ago to promote economic development and regional identity.
Beyond monitoring the development projects, county officials are working on the 46.6-mile RiverWalk, which they say gives the county a good chance to play a role in the process. ''The approach is how do we put the pieces together and make sense,'' said Jerry Mulligan, county planning commissioner noting that the county has tried to provide a road map for growth through documents like ''Patterns for Westchester,'' which looks at land use and growth.
As for the riverfront, there are a multitude of questions to explore: how will traffic be affected, particularly along already gridlock-prone Route 9? Have opportunities for mass transit been explored? How much open space will there be? What will be the mix of homes and businesses? Have the county's numerous historic and natural resources been protected?
In these and other questions, a number of visions must be considered. Groups like Scenic Hudson and Riverkeeper strive to secure public access as an organization like the Historic Hudson Valley focuses on the county's treasure trove from the past. Municipalities that have been struggling to make up revenues lost as industry died see an opportunity to increase their tax base, and soaring property values open the door to every developer's dream.
Mr. Matthiessen put public access at the top of his list for priorities in developments. But another perspective comes from Martin Ginsburg, whose Ginsburg Development Companies, based in Hawthorne, has at least three projects in the works along the river, and wants to bring people back to the river, but with an eye toward tourism and the creation of a vast array of shops, restaurants and inns.
''Almost all the communities recognize that tourism would be beneficial, but they've done very little create a place where tourists want to go,'' he said. ''There are cruise ships that go up the Hudson but they go rarely because there are no places to stop.''
He notes that the development he is creating in Haverstraw, across the river from Ossining, will have the first port of call on the Hudson River.
In Westchester, projects include a waterfront development in Tarrytown that calls for a recreation center and swimming pool, esplanade, shops and housing as well as a new Village Hall. In addition to the G.M. site in neighboring Sleepy Hollow, the Ginsburg Development Company has plans for 44 town houses in what he calls ''Ichabod's Landing,'' on 3.5 acres adjacent to General Motors site. Farther north in Peekskill, Mr. Ginsburg's company is developing what it calls Riverbend, 201 luxury condos on a milelong stretch of the Hudson.
In Irvington, a new commercial development is under construction just north of the Scenic Hudson Park, and Hastings-on-Hudson will most likely find itself weighing proposals once the former site of the Anaconda Wire and Cable Company is cleaned up by the Atlantic Richfield Company, which now owns the property.
Mayor John A. Perillo of Ossining said the village is finalizing plans on a project by the developer Louis R. Cappelli. The project, Harbor Square, calls for 127 condos and about 10,000 square feet of retail space.
The project has been controversial, with elections being won and lost over the issue. Mayor Perillo was voted into office in 2002 after promising to have a referendum on the project. Once elected, however, he backed away from the promise and worked with Mr. Cappelli to have the size of the project reduced and a tax abatement rescinded.
''When I came into office it was an apartment building with residence for 180 tenants,'' Mr. Perillo said. ''A very box-type building with really no architectural flair.''
Through talks with the developer, he said they have been able to scale the plans to 127 units, six-story buildings instead of nine story ones and no tax abatement (the previous agreement included a 66 percent tax abatement). Mr. Perillo said he had no choice but to negotiate with the developer because the former board had negotiated a deal that left the town legally bound to the developer.
''I'm trying to make lemonade out of lemons,'' he said. But bitter opposition to the project persists. Tom Langley, a member of the Ossining Waterfront Alliance, a group formed to fight the project, said the plan has been negotiated behind closed doors without the promised waterfront committee established to focus on the community's desires.
The group has pledged to battle the development in court. ''The fight is far, far, far from over,'' he said.
In contrast, the project in Sleepy Hollow has been a much more open process.
''This is not like where, if you remember the old movie with Charlton Heston, Moses comes down with the tablets and lays down the law,'' said Philip Zegarelli, mayor of Sleepy Hollow. ''Lots of developers come in and say their tablets are their plan. We right off the bat said you ain't going to do that. We're going to sit down and tell you what we think ought to go there.''
Many environmental and historic groups have been party to the process as has the community and the county.
In Sleepy Hollow, none of the buildings are to be more than four stories high, leaving open views to the river from the bluffs overlooking the site.
''There will be no fences, no barriers,'' Mr. Zegarelli said. ''That to me is a key ingredient to what I think will be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for the people of Sleepy Hollow to see what can be done with redeeming the waterfront.''
Jonathan Stein, partner in charge of the development at Roseland, said that the project includes 200 units marked specifically for the elderly, with 100 of those affordable housing, and that the population density is well under town zoning requirements.
Still, there are concerns. River advocates suggest that the number of housing units should be far fewer, 700 to 1,000, and continue to lobby Roseland to leave 30 percent or more of the site open for green space. Currently, a little more than 25 percent is open space.
Mr. Stein noted that a significant amount of building will have to be done to link the existing village with the lighthouse project, including the construction of streets and sidewalks. He said that the village, along with groups like Scenic Hudson and the state, had been part of the process to determine how the old and the new should be linked.
''There has been a lot of effort to coordinate with the community and other developers,'' Mr. Stein said, adding that the efforts continue.
Besides questions about how much open space should remain, the density of development and public access, questions also arise about what the developments should look like.
''One of my objections is that the new waterfronts will be a homogenized residential community with no market no connection to the history that preceded it, '' Mr. Panetta said. ''There are architectural reminders, there are local histories that need to be preserved. This is the moment to do it because that history is disappearing.''
River advocates say they are encouraged that public discussions are taking place. Taking the long view, they say these discussions may mean that there is a better chance that what is ultimately built will be better than what happened 100 years ago.
''We're at a moment on the Hudson as we turn the corner into a new century,'' said Deborah Meyer DeWan, the director of the Riverfront Communities program with Scenic Hudson, ''where we're clearly poised to take the best of the history and the lessons we've learned into a new dimension -- one that celebrates and connects people with the river once again in a way that is environmentally sound, economically viable and culturally rich.''
A Walk Up the River, Skirting Sing Sing
MANY hurdles stand in the way of Westchester County's plan for a RiverWalk along the Hudson River: the Indian Point nuclear plant, for instance, as well as miles and miles of active railroad hugging the shoreline, big swaths of private land, steep terrain and gritty abandoned industrial sites. But probably the most harrowing challenge to the 46.6-mile RiverWalk plan was the Sing Sing Correctional Facility, a state maximum security prison in Ossining.
Charting the potential route from aerial maps, county planning officials saw a slim tract of land running along the prison on the waterfront side.
Armed with a camera, they went to document what was there. Instead, they encountered an irate prison guard who demanded the film from their digital camera, which they dutifully had to delete, frame by frame.
''We abruptly said, 'Let's reroute around the prison on the inland side,''' said Paul Gisondo, an associate planner with the county who worked with a field team planning the path.
County Executive Andrew J. Spano has made a goal of the creation of the trail way, which will run from Cortlandt at the Putnam County border to Yonkers at the border of New York City. He touts the idea as an opportunity to increase access to the river, to promote tourism and to generate business.
''I think RiverWalk is one of those projects that enables us to work with communities to identify where local, county or state parks can be tied together to create a continuous trail way,'' said Jerry Mulligan, the county commissioner of planning.
County planners said it could take as long as 10 years for the project to be completed, but sections of it will be opened as they are ready. Eighteen miles of trail way are already in place as part of existing parks, like the Old Croton Aqueduct, and seven miles are in design or under construction. On the Westchester shoreline, the railroad uses or abuts some 21 miles of the riverfront. Eight miles is either active or former industrial property, three miles belong to institutions ranging from the Veterans Administration Hospital to Lyndhurst, a property of the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and the rest is a mix of private lands in commercial, recreational or residential use.
To put the RiverWalk plan into effect, myriad issues will have to be resolved, including the fate of the Yonkers Paddling and Rowing Club, a 120-year-old group that uses a boathouse in Yonkers that the county would like to remove to make way for the path, which will run through Habirshaw Park, a park the county is creating nearby.
''We can't get through there with that building in place,'' Mr. Mulligan said.
The county owns the land and sent letters to the club that it needs to clear its belongings out of the Alexander Street boathouse by Feb. 15. Local and county officials have been meeting to resolve the issue and are hopeful that solutions will be found.
Bob Morrow, club commodore, said Yonkers officials had assured him that the club will not have to leave by Feb. 15. Club members say a rowing club is the perfect use for the site and for the boathouse, which they have used for about 70 years.
Mr. Mulligan said the county isn't arguing that the use isn't perfect. The problem, he said, was that the club, which is semiprivate, has had six years to find another location so that the way can be cleared for greater public access to the area.
Mr. Morrow notes that the county plans to put a 12-foot fence around Habirshaw Park so it can be closed to the public at certain times and that actually the boathouse would be one of the last points of public access if that happens.
''Ultimately, the county, city and the club all want people to enjoy more access to the Hudson River,'' said Andrea Stewart-Cousins, a county legislator from Yonkers, who has entered the talks. ''With that as the shared vision, it shouldn't be hard to get everyone together and working to achieve the desired goals.''
BARBARA WHITAKER
