He could not see the ball either, the kick that disappeared into the swirling snow of the New England night.
Adam Vinatieri then barely caught sight as his 45-yard kick -- perhaps one of the greatest in N.F.L. history -- cleared the crossbar with 32 seconds left to send the Patriots into overtime against the Raiders in a playoff game two years ago.
Two weeks later, he won the Super Bowl with a 48-yarder as time expired, but it is the kick in the snow that has defined his career and changed his life. David Letterman had him try to kick a ball between two buildings. A furniture company made him its pitchman. Two of the greatest kickers ever -- Morten Andersen and Gary Anderson -- separately approached him last year to tell him how amazing the kick was. And people gape at him in supermarkets. This is the kicker as rock star, a most incongruous combination in a game where other players usually make fun of a kicker's special shoes.
''Everybody has got a story,'' Vinatieri said. ''People were telling me they were running down the street in a blizzard because it was the most amazing thing they ever saw.''
The transformation in Vinatieri was evident this week as the Patriots prepared for the Super Bowl. Other kickers are asked about him (Carolina's John Kasay said he watched the snow kick at home, and thought there was no way Vinatieri could make it).
On media day, Vinatieri was surrounded by dozens of reporters -- not as big a crowd as Tom Brady drew, but unheard of for a kicker -- and he told and retold his story. About how his great, great grandfather Felix Vinatieri was Gen. George Armstrong Custer's bandmaster and was fortunate to be told to stay behind as Custer headed off to meet his fate at Little Big Horn in 1876 -- a significant benching as it turns out.
About how perhaps the penchant for derring-do moments runs in the bloodlines, since the daredevil Evel Knievel is a cousin of Vinatieri's. Knievel may have jumped over the Snake River Canyon on a jet-powered Skycycle, but Vinatieri has kicked 15 game-winning field goals with less than a minute remaining in regulation or in overtime.
''I got a lot more recognition, a lot more media things,'' Vinatieri said. ''A lot of fun things kickers don't get to do. It's usually time for the Hollywood quarterbacks and the superstars. But sometimes us little kickers get a little bit, too.''
Vinatieri's most recent game-winner was a 46-yarder with 4 minutes 6 seconds left that gave New England a 17-14 victory over Tennessee and sent the Patriots into the American Conference final. If it lacked the high drama of the snow kick, it had a more subtle significance.
After an unusually erratic season, Vinatieri was his old self in high-pressure situations. That is a relief for the Patriots and for Vinatieri. His kicking percentage is 80.6, placing him 10th in career accuracy. That would be great, except that entering the season, he was fifth on the list. In 2002, he converted an astonishing 90 percent of his kicks (27 of 30), including a career longest of 57 yards. That, while playing home games in a stadium in which he regularly encounters miserable conditions and difficult footing. It earned him his first trip to the Pro Bowl.
''Do you know how rare it is for a kicker from Green Bay or Chicago or New England to make the Pro Bowl?'' Kasay said. ''His kicking in atrocious conditions is unbelievable.''
Vinatieri is not the sensitive sort. He has no detailed prekick routine, no mantra he repeats, no prescribed order for stretching and retying his laces. He never wanted to rely on a system, in case he did not have time before a kick to execute the whole drill.
But this year, Vinatieri faced trials that only a kicker could appreciate. He has reportedly had back trouble. He is on his third snapper of the season, after the first two suffered season-ending injuries. He has had two holders, because his regular one was released for a week before being re-signed. Not surprisingly, he missed nine field goals, and his accuracy rate plummeted to 73.5 percent, the worst of his career.
''It was an interesting year,'' Vinatieri said. ''I've never seen the injuries we've had at the snapper position, the transaction stuff at the holder position. From the middle of the season to the end, it was something new every week.''
But as Vinatieri leaned back at media day, he had the comfort of gazing at a perfectly manicured field in a climate-controlled environment. It probably would not matter to one of the best poor-weather kickers in the game, but if it rains heavily Sunday, the roof of Reliant Stadium will be closed. Vinatieri will be able to focus on just kicking the ball straight.
That seems too little to ask of him. Patriots Coach Bill Belichick has known Vinatieri since he was a rookie in 1996, when Belichick was Bill Parcells's defensive coordinator. He pays Vinatieri an almost unheard-of compliment. ''More than a kicker, he's a football player,'' he said.
The stereotype of a kicker is that of a player isolated from the rest of the team. He does not practice with teammates; he doesn't lift weights, and players avoid him when his time in the spotlight is approaching, convinced that they might upset his fragile fortitude. Vinatieri quashed that image almost immediately in 1996. In a game against Dallas, as Herschel Walker took off down the sideline with a kickoff, heading for a touchdown, Vinatieri, 6 feet and a muscular 202 pounds, gave chase.
''I don't know how I got 10 seconds of speed, but that one day I was fast,'' Vinatieri said. ''I ended up tackling him from behind. I remember Coach Parcells saying to me, 'You're more than just a kicker; you're a football player to this team now.' ''
Linebacker Tedy Bruschi was on the field with Vinatieri that day. And he has been in the weight room with him in the off-season, wondering what Vinatieri is doing in there.
''He's not going to tackle anybody; why is he training so hard?'' Bruschi said. ''But he was outrunning me to get to Herschel. I was like, 'O.K., it's like we've got another guy on the kickoff team.' ''
PRO FOOTBALL
