SINCE its creation in 1999, the Nassau Health Care Corporation has aspired to a regional role as a top-rung health provider offering advanced medical care at its 631-bed Nassau University Medical Center in East Meadow.
Last week, in the opening round of what will be an intense debate about a thorough restructuring and downsizing of the public-benefit corporation to stop its financial losses -- $91.1 million to date -- a study by a consultant hired by Nassau County splashed cold water on notions of advanced health care. The study said a caseload review revealed that the medical center more nearly fit the description of a community hospital functioning as the county's family doctor, with a special mission as the doctor's office of last resort for the uninsured and indigent.
Dropping its costly pretensions to be more, the study suggested, will be one key to averting a financial collapse within 18 months. A collapse would have serious financial consequences for the county, which guarantees repayment of $256 million in debt the corporation assumed at its creation.
The hospital corporation ''has pursued costly, and ultimately unaffordable initiatives based upon a vision of becoming a full-service tertiary-care hospital, when in reality it should have structured its operations and programs based on the goal of being a first-class community hospital,'' said the study by Manatt, Phelps &amp; Phillips, a Manhattan law firm with a specialty in turning around financially troubled hospitals.
Such turnarounds are complex, but the goals are simple. ''What you are trying to do is eliminate costs but keep revenue the same or add more -- that's really the trick,'' said Kenneth E. Raske, the president of the Greater New York Hospital Association.
Kevin Dahill, the president and chief executive of the Nassau-Suffolk Hospital Council, which represents 24 nonprofit and public hospitals in the two counties, said Nassau University Medical Center was far from alone in facing financial hardships. ''More than half our membership is in a very precarious financial situation,'' he said.
Rick Wade, the senior vice president for communications of the American Hospital Association in Washington, said a third of all hospitals were operating in the red, and a third were barely breaking even.
In New York, six hospitals closed last year, including the 213-bed Island Medical Center in Hempstead.
Richard B. Turan, the president of the Nassau Health Care Corporation, said he did not expect Nassau University would be added to the list. ''I don't believe anybody is going to suggest that we close,'' he said. ''The question is what do we need to look like to continue to function.''
The study consultants also rejected closing the hospital but recommended regionalizing some services it now offered. This would involve affiliations with one or more of the three health systems that operate in Nassau: Catholic Health Services of Long Island, North Shore-L.I.J. Health System and the Winthrop South Nassau University Health System.
The study said one objective would be to create a partnership with the private systems. ''This integration not only would contribute significantly to improving the clinical and financial performance of N.H.C.C. but would also go a long way toward breaking down historic barriers to access to the best health care available in Nassau County for all patients, including the indigent,'' the study said.
The study said that by tailoring itself to its true calling as a community hospital, the Nassau University Medical Center could reduce costs by as much as $20.2 million while increasing revenue by up to $14 million. This would be part of an overall restructuring plan to save the corporation up to $47.7 million while increasing revenue by up to $35.3 million.
Another recommendation that is bound to be controversial calls for closing the 889-bed A. Holly Patterson nursing home or reducing beds to somewhere between 450 to 680 and relocating the home. Part of its operations would be housed in the hospital building and part in a new building on the hospital grounds.
Closing the home, the study said, might be possible if the current residents moved to private nursing homes with empty beds. It said the private homes had an incentive to fill 95 percent of their beds because that would qualify them for special payments to hold beds open when residents temporarily leave for hospital treatment.
In either event, the nursing home building in Uniondale would be razed and the 63-acre property sold. The money that would bring in, an estimated $30 million to $70 million, would be used to pay off part of the $256 million corporation debt.
The study said that 225 to 313 jobs, including those for 17 to 19 doctors, would be eliminated at the hospital, where reductions have already occurred. It said 71 to 137 jobs would be eliminated at the nursing home. The corporation has about 3,800 employees, Mr. Turan said.
No immediate layoffs were envisioned at the corporation's seven diagnostic and treatment clinics. But the study, citing higher Medicaid payments for patient care at the clinics, called for doubling their patient caseloads, in part by redirecting patients from the main hospital to the clinics.
The study also called for a revision of agreements between the corporation and the county that would increase the county's control and give county officials the power to appoint members of the corporation's board of directors.
