POETS HOUSE, an archive in an office building on Spring Street in Manhattan, is a repository for words that seek to capture the highs and lows (and sometimes tears) of human emotion. So in this setting on Jan. 17, none of 85 people who gathered to witness the marriage of Carolyn Leonhart, a jazz singer, and Wayne Escoffery, a saxophonist, seemed put off when copious tears came bursting from first the bride, then the bridegroom. Before long even the bride's father, the jazz bassist Jay Leonhart, was caught up in the crying jag.
A bride crying on the happiest day of her life? Do a lot of brides break down in tears?
The couple's officiant, the Rev. Galen Guengerich of All Souls Unitarian Church in Manhattan, a man who estimates that he has married 80 couples, said: ''Gee, I don't know. Not that many.'' He then added, ''It was a lovely moment.''
Let's rewind. Valentine's Day, 2002. Ms. Leonhart went to the jazz club Smoke that night with Victoria Cave, then a fellow backup singer with Steely Dan, because it was the kind of place they could feel comfortable visiting without dates.
Ms. Leonhart, now 32, managed to shoo away a couple guys, whom she said ''were trying to hit on us,'' but then Ms. Cave noticed Mr. Escoffery. The London-born musician, now 28 and who plays tenor sax with the Charles Mingus Big Band and Orchestra, was sitting by himself. Ms. Cave recalled telling her companion, ''That guy is cute, and he's checking you out.''
And so Ms. Leonhart checked him out, too. He was, she said, like a beautiful painting, and so young. Too young, perhaps. Eventually he came over and introduced himself.
A month later, Mr. Escoffery, whom Sue Mingus, widow of Charles Mingus, described as ''one of the most talented, poetic artists,'' asked Ms. Leonhart on a date. But between her traveling schedule and his ''we had a lot of first dates,'' Ms. Leonhart said.
And then she went on tour to Switzerland and France, and suddenly she missed him. ''That's when we both realized it was definitely more than just dating,'' she said.
Last April, knowing of her love of submarines and military history, he took her to visit the Nautilus submarine at a museum in Groton, Conn., where Mr. Escoffery pulled Ms. Leonhart onto his lap and asked her to marry him.
They wanted a garden wedding, but they were too impatient to wait until summer. They didn't want to spend a lot of money, nor, Ms. Leonhart said, ''were we looking to make a fashion statement with our wedding.'' Which is why they settled on the obscure Poets House. Ms. Leonhart's low-key attitude extended to the wedding dress as well, an inexpensive white bridesmaid's dress with halter top.
''You know jazz musicians,'' said her father, who pretended to look at his watch and then mimicked a cool dude: ''Hey man, let's run down to the justice of the peace.''
Mr. Guengerich, the officiant, began the couple's nondenominational ceremony by explaining that ''true love engages differences.'' It was while he was taking the couple's vows that Ms. Leonhart's usual reserve turned into a soup of bridal emotion -- laughing at first and then bursting into tears. (''I'm not going to wear mascara at my wedding,'' a woman in the audience whispered, amid all the sniffles.)
When Ms. Leonhart recovered her composure, she reached up to brush the tears off Mr. Escoffery's face and put the ring on his finger.
''We're both intense people,'' Mr. Escoffery said later. ''She is one of the few people who understands the strong emotions I have.''
Earlier, as he stood outside the storage room where his daughter was putting on her veil, Mr. Leonhart said, ''It's so good to see her turn into a bride, to be so into it.'' After the ceremony, he explained his own tearful response to his daughter's pledge of lasting love. ''To hear herself say it, and to mean it so much. . . .'' he said, and then got all teary-eyed again.
Or perhaps it was the stunning impossibility that a lovely and talented young woman might meet an available man who shares her interest in jazz and her poetic spirit, who is tall and handsome and well spoken and polite. And she married him anyhow?
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
