THE PRICE OF LOYALTY
George W. Bush, the White House,
and the Education of Paul O'Neill.
By Ron Suskind.
348 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $26.
WHEN Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill took his famous trip to Africa with Bono, the lead singer of U2, in May 2002, the odd-couple label was, predictably, tossed around quite a lot in the press. In fact, the two men shared a deep interest in the developing world; the really curious pairing of George W. Bush's Washington, an authentically star-crossed duo that had no chance from the start, was O'Neill and Bush's political guru, Karl Rove.
Their first conversation took place on Dec. 30, 2000. That morning, the Associated Press had run an article announcing that a two-day economic forum with the president-elect in Austin, Tex., would feature O'Neill, the Treasury secretary-designate; Donald Evans, his counterpart-to-be at Commerce; and Lawrence Lindsey, who would be chief economic adviser. O'Neill learned about his participation while reading The New York Times. And when he got Rove on the phone, O'Neill, who considered politics the enemy of good policy, learned a lot about what his next two years would be like.
''I think it would be better, Karl,'' O'Neill said, ''if someone had bothered to first ask me whether I thought this was a good idea and then whether I thought it would be a good idea for me to attend. My answer to both questions is no.'' Ron Suskind goes on in the ''The Price of Loyalty'' to describe a ''penitent'' Rove (let's see how Rove characterizes his mood when he writes his book) eventually acknowledging that the event was chiefly designed to give air time to key corporate donors. O'Neill hung up and dashed off a quick memo to self that read in part: ''Get KR and others in the press/media operation to agree we're going to coordinate our outside face and that the outside face will be driven by substance, not by the need to have a line of the day.'' I'm guessing here that you can see why the relationship came to naught.
The Rove chat aside, O'Neill entered the Bush administration confident that he could effect change and reform. After all, he was assuming arguably the most venerable position in the cabinet, and he was no Washington neophyte. He first came to the city in 1961, when he landed a job in the Veterans Administration. He had worked in high-level capacities in the administrations of Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford. In 1988, George H. W. Bush's transition team approached him to consider becoming Secretary of Defense (demurring, he recommended his old pal Dick Cheney). So he knew the town and most of the principals with whom he would be serving, and his ideological credentials -- he backed privatization of Social Security, large tax cuts and so forth -- seemed sound. But he had settled in Pittsburgh, where he had been the chief executive officer of Alcoa since 1987. Washington -+and, more to the point, conservatism -- had changed.
''The Price of Loyalty'' -- so tight was the publisher's embargo that even the title was not released until just before the book itself appeared -- has run its course through the news cycle by now. Some of the first reported bits are certainly compelling, although it could well be argued that at this point one has to be a bit naïve to believe that this administration was not looking for ways to oust Saddam Hussein before Sept. 11; crumbs were dropping along this neoconservative trail for more than a decade. Other revelations are of greater interest, especially those concerning the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, an O'Neill ally (and thus a hero of the book). Greenspan and O'Neill tried to insist that Bush's tax cuts be made conditional on budgetary health, a battle they lost in the Senate by one vote. Greenspan has denied using the word ''irresponsible'' with regard to the tax cuts, but there's enough material here that he hasn't denied to suggest that his opinion was exactly that.
But the news-cycle controversies have obscured the book's central, and important, thesis. It is the contention of O'Neill -- and of Suskind, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and the author of ''A Hope in the Unseen: An American Odyssey From the Inner City to the Ivy League'' -- that in this White House, evidence and argument have been routinely pushed aside when they got in the way of previously decided political outcomes. That we've heard before. What enriches ''The Price of Loyalty,'' aside from the accretion of persuasive detail, is its assertion that in this administration, a time-honored notion of public service has been deeply corrupted.
When O'Neill worked in the Nixon and Ford White Houses, Suskind writes, he served presidents whom he respected as policy makers, whatever their other faults, for two reasons: first, they were knowledgeable about the details of policy; and second, they made it a point to have their aides present them with different, and sometimes starkly warring, points of view. Nixon called on the Office of Management and Budget (where O'Neill worked) to prepare so-called Brandeis briefs, named after Justice Louis Brandeis of the Supreme Court, that presented thorough analyses of opposing arguments and made everyone ''really think deeply about the ideal of good government and how to get there,'' in O'Neill's words. The people in the room may have all been from one political party or shared a general world view. But they understood that when spending the people's money and acting on behalf of the entire country, including that segment that did not vote for their president, their obligation to fact-based inquiry and rigorous testing of hypotheses was self-evident.
This book serves as that standard's obituary notice. First, Bush himself is portrayed as disturbingly unengaged. From O'Neill's first meeting with him through his last, Bush asked some questions here and there about politics and perception, but he rarely asked a specific question on a policy matter. The weekend after the Sept. 11 attacks, when O'Neill was among the group invited to Camp David to discuss responses, he espied a large stack of intelligence briefings brought by the director of central intelligence, George Tenet, and found himself thinking, ''I hope the president really reads this carefully. It's kind of his job.''
Second, O'Neill smelled at many high-level meetings the odor of a conversation set up in advance to drive the discussion toward the conclusion that Rove and the political team had already settled upon. One example: At a meeting on steel tariffs, which the administration put in place in 2002 against all free-market principle, O'Neill could tell where things were going when the United States trade representative, Robert Zoellick, ''made several oblique references to 'political realities.' '' The pattern repeated itself over and over, on tax cuts and the economy and energy policy and Iraq. In time, O'Neill grew aghast, and went to his old friend Cheney to suggest that the administration try Brandeis briefs. But Cheney -- the book's chief villain and, if Suskind and O'Neill are to be believed, our functional president -- just sat passively. ''He thanked Paul, as always, 'for his sharp insights,' '' Suskind writes. And that was the end of it.
The end of O'Neill finally came in December 2002, when Cheney -- not Bush -- called to give him the sack. For all of the arguments ''The Price of Loyalty'' advances deftly, one point it allows only grudgingly is that the administration had several legitimate beefs with its man at Treasury. In early passages, Suskind turns somersaults to establish O'Neill's probity, apparently so great that even inanimate objects reflected it (at one point, O'Neill settles into a ''ladder-back chair'' that was an ''emblem . . . of rectitude and transparency''). And though Suskind does acknowledge O'Neill's maverick nature and tendency for unguarded comments, the missteps are usually represented as the frank talk of a courageous truth-teller, when sometimes they were just impolitic mistakes. Finally, there are one or two surprising omissions. In the section on the Africa trip, Suskind doesn't even mention that while O'Neill was abroad, the Dow Jones industrial average suffered a drop of more than 350 points, and that it was kind of his job to be in Washington to steady the markets.
But even so, whether O'Neill was a brilliant Treasury secretary or a mediocre one, he did regard the public trust as a serious matter, and the case ''The Price of Loyalty'' makes about the debasement of the policy process is a strong one. ''Politics, as it's now played, is not about being right,'' O'Neill concludes. ''It's about doing whatever's necessary to win. They're not the same.'' One finishes this book hoping that those who consider themselves the guardians of Washington integrity will do more to demand that the distinction be honored.
Michael Tomasky is the executive+editor of The American Prospect.
