WALKING into Nini's in New Haven feels like stepping onto the set of a piece of theater art. Maybe it starts with the curtains. You walk off the street into a tiny anteroom, through heavy curtains into the smallish restaurant; more curtains divide the room from the kitchen and the back area.
Your host greets you as you peek through the entry curtain and sort of shoos you in, where you jostle and are jostled by other guests arriving and leaving, pulling coats on and off a portable coat rack. (There are only two seatings; everyone arrives at once.)
It doesn't feel like any restaurant I have ever been in. It's more like walking into someone's home, informal and sometimes more than a little hectic. You can stand in the middle of the room for a few minutes before one of the black clad waitresses takes you in hand to tell you where to sit. That may be intentional. Everyone takes it in stride.
In retrospect, I think Nini's feels like theater to me because I don't have a sense of the kitchen driving the restaurant. The very prettily done up dining room (exquisite, diminutive rosebuds on the white clothed tables, tapestry banquets) seems to exist on its own. The food appears magically from the back (through curtains, of course).
I have a theory about why this is true. Nini's is also a catering business. Caterers aren't grounded in a particular place; they've got to move their show around. And if you've ever seen some of limited workspaces caterers have to work out of, I think it's fair to say they do sometimes make food appear by magic.
A catering business needs to have something for everyone particularly since, unlike a restaurant, the clientele is there for the occasion and not because it chose the caterer. Nini's sells a somewhat eclectic cuisine. On one menu there may be Thai, Mediterranean, French and Creole or Spanish food. (Entrees are predominantly French and Italian.) The menu changes every two to three weeks. The food is executed very competently; the chef is genuinely versatile.
One night we had a garlicky octopus salad, seasoned with hot peppers, red onion and olive oil; the garlic was a little aggressive but the dish was tasty. A beef satay had an appropriately charred flavor and a sweet, hot Thai-seasoned fennel salad. A bacon and leek tart was properly creamy with an excellent, tender crust. A Provençal style cod was moist, the saffron broth light and well balanced. The pumpkin cognac cheesecake tasted like the best pumpkin pie I had ever eaten; the flourless chocolate cake will give chocoholics what they're looking for. The crusty bread is always warm.
Sometimes the chef misses: pork osso buco is an inspired idea (the big shank looks great on the plate, too) but I didn't like the ginger in the sauce. The foie gras was ill deveined and the apple relish tasted too strongly of cinnamon. The apple dumplings were bland.
Versatility has a downside for a restaurant, too. Nini's lacks a sense of identity for me. A successful restaurant sells more than just food. It sells an experience, a context within which to enjoy the food, defined as much by the service, décor, mood and lighting, as it is by the menu. Because the chef is good at cooking everything, I can't feel his or her passion for anything. It's all a little casual for me. I would like to feel the chef's guidance more strongly. And I want tighter service: the first several times I tried to make reservations, I left a message and never heard back. Dinner can drag on, particularly at the second seating.
The menu is prix fixe -- one of the few places in Connecticut that has it -- and reasonably priced: $25.95 for three courses, $29.95 for four courses. On top of this, Nini's is B.Y.O.B. and I love that. To be able to drink a fabulous bottle of wine and still walk out of the restaurant for under $40 a head including tip -- about $30 for three courses -- is terrific.
Nini's Bistro  40 Orange Street, New Haven  (203)562-6464
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Informal, pretty restaurant in converted industrial space.  NOISE LEVEL -- Can be very (too) loud.  SERVICE -- Friendly, intimate, sometimes slow.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Bacon and leek tart, Thai peanut beef brochette, all salads, cod Provençal, strip steak with Gorgonzola crust, grilled duck breast, pumpkin cheesecake, chocolate flourless cake. The menu changes every two to three weeks, but you're encouraged to request favorite dishes.  PRICE RANGE -- $25.95 for three-course prix fixe, $29.95 for four-course (required Fridays and Saturdays.) CREDIT CARDS All major cards accepted.  HOURS -- Dinner: Wednesday through Saturday, two seatings only: 6 p.m. and 8:30 p.m. (If there is space, Nini's can be flexible about times.)  RESERVATIONS -- Recommended.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Good.  Reviewed by The Times Feb.1, 2004.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
