CALL it his urban initiative. With his poll numbers dropping and his support among moderate Republicans disappearing, Gov. John G. Rowland has turned to the cities for support. And in some places, he is getting it.
Mr. Rowland, born and bred in Waterbury, is asking for support in the state's biggest cities, Waterbury, Hartford, New Haven and Bridgeport, as he faces inquiries into gifts he took for his vacation cottage. These are cities where Democrats sometimes face stronger competition from the Green Party than from Republicans. Other than Waterbury, the state's biggest cities voted against him overwhelmingly in the last election.
Now, he is hoping local leaders in those cities, including ministers at some active black congregations in the state, can help his approval numbers. Dean Pagani, Mr. Rowland's chief of staff, acknowledged that some people might find it ''ironic'' that the governor has support in the cities.
Dr. John Orman, professor of politics at Fairfield University, was one of those people.
''It would be really ironic if a Republican governor's last hope of support is the inner-city communities,'' he said. ''It would be like a liberal Democrat going to try to get support from conservative senior citizens in Arizona. Rowland's record isn't something that's going to make people in the inner cities say 'He's really a champion of minorities and he's going to help us.'''
In a speech in Bridgeport on Jan. 22 to announce financing for an economic development project, Mr. Rowland stressed his connections to the cities. He said he ran for a third term ''because we had unfinished business in Bridgeport, Waterbury, New Haven and Hartford.''
''This city has extraordinary faith and hope,'' he told a crowd of dignitaries, business people and reporters. ''It reminds me of my hometown of Waterbury, which is one of the reasons I feel closely committed to this community.''
Later, he made comparisons between his own plight and that of the city, which has received more than $650 million in state investments during his tenure as governor.
''We have faced some ups and we have faced some downs, and so have I,'' he said. ''But my command focus will be on bringing this city back along with our capital city of Hartford, Waterbury and New Haven, making sure that everybody has a better quality of life. I have not taken my eye off this ball for one day over the last nine years. And my eye will be on this ball for as long as I am in office.''
People realize the governor has invested more in the state's cities than previous governors, Mr. Pagani said. According to the governor's office, the State Bond Commission has sent more than $439 million to Waterbury, $847 million to Hartford, $303 million to Bridgeport and $313 million to New Haven for capital improvement projects during his tenure.
His current strategy, observers say, will attempt to shift the focus to those projects. During the past week, Mr. Rowland has also talked with ministers at primarily black churches in Hartford and New Haven. From their comments after the meetings at the Capitol, it appears he made a good impression.
''It's absolutely vital as a Christian to operate the ministry of reconciliation,'' said Gary L. Jenkins, a pastor at the Sword of the Spirit Ministries in New Haven. ''As a pastor and a man of compassion I felt it was time to extend a hand of forgiveness to the governor.''
Mr. Jenkins, who first met the governor while he was a radio reporter covering the Capitol more than 20 years ago, considers himself Mr. Rowland's friend. He doesn't condone what the governor did, but he said he thought it was time to forgive him.
Though he said he was speaking as a friend of the governor, he acknowledged he had a lot of influence over the people who go to his church. He planned to use that influence.
''I asked my parishioners to forgive him,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''They trust me as their pastor and in return I think that translates into a change of heart for some people. I would say they're overwhelmingly in his favor.''
Mr. Jenkins said he planned to bring together other ministers and ask them to forgive the governor and urge their parishioners to do the same. Given what he has heard in the community, he said he did not think that would be particularly difficult.
''I never considered going on a crusade for Governor Rowland,'' he said. ''I found out there are other ministers who felt the same way I did.''
Like other black ministers interviewed for this article, Mr. Jenkins said he remembered a moment of crisis in his community when the governor stepped in. In 1997, a black man, Malik Jones, was shot and killed by an East Haven police officer. The governor was at his side in the neighborhood, Mr. Jenkins said, and even called the United States attorney general at the time, Janet Reno, to push for an investigation.
Mr. Rowland hugged the pastor at least twice during their meeting on Monday and they prayed together. While Mr. Rowland has been criticized by newspaper columnists and political observers for his ''Come to Jesus'' apologies earlier in the scandal, Mr. Jenkins feels he is expressing genuine feelings.
''He's a compassionate man, believe it or not,'' he said. ''That's the thing that the news media doesn't see.''
That point was reiterated by Cornell Lewis, a minister at the Northend Church of Christ on Albany Avenue and the leader of the group Men of Color, which has pushed to get drug dealers out of Hartford. Mr. Lewis also met with the governor last Monday. He said the meeting focused on the issues Mr. Lewis is dealing with in Hartford, but they also discussed the governor's predicament.
Mr. Lewis noted how quiet it was in the Capitol and asked the governor why. Mr. Rowland told him about the formation of a committee that will decide whether to impeach the governor. The governor was obviously distressed, said Mr. Lewis, who asked if he could do anything for him. But the governor did not specifically ask for him to rally support, Mr. Lewis said.
''To be honest, there are people in the African-American community who don't share the opinion of many Democrats who are trying to impeach him,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''They don't see grounds for impeachment to begin. They see it as politics.
''This is what I'm hearing in the coffee shops, in the barbershops, in the weight room: 'You want to destroy a man because of a hot tub and some improvements he made at a cottage?'''.
Some people equate the governor's economic woes to their own, despite his making $150,000, Mr. Lewis said. Education and alimony payments eat up a lot of that money, Mr. Lewis added.
The governor's push for support, though, may fall short, especially in black communities, Dr. Orman said. The governor might have been able to count on support in the cities if he was seen as a victim. But, Dr. Orman said, that is not the impression most people have.
''If there was an appearance of a partisan witch hunt then I could see people rallying around Rowland,'' he said. ''He's not set up for a classic underdog 'they're trying to drive me out of office' campaign.''
Indeed, others said the governor was not getting much sympathy in the cities, and especially not in the black community.
''Certainly the governor has left his mark on cities in terms of trying to revive them,'' said Steven M. Harris, a founding member of the Greater Hartford African-American Alliance and a former Hartford city councilman. ''But the folks I listen to, working class folks, everyday folks, they're a little surprised that the governor's been hanging on this long. Because if that was us, or if that was me, they'd lock me up and throw away the key.''
City dwellers have also reacted angrily to the governor's moves to cut health insurance for poor people. Now that he is in hot water, they aren't necessarily going to turn around and embrace him, said Marilyn E. Rossetti, executive director of Hartford Areas Rally Together, a community development organization. Ms. Rossetti said she had heard mixed things from the people she worked with. Mostly, though, people struggling to make it in Connecticut's cities aren't focused on the governor at all. At most meetings of community members, including a large gathering last week, the subject didn't even come up.
''Not one person in that room talked about the governor,'' she said. ''They talked about their community.''
Others disputed the claim that Mr. Rowland has helped the state's cities.
''He's been in office for nine years and despite a national economy that was mostly robust during that time, our cities are in worse shape,'' said George C. Jepsen, the state Democratic Party chairman.
Democrats control the top office in every major city in the state, but only one of those mayors, John DeStefano of New Haven, has asked the governor to step down. Mr. DeStefano has already indicated his interest in running for governor in 2006. Others, such as Waterbury Mayor Michael J. Jarjura, a Democrat, have supported the governor. Mr. Rowland backed Mr. Jarjura during his last election run.
''I was actually just getting upset with what I believe to be a rush to judgment by some high level political people both on the federal and state level. It appeared to me that there was a frenzy going on to raise the level of vitriol so the governor no longer had any other choice but to step down,'' Mr. Jarjura said after a news conference on Tuesday during which Mr. Rowland announced that more state money would go to the city for community development.
Mr. Jarjura said he had not been asked to rally support for the governor, but that he was happy to make appearances with him in the city. He acknowledged that the appearances helped Mr. Rowland take the attention off his scandals, but said that was not his primary concern.
''It's not about anyone overtly out to do public relations,'' he said. ''It's my honor and privilege to stand with him. He's been generous to my city and many other cities in the state.''
Of course, some mayors may have more to lose by asking him to resign than they have to gain. The state's cities are still competing for money and bonds, which the governor can help steer their way. Some Democrat leaders in the Legislature have specifically asked mayors not to speak out on the issue.
State Senator William A. Finch of Bridgeport urged local politicians not to speak out on the Rowland scandal, for fear that it could hurt the city's chances of getting state grants.
John M. Fabrizi, the mayor of Bridgeport, said he didn't need Mr. Finch's advice to make the decision not to ask the governor to resign. Though he supported the committee of inquiry formed last week to decide on impeachment, Mr. Fabrizi said he would let state legislators worry about what is going on at the Capitol. He is focused on the city.
''I appreciate his opinion,'' Mr. Fabrizi said of Mr. Finch. ''However, I base my reasoning on the governor's relationship to Bridgeport. He's been a tremendous asset to Bridgeport.''
Some of the governor's staunchest supporters said they would continue to rally behind him.
''I may not be of his political persuasion but I'm a friend of the governor,'' said the Rev. King T. Hayes, pastor at Shiloh Baptist Church in Hartford. Mr. Hayes, who gave the benediction at each of the governor's inaugural ceremonies, said he did not condone the governor's actions, but does feel he deserved a second chance. He hasn't preached to his parishioners about the governor, but he intended to stand behind his friend.
''Friends are not 'fair weather,''' he said. When you're good, they're your friends. When you're bad, they're still your friends.''
Connecticut
