THIS book club starts its meeting exactly on time. That alone would make it different from most. And every single member of the club has read the book. That would certainly make it different from mine (where, I should confess, I tend to be one of the slackers). There are no snacks at this meeting, not even water. Instead the seven women get straight to business, because business is why they're here in the first place.
Welcome to the Women of Color Leadership Book Club at the Chubb Group of Insurance Companies. The club has met every month or so for nearly two years, since Lori McKee, a relatively junior project manager, was left out of a corporate conference for more senior employees of color.
So she went to Patricia Jackson Hall, the vice president who directed that conference, and asked how less-senior staff members could network, too. The idea of a monthly book club was born, with a reading list of books about leadership and career building.
''I saw this as a challenge to make lemonade out of what they perceived to be a lemon,'' said Ms. Hall, who is herself a member of the group. And a lot of lemonade it is. There is such interest in the club -- which is held by teleconference on company time and with company equipment -- that there are now a half-dozen satellite groups in addition to the original club.
Business has always been done while it looks like you are doing something else -- playing golf, drinking martinis over lunch, gathering at the coffee cart. The Leadership Book Club was built on that paradigm, that some of the most important work is done when you're nowhere near your desk.
Monica Elliott, for example, who works with Ms. McKee and helped her form the club, was recently approached by a managing director to interview for a challenging position. At first, she said, ''I was completely stopped by fear.''
But the book club was reading ''Soul Food: 52 Principles for Black Entrepreneurial Success,'' at the time, and Principle No.45 was ''The Do What You Fear Principle,'' which states: ''Successful entrepreneurs condition themselves to do what they fear, because they know the more they accomplish a particular task, the less they fear it. Success means not listening to the surrounding noise.''
So Ms. Elliott took the risk and applied for the job. She didn't get it. But the executive who interviewed her was impressed and recommended Ms. Elliott for an even better job, she says. No, she didn't get that one either, but, she said, ''I am now recognized in other areas of my corporation where they would not have normally known me and I am more confident about taking a chance regardless of the 'noise.'''
Ms. McKee is also reaping benefits from the club. Advancement, she is learning, will not be handed to her, so she has started to ask. Not long ago she went to her supervisor and ''requested to take on the deployment of a large-scale global project,'' she said. The job became hers, and ''I'm proving I can do this.''
While she is doing that, those above her are learning that the initiative it took to found this book club is initiative of value to the company. ''Lori's now on my radar screen,'' said Jenifer Rinehart, a senior vice president and chief diversity officer of Chubb. ''I see her now as someone I can tap into.''
Ms. Jackson said, ''This keeps me in touch with those in our pipeline, our future managers, directors and senior executives.''
When I listened in on a telemeeting a few weeks ago, however, the discussion was not about promotion, but philosophy. The book was ''Tempered Radicals: How People Use Difference to Inspire Change at Work'' by Debra E. Meyerson , and the talk was about influencing the world.
''What is your experience of your self in the workplace?'' asked Ms. Elliott, who was the discussion leader for this book. ''Are your actions driven by your relationships with others and your relationship to the organization? Do you find your values being compromised?''
Ms. McKee answered, ''I want to be taken seriously, which means I want to stay within the lines of corporate culture. But I want to color in those lines, too. That's how you stay true to yourself and also make a difference.''
''This group is an example,'' she said. ''It's within the lines, but it's also different. I don't think I know how to conform. And I'm finding that I don't always have to.''
LIFE'S WORK
