I WASN'T in Manhattan when Jodie S. Lane was electrocuted two weeks ago while walking her two dogs. I couldn't participate in the anger and bewilderment of most New Yorkers. I'd just returned to Paris. I was locked in a classroom with a bunch of movie mavens, talking about Mr. Blonde (Michael Madsen), the psychopathic killer in Quentin Tarantino's 1992 film, ''Reservoir Dogs,'' a devil who dances around the cop he's just captured, cuts off his ear and douses him with gasoline.
There was something so malevolent about Mr. Blonde and his little dance that it felt like a random act outside the dynamic of cinema itself. The cop is played by an actor who seems part of some elemental universe where nothing and no one has a name -- the gods are against this poor policeman, whose fate it was to bump against Mr. Blonde.
There was no Mr. Blonde in Ms. Lane's mysterious death on Jan. 16, but there might have been. ''Reservoir Dogs'' is a tale of L.A., where nobody walks, where sidewalks are hard to find. Ms. Lane would probably have gotten a traffic ticket before she ever crossed a street. But New York is a nation of walkers. And before she was electrocuted outside Veniero's pastry shop in the East Village (with the best marzipan on the planet), she chatted with another dog owner about their dogs.
She and her dogs had wandered near a metal plate covering an underground utility box; improper insulation, according to Consolidated Edison, had turned that metal cover into a weird kind of electric chair. One of the dogs stepped on the cover, went berserk, bit the nose of the other dog. Ms. Lane tried to calm them, but she touched the wrong dog, and an electrical current went through the dog like a murderous conductor and into her.
''It's just unacceptable that somebody can walk down the street and get electrocuted,'' Mayor Bloomberg said soon after the accident. But how can anyone patrol 90,000 miles of cable, with 250,000 manholes and utility boxes? In 1999 a carriage horse was electrocuted when it stepped on a Con Ed cover near Park Avenue. Who can say how many other horses fell, or how many children were electrocuted for burrowing in the wrong hole, or being in the wrong place?
And it isn't only bad wiring. In 1979 a Barnard student, Grace Gold, was killed by a piece of masonry that dropped like a bomb from an eighth-story window on West 115th Street. ''This is like a 10-million-to-1 possibility -- no, more than that,'' said a detective on the scene, as if 10 million to 1 were improbable odds for New Yorkers, who have to dodge 10 million possibilities every day.
We can't do much about the labyrinth that lives under the ground -- not just wires but pipes, subway tunnels and gas lines. It is a subterranean country that seems to mock each of our moves, mimic our own complexity, as if we were expendable, not the wires. There are abandoned subway stations that belong to another era, stations that would bother our dreams if we ever decided to examine them. It's better that they're lost in their own stop-time.
But Ms. Lane belonged to us. She wasn't some wild creature that rose up from the ground. She was a 30-year-old doctoral student at Columbia University Teachers College, and she was writing a book about children with obsessive compulsive disorder.
A graduate of Sarah Lawrence, she'd lived in New York for the last 10 years. She was of the city, as much as any single one of us. But we seem to have more vivid information about the dogs than Jodie herself. One of them lost a couple of nails on its back paws. The dogs were brought to nearby St. Marks Veterinary Hospital.
''They were mostly shaken up,'' said the veterinarian who administered to them. ''They just saw what happened to their mother and were terrified.''
That word ''mother'' startled me, as if we lived in a veterinarian's world, where dogs could adopt us as part of their kingdom. Ms. Lane had touched a nerve in New York. We're still raw after 9/11. Her crazy disappearance reminds us how fragile we all are in a town that was attacked by a diabolic killer-poet, Osama bin Laden, a Mr. Blonde who hides behind a holy war. We're a city that can't quite recover from a carnage that makes no sense.
WE are the most welcoming, various people in the world. Over half of us are foreign-born. I grew up during one colossal wave of immigrants, when Italians from Sicily, Jews from Eastern Europe, and their children strode through our public schools and learned New York's powerful song: none of us was alone; we would give back to each new generation what had been given to us. Rather than a melting pot, we were pieces of a mosaic. That was our strength. Unlike bin Laden, who would narrow us down to some rigid formula where foreigners couldn't find a place, we are all foreigners who look one another in the eye.
I remember as a small boy in the Bronx watching Joe DiMaggio, the son of Italian immigrants, striding along the Grand Concourse in his Yankee uniform, absorbed in himself but still curious enough to smile at us and tip his hat. No one would have interfered with this Yankee Clipper who'd been lent to the Bronx for a little while. ''Clipper's coming,'' we would whisper, and it gave us an edge over Manhattan. Manhattan had the Chrysler Building, but we had the Clipper....
And now, after 9/11, our own history seems in danger. The mosaic may not hold. I doubt that another DiMaggio will ever walk the Concourse in his cleats. And who knows what mad bomber might rip away the witch's silver cap that sits on top of Chrysler? We remain a city in mourning, no matter what memorial we fasten onto the site of the twin towers.
I'm privileged enough to have an apartment in Greenwich Village; Tony Soprano (aka James Gandolfini) is my neighbor. I see him wander in his bomber jacket, clutching a baby carriage.
Why does Soprano comfort me? Is he a good Mr. Blonde, a devil who has his own harried family, who kisses as often as he kills? In my corner of Manhattan he's not a Mafia don, just a papa who haunts West 12th Street.
I miss New York when I'm away. Paris is a city of monuments and streets with buildings that are so symmetrical, they look like stranded ocean liners. But I cannot find that great, brooding mix of faces, that sense of a constant carnival.
Ms. Lane was part of this carnival, a young woman who wrote about disturbed children, walked her dogs near Veniero's, and encountered the wrong electrical grid. Any one of us might have stood under a piece of wild masonry that dropped from the sky, or a crane that happened to fall, or bumped into a taxicab that caromed out of control -- a kind of random malevolence, as if the metropolis were populated with a world of Mr. Blondes, cruel puppeteers who picked on us, at the odds of 10 million to 1. And each of us, as New Yorkers, might remember Ms. Lane, even mourn for her, while we dance out of the devil's way.
NEW YORK OBSERVED Jerome Charyn, who runs the film studies program at the American University of Paris, is the author, most recently, of ''Gangsters and Gold Diggers: Old New York, the Jazz Age, and the Birth of Broadway'' (Four Walls Eight Windows).
