For five years, John Elway hoped he would be inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame as soon as he was eligible, anticipating the honor that would cap his career.
But what he had not considered was that the induction would be in Canton, Ohio, only 60 miles from Cleveland, the city he tortured in two straight conference championships as the quarterback for the Denver Broncos.
''I'll be honest with you, I haven't been back to Cleveland since The Drive,'' Elway said. ''When I was there, all the fire hydrants were painted orange and had my number on them. I just wonder if the paint's worn off yet.''
Elway laughed and called himself humbled by his impending induction. He was selected for the Hall on Saturday along with the former Lions running back Barry Sanders, the onetime Vikings defensive end Carl Eller and the six-time Pro Bowl offensive tackle Bob Brown, who played for the Raiders, the Eagles and the Los Angeles Rams.
The Hall of Fame's 39-member selection committee started a meeting Saturday morning with 15 candidates to choose from, including George Young, the former general manager for the Giants, and the former Giants linebacker Harry Carson. The field was whittled to six finalists before four inductees were chosen.
''I'm obviously very disappointed both didn't get in,'' said the Giants co-owner Wellington Mara, who is already in the Hall of Fame. ''But I can't complain about the guys who got in. They are very deserving.''
Elway, 43, ended his career after winning the second of two Super Bowl titles with the Broncos in 1999. He finished with 51,475 passing yards, second to Dan Marino, but will forever be known for his ability to direct stunning comebacks. He did it against the Browns twice in the American Football Conference championship game, most famously in 1987. What became known as The Drive was a 98-yard march to a touchdown with 39 seconds left to send the game into overtime, when Denver won, 23-20.
In his 16-year career, Elway led 47 game-winning or game-saving fourth-quarter drives.
Sanders, 35, retired abruptly five years ago, his 15,269 rushing yards ranking him second to Walter Payton's 16,726, a mark that has since been surpassed by Emmitt Smith.
''When I think about the Hall of Fame, it seems like something that happens to someone else,'' Sanders said. ''Dick Butkus. Walter Payton. Names like those. So, to be here, I truly feel a little out of place. I think about my 10 years, the fact that people saw something that, like with all these honorees, they thought was unique.''
Eller, 61, was a key member of the Purple People Eaters, the defensive line that led the Vikings to four Super Bowl appearances. Eller was selected in his 20th year of eligibility, and he said he believed he would have been inducted sooner had the Vikings not lost all four of those games, a streak of futility since matched by the Buffalo Bills.
Eller played all but one of his 16 seasons for the Vikings.
Brown, 62, waited 25 years for his honor. Not only did he play an unglamorous position, but he also split his career among three teams, and he said he thought that worked against his chances of making the Hall.
Elway, Sanders and Eller appeared at the announcement in Houston, and Brown spoke on a conference call.
''I was up all last night pacing,'' Brown said. ''Don't let anyone tell you they can be relaxed, cool and cavalier when they're going through the process.''
Five years ago, Elway retired at the apex of his career. He had been named the most valuable player of the Broncos' Super Bowl victory over Atlanta, his second championship after losing in his first three trips to the Super Bowl.
That day in 1999, his father, Jack, was there to watch. So were his twin sister, Jana, and his wife, Janet. In the last few years, Jack died of a heart attack, Jana died of cancer and his divorce from Janet became final last month. The Elways have four children.
Elway expressed particular sadness that his father, who was his first coach and career-long inspiration, had not lived to share this honor with him. Jack Elway would have been his son's presenter for the ceremony on Aug. 8.
Elway said he had not decided who would play that role.
''He is truly the reason why I am standing here,'' Elway said.
There were plenty of happier memories for Elway to recall Saturday. He remembered how The Drive solidified his position as one of the game's best quarterbacks, and how two Super Bowl victories ended his career perfectly.
But he also remembered his first start, against Pittsburgh in 1983, when he was pulled at halftime after going 1 for 8 and throwing an interception. Elway recalled looking across the line at linebacker Jack Lambert, who is already in the Hall. Elway said that Lambert was spitting and drooling.
''I wanted to click my heels and say: 'Auntie Em, bring me home. I'll give back the signing bonus,' '' Elway said. ''For me to be standing here thinking about that game is a miracle.''
PRO FOOTBALL
