An army of sanitation workers stood solemnly outside a brownstone church in Red Hook, Brooklyn, yesterday morning to salute a colleague who was killed in a freakish accident while collecting trash.
As bagpipes wailed, a coffin with the body of the worker, Eva M. Barrientos, was carried by an honor guard of police officers past more than 1,000 sanitation officials and workers, who lined up three deep in their forest green uniforms. The coffin was draped with the city flag -- three vertical stripes of orange, white and blue.
Ms. Barrientos, 41, and a mother of three, last week became the city's first female sanitation worker killed on the job, city officials said. During a routine trash collection in Bushwick on Monday, she climbed on top of a garbage truck to pull free a trash bag that had jammed the compactor when a mechanical lever came down on her.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that Ms. Barrientos had held one of the most important jobs in the city, one that helped improve the quality of life for residents every day. He added that the city's flags had flown at half-staff ''because that's what we do when we lose one of our own.''
The mayor then thanked the sanitation workers, who filled the wooden pews and crowded into the back of the church, for clearing the streets and doing their part to keep the city running.
''Thank you for everything you do -- just please be safe,'' he said.
Sanitation Commissioner John Doherty said Ms. Barrientos had treated her work with respect and had sought to change the stereotypes of scruffy street workers. Ms. Barrientos -- one of only 153 women in the department -- was accorded the funeral rituals normally reserved for those of higher rank because she had died on the job, city officials said.
''Eva always looked good, and she always dressed for success,'' Mr. Doherty said. ''She will be dearly missed at roll call each and every morning.''
Ms. Barrientos's relatives and friends remembered her as a woman who held together her family and, even though she collected trash for a living, always made sure that her hair and nails were done and her uniform was spotless.
''Everybody thought she was crazy when they heard she was working in sanitation,'' said Maribeth White, 17, Ms. Barrientos's stepniece. ''Personally, I believe she liked driving the truck.''
Rick Anderson, a sanitation worker in Queens, said that although he did not know Ms. Barrientos well, he wanted to attend her funeral to pay his respects.
''One of my co-workers was killed on the job,'' said Mr. Anderson, who recently broke his finger at work. ''It could have happened to anybody. It's just sad, that's all.''
Janice Thomas, a sanitation worker from Brooklyn, said she was glad that city officials had recognized Ms. Barrientos's hard work.
But she added that it would have been better if that recognition had come while Ms. Barrientos was alive.
''We work harder than the men do on the job because we put our heart and soul into it,'' she said. ''We don't get respect for it.''
