Keeping Central Park A Symbol of Pride
The way Phyllis Cerf Wagner sees it, one's passion for civic causes does not fade.
Mrs. Wagner, 87, had careers as a newspaper and magazine columnist, a book editor and publisher and an advertising executive, and she was married to a famous publisher and a former mayor of New York. The publisher, Bennett Cerf, with whom she had two sons, died in 1971. The former mayor, Robert F. Wagner, died in 1991.
But as much as all that amounts to, it still does not fully define Mrs. Wagner. She has also long been active in civic campaigns, including the restoration and maintenance of Central Park.
In 1980, after years in which a financially beleaguered New York City was unable to care for its parks, a private nonprofit group, the Central Park Conservancy, was formed to raise the additional money that the city needed to repair and preserve what had become a badly tarnished crown jewel in the heart of Manhattan.
Mrs. Wagner was a founder of its women's committee, which has worked to obtain a regular flow of donations for work like caring for the trees, landscaping, playgrounds and benches. One fund-raising method she devised was the park's adopt-a-bench program.
These days, the conservancy manages the park, under a 1998 contract with the city, and the women's committee and its programs continue. Mrs. Wagner, now a grande dame of the conservancy, said last week that she was still active with the adopt-a-bench program and that her role included being a resource for her younger colleagues.
''If there's a question about it, they still come sweetly to me, and I say, 'Blah, blah,' and we're women working together,'' she said.
Speaking from her home of more than 60 years on the Upper East Side, Mrs. Wagner said that another strong interest of hers was how children learn to read.
In the 1950's, she and Theodor Seuss Geisel and Mr. Geisel's first wife, Helen, started Beginner Books Inc., for which Dr. Seuss wrote such best sellers as ''The Cat in the Hat.'' Random House, of which Bennett Cerf was a founder, later bought Beginner Books.
''I'm still thinking in that area, the mechanics of reading,'' Mrs. Wagner said.
Overall, though, ''Central Park is my passion,'' she said.
Schapiro's Is Back For History's Sake
From 1907 until 2001, the Schapiro Wine Company, maker of kosher wines, was a well-known presence on Rivington Street on the Lower East Side, a remnant of the days when far many more Jews than now lived in the area.
Though the company stopped making its wines there by the 1990's -- it now makes them in Monticello, N.Y. -- it kept its landmark store at 126 Rivington open until it sold that building in 2000. When it sold its warehouse next door a year later, Schapiro's was gone from the Lower East Side.
Consistent with the area's increased trendiness, the old store is now a bakery called Sugar Sweet Sunshine, with offerings like yum-yum bars and sunshine cake.
But Schapiro's total absence from the area proved temporary. Last April, it opened a small retail spot in the Essex Street Market, across the street from its old place.
Norman Schapiro, the company's president and the grandson of its founder, said last week that it did not matter how much he sold at the market. The point, he said, is that ''people come to the Lower East Side, they see Schapiro is still here.''
Following Up
