Solos and One Threesome
Passage Theater Company's Solo Flights Festival has a new twist this year. In addition to its usual roster of four solo theatrical events, there will be three solo theater pieces and four musical performances, one of which features a three-person ensemble.
The plays, performed by their authors, are ''The Man Who Danced With Marlene Dietrich,'' by Robin Hirsch, a child of Holocaust survivors whose piece is about his family's experience as World War II loomed; ''Watermelon -- Git It While It's Hot!!!'' by Cecelia Antoinette, a comedy that explores life in a black suburb of Dallas; and ''Downloaded and in Denial,'' by Cynthia Adler, about media spin. Each piece will be performed four times at the festival, which runs from Thursday through Feb. 29.
The musical performances are by Christine Lavin; Yuri Lane; JoAnne Brackeen; and Vince di Mura, Dan Fabricatore and Kip Rosser in ''A Jazz Tribute to the Music of Joni Mitchell and George Harrison.'' Each runs for one night.
Is there any inconsistency in a solo festival featuring an ensemble? ''Part of Passage Theater's mission is to try and bring a variety of artistic events to the Trenton area,'' said David White, the group's managing director.
Information: (609)392-0766.
From the Bottom Line to Paramus
The Paramus Picture Show, a movie house that seats 300, began presenting live events this past December in addition to its film showings. Next week, on Feb. 13 and 14, it will present three concerts by the David Bromberg Band. The band was originally scheduled to play around that time at the Bottom Line in New York City, but late last month that club announced that it was closing after a rent dispute with its landlord, New York University.
''Paul just lucked out with the timing,'' said Jennifer Pincus, one of four owners of the Paramus theater, referring to her co-owner and brother-in-law, Paul Casson. She explained that Mr. Casson, a folk and blues aficionado, had no idea about the Bottom Line's closing before he asked Mr. Bromberg to appear.
The Bromberg band concerts are at 8 p.m. Information: (201)845-6112.
Inspired by Challenger
Marlene O'Haire was a freshman at the University of Maryland in College Park when the shuttle Challenger exploded on Jan. 28, 1986. ''We had a shuttle bus on campus, and when I heard the shuttle exploded, I thought it was our bus,'' she said.
Ms. O'Haire, 36, right, who lives in Jersey City, plays the character of Teacher in Jane Anderson's play ''Defying Gravity,'' which was inspired by the Challenger disaster and the death of Christa McAuliffe, the elementary school teacher on board who perished along with six other astronauts. The play is at the Morris Museum's Bickford Theater in Morristown from Thursday through Feb. 29.
''Defying Gravity'' explores the feelings of Teacher's 5-year-old daughter, Elizabeth, as well as those of bystanders, a NASA mechanic, his acrophobic girlfriend and Teacher herself. ''The play asks the question, 'Is it worth it to risk your life for progress?''' Ms. O'Haire said.
Information: (973)971-3706.
Jewish History
European Jews seeking economic opportunity began coming to Morris and Sussex Counties in the late 19th century. Many were peddlers, eventually opening storefronts. Beginning in 1903, they also created lively resort communities of hotels and bungalow colonies in Pine Brook and Mount Freedom, a kind of New Jersey borscht belt.
''The Jews of Morris and Sussex: Early Settlers and Synagogues Before World War II,'' an exhibition at the Jewish Historical Society of MetroWest in West Orange, explores the history of these settlers through photographs and artifacts. The show is at Marantz Art Gallery at the Leon and Toby Cooperman Jewish Community Center in West Orange through Feb. 22. Information: (973)736-3200.
Michelle Falkenstein
