NOBODY doubts that many Americans will vote their pocketbooks in this year's presidential election. The puzzle is figuring out which party those pocketbooks will favor.
The Democratic candidates, traveling around Arizona, Missouri and other states holding primaries this week, are talking about the millions of layoffs and millions of people who have lost health insurance under President Bush. Senator John Kerry, whose fortunes have risen as the war in Iraq as receded as an issue, has dismissed the recent surge of economic growth as a ''Wall Street Bush-league recovery.''
Mr. Bush, on the other hand, is showing new confidence that the economy will in fact help his chances come November. His State of the Union address offered a laundry list of Reaganesque optimism that he is likely to repeat in coming months: home ownership, exports and employment are up; inflation and interest rates are down. Mr. Bush even dropped a common refrain from last year in which he had vowed not to be satisfied until everyone looking for work could find it.
''It's difficult to figure out,'' said Andrew Kohut, director of the Pew Research Center, ''if the glass is half-empty or half-full.''
There have not been crosscurrents like these since at least 1984, politicians and pollsters say, when Ronald Reagan was running for re-election as the economy was coming out of the slump of the early 80's. The fact that the economy was creating hundreds of thousands of new jobs a month in 1983 and 1984 makes today's situation, with job growth still meager, look even murkier.
The Federal Reserve, in its statement last week suggesting that it could raise interest rates sooner than expected, inadvertently captured the moment with this nugget of ambivalence: ''Although new hiring remains subdued, other indicators suggest an improvement in the labor market.''
Perhaps reflecting the good news Mr. Bush listed in his speech, consumers report being more confident about the economy than they were when Bill Clinton, Richard Nixon, Lyndon Johnson or Mr. Reagan won re-election, according to the University of Michigan.
''The economy is the No.1 issue today,'' said Matthew Dowd, the chief strategist for the Bush campaign. ''And we are in about the same position Reagan was in '84 and Clinton was in '96.''
But the stock market remains 10 percent lower than when Mr. Bush took office, and he is almost certain to become the first president since Herbert Hoover to preside over a loss of jobs, as Democrats are fond of noting. With the surpluses of Mr. Clinton's tenure having turned into a $500 billion deficit, even some Republicans have begun to worry that Mr. Bush is handing a campaign issue to Democrats. Tomorrow, the White House will release a budget proposal for next year.
''The myth of Republicans being the party of fiscal responsibility is being unmasked by this administration,'' said Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm of Michigan, a Democrat. ''Democrats must hammer on this issue.''
It may not resonate with many voters, though, if the coming months resolve the debate over the economy as definitively as aides to Mr. Bush expect. Almost all economists, including some who have been cautious and prescient over the last three years, agree that hiring is finally likely to pick up in the next few months. In that case, Mr. Bush would likely try to drown out the deficit discussion by trumpeting last year's tax cut as the cause of the recovery.
''You have the Democrats arguing one set of numbers and us arguing another, and that's why God made elections,'' said Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster. ''By November, it won't be a close call.''
Senator Christopher S. Bond, a Missouri Republican, added: ''Things are looking up. It has to show up in jobs soon.''
Even if growth is only moderate this year, a well-known formula for predicting presidential elections (developed by a Yale professor, Ray Fair, and based largely on the economy) is forecasting an easy win for Mr. Bush.
But in their early primaries, the Democratic candidates have offered glimpses of how they will campaign on the economy if it continues to improve. As Mr. Kerry did when he called the recovery ''Bush league,'' they have begun to paint this recovery as one that exists only in official statistics and well-off households.
In his stump speech, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina describes ''two economies,'' in which a few are comfortable while many struggle paycheck to paycheck. Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, and Mr. Kerry both speak of hard-working families that cannot afford medical care and call the United States the only industrialized country without universal health insurance.
The strategy includes obvious risks, forcing the party to make a downbeat argument to an electorate that tends to prefer optimism. A similar line of attack -- as well as voters' preference for Republicans on national security issues -- left the Democratic presidential candidate in 1984, Walter F. Mondale, winning only his home state, Minnesota, and the District of Columbia.
But the ''two economies'' approach also has a basis in reality. In a reversal of what happened in the late 90's, earnings of workers at the middle and on the bottom half of the income ladder fell last year, after being adjusted for inflation. Pay for those in the top 25 percent continued rising, according to the Labor Department.
''There is still a great degree of economic angst among workers,'' said Mark Sanford, the Republican governor of South Carolina, which will hold a primary Tuesday. ''They don't see the way out of the tunnel yet.''
The three tax cuts since Mr. Bush took office have added to the income gap, reducing taxes the most for wealthy households. By elevating Mr. Kerry at the expense of Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt, voters in Iowa and New Hampshire increased the chances that the Democratic nominee will focus on the distribution of the tax cut in the general election. Mr. Kerry, like Mr. Edwards and former Gen. Wesley K. Clark, want to roll back only the reductions that go to the highest earners, while Dr. Dean has called for a complete repeal of the tax cuts.
Whatever they think of the various candidates, many Democrats would be relieved to avoid a fight in which Mr. Bush could criticize them for wanting to raise middle class taxes. ''We have a slight advantage,'' said Bill Richardson, the Democratic governor of New Mexico, referring to the economy, ''if we focus on the irresponsibility of the Republicans in not balancing the budget, high unemployment and losing jobs overseas, rather than the tax cut debate.''
What makes the 2004 economy so difficult to figure out, however, is that the picture for middle class families is far from uniformly bad. House prices have continued to rise, and interest rates remain low. The recent recession was not severe enough to erase the remarkable strength of the late-1990's economy, and most families at all income levels make more money than they did five or three years ago, even taking inflation into account.
So even Ronald Reagan's famous question -- Are you better off than you were four years ago? -- will not be easy to answer this fall. Right now, Senator Bond said, the economy ''is close to a wash.''
