AT 10 p.m. on a recent Thursday, the singer Nellie McKay wasn't even close to being ready to leave her pocket-size Harlem studio apartment. Lateness seems to be a vice with Ms. McKay, 19, who will release her debut album, aptly titled ''Late Again,'' on Feb. 10.
''If lateness is grounds for going to hell, then I'm going to hell,'' Ms. McKay said cheerfully.
Wearing a bright blue Chinese robe and a corona of pink curlers, she peered into her bathroom mirror and painstakingly applied false eyelashes. The mirror was smashed, a sunburst of cracks radiating from its center to the outer corners. ''I got into a fight with my record company,'' Ms. McKay explained sheepishly, ''and then I had a really horrible show, and I was talking on the phone to my mom about it and she agreed it was horrible, and she always tells me the truth, so I got real upset and I punched the mirror.''
Ms. McKay (pronounced Muh-KYE), who counts Doris Day among her idols and peppers her speech with retro expressions like ''wonderful,'' ''gee,'' and ''man,'' rarely shies away from a good fight. Viewing her album's 18 songs as a collective piece, she insisted that Columbia Records, her label, release ''Late Again'' as a double disc, an unheard of power play for any first-time artist, much less a teenage girl. ''Harry Connick Jr. told me I wasn't going to get a double album, which made me that much more determined to do it,'' she said. Ms. McKay prevailed.
Eyelashes in place, she put on a cardinal-red coat dress and short black boots. The curlers were removed to reveal a hairdo as fluffy and high as meringue. ''I've been a blonde for about a year now, and boy, has it ever changed my life,'' she said. ''I'm a real believer in the idea of transformation. I've gone from brunette to blonde, glasses to contacts, high school and college victim to -- what's the opposite of victim, a bully? No, a tyrant!'' She meant it as a joke.
Ms. McKay, who was born in London and grew up in Olympia, Wash., Harlem and the Pocono Mountains in Pennsylvania, was just about ready to face the world, but first, a song for the road. Taking a seat at her electric piano, across from a framed photo of Liberace, she delivered a number in what sounded to the untrained ear like flawless Japanese. ''I worked it out with phrase books and the Internet,'' she said.
Ms. McKay, who attended the Manhattan School of Music for two years before dropping out last spring, played jazz standards in piano bars around town but soon realized she would need to write her own songs to break out of the cabaret circuit. The first song she wrote won a competition. In short order, Ms. McKay was given a monthlong residency at the downtown nightclub Fez, and became the object of a bidding war among five labels.
In the cab on the way downtown, Ms. McKay, an animal rights champion, pasted to the seat a sticker she had made up denouncing Columbia University's treatment of laboratory animals. Someday, she said, she hoped to be compared to Bob Dylan. ''He was one of the first to make a successful political and artistic statement,'' she said.
At Fat Cats Jazz and Billiards Club on Christopher Street in the West Village, her friends were waiting: Nicole Horton, 25, a Web site designer; Ms. McKay's publicist, Carla Parisi, 26; David Elliott, 23, a Manhattan School of Music classmate; and Timothy Dark, 27, a rapper whom Ms. McKay knew from her days playing the Sidewalk Cafe in the East Village.
Ms. Horton and Ms. McKay wedged themselves onto a sagging couch next to Ms. Parisi and watched the Jason Lindner jazz band finish its set. Around 2 a.m., the lights in the club flashed on and off. Ms. McKay and her pals gathered at a nearby bar.
''Do you have French fries?'' Ms. McKay asked the waitress. They did. ''Oh, goodie. I'll have at least one big order of those.''
The waitress studied Ms. McKay's face before asking, ''Has anyone ever told you you look just like Mira Sorvino?'' Beaming, Ms. McKay gushed: ''Aw, gee, thanks, man. I love that comparison -- she speaks Japanese, doesn't she?''
A Night Out With  Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  The Night Out column last Sunday, about the singer Nellie McKay, gave an outdated title, supplied by her publicists, for her coming debut album. It is ''Get Away From Me,'' not ''Late Again.''
