The Rangers, under Coach Glen Sather, seldom practice their power play or their penalty killing. Night after night, it has shown.
Since Sather obtained Jaromir Jagr on Jan. 23, in part to bolster an anemic power play, the Rangers have not scored a power-play goal.
As if that were not bad enough, the Rangers allowed two power-play goals in the first period Saturday night, and the result was a second 3-1 loss to the Buffalo Sabres (23-25-5-1) in two nights. The Rangers (19-23-7-4) played both games without Eric Lindros, who is sidelined with a concussion.
After going 0 for 5 on Saturday night, the Rangers are 0 for 16 on the power play with Jagr in the lineup. The Rangers have lost four of the five games since the Jagr trade; they have lost seven of their last eight games and are in 11th place in the Eastern Conference, 8 points behind the eighth-place Islanders.
''It's not 1990, where you have wide-open games that go up and down the ice,'' said Jagr, a five-time scoring champion. ''Now, you have to win games on the boards, you have to drive to the net. You win games on ugly goals, on the power play. And that's basically why we are 1-4 since I've been here.''
Sather was prepared to have the Rangers return to New York by bus instead of flying home on the team charter, said a person with knowledge of the situation. But Sather did not force the Rangers to take the nine-hour bus ride.
Sather's only lineup change after the Rangers' 3-1 loss to the Sabres at Madison Square Garden on Friday was in goal. Jussi Markkanen started in place of Mike Dunham and was often brilliant in stopping 26 of the 29 shots he faced.
But for the second consecutive night, Buffalo's Martin Biron was better in the opposite goal, finishing with 31 saves.
The Rangers came into the game averaging 18.3 penalty minutes a game and took eight penalties Saturday for 16 minutes. They were ranked 26th in penalty killing, with a tepid success rate of 81.5 percent; the Rangers allowed the Sabres two power-play goals in six chances Saturday.
To compound matters, the Rangers' power play has been toothless. Coming in, the Rangers were tied for 25th in the league, with a success rate of 14 percent. When the Rangers could not score on three power-play chances in the first 3 minutes 7 seconds of the game -- including 1:26 of a two-man advantage -- the stage was set for another defeat.
The Sabres did not waste their five-on-three advantage, with Jean-Pierre Dumont scoring his 14th goal of the season to open the scoring at 7:54 of the first period with the Sabres skating with a five-on-three advantage.
Maksim Afinogenov then scored his 10th goal of the season at 15:00. For the second straight night, the Rangers were staring at a 2-0 hole.
Sather finally decided to switch things. The Rangers had opened the game with Mark Messier centering Martin Rucinsky and Jagr; Petr Nedved centering Jed Ortmeyer and Aleksei Kovalev; Bobby Holik centering Chris Simon and Matthew Barnaby; and Jamie Lundmark centering Garth Murray and Paul Healey. For the second period, Sather moved Holik between Rucinsky and Jagr; put Messier between Simon and Barnaby; and moved Lundmark to left wing on a line with Nedved and Kovalev. Sather also shortened his rotation from four lines to three. And the Rangers fought back to within a goal at 7:26 of the second period.
The goal scorer was not one of the forwards, however. For the second consecutive game, the Rangers received the first goal of the season from a journeyman defenseman.
On Friday night, it was Dale Purinton's first goal in 14 months. On Saturday night, it was Joel Bouchard's first in just over a year (Jan. 21, 2003). Bouchard scored on a slap shot off a pass from Holik.
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV (wrist) missed his fourth consecutive game. Left wing JAN HLAVAC was a healthy scratch for the second consecutive game.
HOCKEY
