SIR WALTER RALEIGH
By Raleigh Trevelyan.
Illustrated. 622 pp. New York:
A John Macrae Book/
Henry Holt &amp; Company. $35.
BY the time Sir Walter Raleigh went to the block in the Old Palace Yard at Westminster in the autumn of 1618, he was already a legendary figure, a survivor from the glittering court of Queen Elizabeth and from the popular (at least for the London and West Country privateers) naval war against Spain, and now in 1618 a victim of King James's immensely unpopular efforts to arrange a marriage between his son Prince Charles and the Spanish infanta.
In retrospect, Raleigh was seen as a heroic defender of English interests against the Spanish imperial colossus. A generation later, for Oliver Cromwell, he seemed, as the author of the influential ''History of the World,'' to be a republican critic of monarchy. Yet when he entered the Tower in 1603, convicted of high treason in a deeply politicized trial, he was undoubtedly the most feared figure of the late queen's court, hated for his domineering manner and for his ''intolerable pride.'' Truly, he was, as Sir Robert Naunton commented, ''Fortune's tennis ball.'' While we know much about his actions and thoughts, to his contemporaries and to us he remains an enigma.
On the scaffold Raleigh confessed that he had been ''a seafaring man, a soldier and a courtier, and in the temptations of the least of these there is enough to overthrow a good mind and a good man,'' although whether he was a good man in any moral sense may be questioned. What was beyond question was his intelligence. Like many of the gentry of his generation, he had been to a university (Oxford) and to the Inns of Court. He was well read in the classics and had an abiding interest in mathematics and science. He was a friend of Richard Hakluyt, the great propagandist for colonial plantation, and a patron of Thomas Hariot, the mathematician and cartographer. He was himself a chemist of reputation (his ''Great Cordial'' was regarded as a sovereign cure for all sorts of maladies well into the 18th century).
He was feared for his persuasive eloquence as much as for his overbearing manner, and Elizabeth never permitted him to become a privy councilor, although he desperately wished to be a shaper of policy. But he was one of the handsomest men of his generation, a quality Elizabeth fully appreciated, and she appointed him captain of the guard, enjoyed his flattering attention (she was old enough to have been his mother) and valued his sardonic wit.
As Raleigh Trevelyan reminds us in his new biography, ''Sir Walter Raleigh,'' Raleigh came from a well-connected Devon family; Sir Humphrey Gilbert was his older half brother, his mother was a Champernowne, and he was kin to Sir Francis Drake and Sir Richard Grenville. The options open to Raleigh, as a younger son with his way to make in the world, were limited to the law, the church or military life, and given the fortunes being made by piracy, the last of these clearly had an appeal. At the age of 15 or 16 he served as a volunteer in one of the English companies fighting in France on the side of the Huguenots. Later, in 1580, while still in his 20's, he was appointed by the lord deputy of Ireland to lead a troop against the rebellious Irish and participated in the terrible slaughter at Smerwick. On his return to London he established himself as an expert on Ireland and as a man on the make, conspicuous at court for his extravagantly elegant clothes.
It was at this stage in his career that the story, probably apocryphal, was told that he had spread his cloak with a flourish across a muddy path the queen was walking in -- a gesture Trevelyan finds entirely in character even if it never took place. By the middle of the decade Raleigh had established himself not only at court but as a substantial planter in Ireland and, like Gilbert, his Devon kinsman, as a would-be planter on the American shore. Following Gilbert's ill-fated attempt, Raleigh obtained a crown charter and dispatched a small fleet captained by Sir Richard Grenville to establish a settlement on Roanoke Island -- all of which was financed by the Lord Wardenship of the Stannaries (the tin mines of Devon and Cornwall), by a wine monopoly and other plums by which an impecunious queen rewarded those in her favor.
Along the way he was granted a knighthood, and late in 1591 he secretly married the very pregnant Bess Throckmorton, one of the queen's maids of honor, a strong-minded woman, in what appears to have been a love match. That was not a good career move for a courtier already overshadowed by the rising young Earl of Essex, for the queen hated any hint of sexual scandal at court and hated even more to lose the familiar presence of one of her ladies.
In the 1590's court rivalries turned deadly as Essex strove for supremacy and the aged William Cecil, Lord Burghley, maneuvered for the succession of his clever son, Robert, to the secretaryship of state and a place at the Council Board. Raleigh and his wife were briefly incarcerated in the Tower, and although they were soon released, Raleigh was not permitted to return to court. In 1595 he led an expedition to Guyana in search of the fabled El Dorado -- an impressive feat of exploration but not a profitable one. In 1596 he participated in the successful but equally unprofitable raid on Cadiz, in which he gained fame for his leadership and personal bravery. In 1597 he was finally permitted to return to a court already made poisonous by the increasingly unstable Essex.
Raleigh was at court when Essex returned from his unsuccessful campaign against the rebel Tyrone in Ireland, and again in 1601 when a desperate Essex attempted to recoup his losses by capturing the queen herself. Two years later Elizabeth died, and Raleigh discovered that her successor, James I, suspected him of disloyalty from the outset of his reign. At the end of 1603 Raleigh was implicated in what was called the ''Main Plot,'' convicted on what were doubtless spurious grounds, and reprieved at the last moment but condemned to remain in the Tower. He was released in 1616 for a last attempt to find the fabled gold mine in Guyana. On this quest his son was killed when Raleigh's men attacked a Spanish town, and he returned, ruined, to a fresh trial in which the conviction of 1603 was ruled justification for his execution in 1618.
Raleigh Trevelyan -- long a prominent figure in London publishing and a prolific journalist -- has written many books but is not a historian by trade. Nevertheless, this is a well-researched biography, based on archival records not only in England but also in Spain and the United States. Several English clans claim descent from Raleigh, among them the Trevelyans, and Raleigh Trevelyan mentions in his preface that his name reflects ''a tenuous family connection'' with the great Elizabethan. He has traveled to scenes of Raleigh's life in Ireland, Spain and the Americas. For all the book's length, the narrative is brisk, and only as much background is included as is needed to let the reader make sense of a complex story. Evidence is handled with care and acuity, and where it is contradictory Trevelyan is content to lay the evidence before the reader. Raleigh was a glamorous Elizabethan; perhaps Sir Philip Sidney is his only rival on that score. But Trevelyan does not disguise Raleigh's arrogant pride, his lies and evasions and his fatal misjudgments of others. Not the least of many pleasures in this book are examples of Raleigh's poetry. If he is eclipsed by Sidney and Spenser, Marlowe and Shakespeare, he was no mean versifier. How many could have written the lines Raleigh did in 1603, when he expected to die in the morning?
Give me my scallop-shell of quiet,
My staff of faith to walk upon,
My scrip of joy, immortal diet,
My bottle of salvation,
My gown of glory, hope's true gage,
And thus I'll take my pilgrimage.
Paul S. Seaver is an emeritus professor of history at Stanford University and the author of many articles and books on 16th- and 17th-century England.
