In more than 3,000 years of history, the fate of the Hebrew language has risen, fallen and risen again, but perhaps never as quickly as it did last month at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan.
Over the Martin Luther King Jr. holiday weekend, parents of about 60 students in Stuyvesant's Hebrew language classes received letters telling them that school officials had decided to end the program.
The school's Hebrew teacher, suffering from a long-term illness, would not be able to return for the spring semester, according to the letter from the principal, Stanley Teitel.
''After much soul-searching, we have made the difficult and painful decision to close down the Hebrew program at Stuyvesant High School,'' Mr. Teitel wrote, ''since we have not been able to locate a teacher with the proper city license and state certification who could have continued the program at the high level we expect and also taught classes in a different subject area.''
Parents, however, were skeptical that a qualified substitute could not be found in a city where every mayor is expected to make at least one trip to Israel.
And within a week, Mr. Teitel met with them and agreed to continue the program, at least until all the students currently enrolled have taken the state Regents examination for a foreign language, which is given after the third year of study.
Stuyvesant, which has 3,000 students, is one of six New York City public high schools that offer courses in Hebrew, according to city officials. The others are Forest Hills, Francis Lewis, Benjamin N. Cardozo and Townsend Harris in Queens and James Madison in Brooklyn. About 330 public school students study Hebrew, city officials said.
There was some disagreement about the sequence of events surrounding the plan to discontinue Hebrew. ''At first we sent them a little note telling them that I would consider stopping the program,'' Mr. Teitel said.
But Seth Akabas, a Manhattan lawyer who has two sons enrolled in Hebrew classes at Stuyvesant, said that the principal ''started out from a position that he was going to close the Hebrew and allow everyone to transfer into Spanish.''
''That was not all that well received,'' he added.
Mr. Teitel said that the parents convinced him of two points: that some students had chosen to attend Stuyvesant, which is renowned for its science and technology program, at least partly because it offered courses in Hebrew and that by offering Hebrew to freshmen, the school had made a commitment to continue the program for them.
In addition to Hebrew and Spanish, Stuyvesant offers classes in eight other foreign languages: Mandarin Chinese, French, German, classical Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean and Latin.
Mr. Teitel said that a retired Hebrew teacher who had finished the fall semester would return for at least part of the spring semester. Fourth-year Hebrew students will be combined with the third-year class and will mostly do independent study.
Whether Stuyvesant's Hebrew program continues in the long term depends not just on staffing but also on the school's budget. Until now, the school had paid a full-time teacher for four classes, each averaging about 15 students.
Under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's reorganization of the school system, principals control their own budgets. Normally, a full-time teacher works five classes with 30 or more students in each, meaning Hebrew is relatively expensive.
And at Stuyvesant, where the student body is 50 percent Asian, Mr. Teitel is under pressure to increase offerings in Mandarin Chinese, Japanese and Korean.
''You walk in my halls for five minutes and you know exactly why Mandarin, Japanese and Korean are all growing,'' Mr. Teitel said.
The school runs a dozen Chinese classes, seven Japanese classes and two Korean classes.
Some Muslim students have also been trying to raise money to begin an Arabic program.
As for the Hebrew program, Mr. Akabas said, ''Honestly, I think that parents' and kids' passion for the program has more to do with religious feelings than with intense academic interest in Hebrew.''
