The Iranian interior minister said Saturday that the reformist government of President Mohammad Khatami would call off parliamentary elections set for Feb. 20 because the hard-line Guardian Council insisted on barring thousands of candidates.
''The fate of over half of the seats is already decided,'' said Abdolvahed Moussavi Lari, the interior minister, the Fars News Agency reported.
Consequently, he said, ''we do not consider the elections legitimate,'' and added, ''we will not hold the elections.''
By barring so many candidates, the Guardian Council, the conservative watchdog of the government, made its most direct intervention in Iran's parliamentary history. In doing so, it created one of the worst crises in the 25-year history of the Iranian theocracy.
Mr. Moussavi Lari said it was the right of the government not to hold an election that it believed could not serve people's interests. He later wrote a second letter to the council urging that it work with his ministry to accommodate a postponement. It is his ministry that is responsible for organizing the vote.
It was not clear whether there might yet be some sort of compromise, averting a showdown between the Iranian government and the council. But President Khatami said Saturday that his negotiations with senior religious officials to resolve the crisis had failed.
''We have reached a deadlock with the Guardian Council,'' Mr. Khatami said, speaking at a wreath-laying ceremony at the shrine of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
An emergency cabinet meeting called to discuss the growing crisis was canceled on Saturday. President Khatami's vice president, Mohammad Ali Abtahi, said that the president had become ill with a serious backache, but he did not say that the meeting was canceled because of his illness. The state television said the president had to rest for a few days.
Mr. Abtahi also said the 12 ministers in the cabinet who handed in their resignation two weeks ago when the Guardian Council first announced it was barring hundreds of candidates from the election would decide within days whether to maintain their resignations. ''My government will only hold competitive and free elections,'' the official Islamic Republic News Agency quoted Mr. Khatami as saying. ''The Parliament must represent the views of the majority and include all tendencies.''
[In what may be a turning point, a group of 109 reformers in the 290-member Parliament resigned Sunday to protest the disqualifications, Agence France-Presse reported. During a contentious session carried live on state radio, the speaker, Majlis Karubi, announced that he had received 109 resignations.]
The interior minister's comments came a day after the Guardian Council reinstated fewer than one-third of the candidates it had initially barred from seeking election. In restoring some of the candidates it had previously barred, however, it increased the number of blacklisted members of Parliament to 87 from 83.
Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, intervened earlier this month and asked the council to reinstate the current members and review the credentials of other candidates. But the council ignored the request in its decision on Friday. It also refused a request by the Interior Ministry to postpone the elections.
In addition to the 12 cabinet ministers, 28 provincial governors have handed in their resignations.
Mr. Khatami's efforts at reform have often been blocked by conservative clerics, yet he has resisted calls to resign over the election issue.
According to a Reuters report citing the ISNA student news agency, the Guardian Council will insist on the elections being held. It quoted a council member, Reza Zavarei, as saying that Mr. Moussavi Lari had a duty to fulfill.
''According to the law, the Interior Ministry is obliged to hold the elections on the legally appointed date,'' Mr. Zavarei said. He added that the council action could not be appealed.
Reformers in Parliament, however, are angry.
''It would be a shame for the government to hold the first ever sham election, and Khatami should not do so,'' said Ali Tajernia, one of some 100 members of Parliament holding a sit-in protest at the Parliament over the council's action.
The council -- a panel of six clerics appointed by Ayatollah Khamenei and six Islamic lawyers appointed through the judiciary -- is charged with reviewing electoral candidates and reviewing laws.
President Khatami's reformist allies accuse the council of trying to tilt the vote in favor of hard-line candidates, who lost control of Parliament to reformists in 2000 elections.
