JOB POTTER, a veteran Democratic councilman in East Hampton, maintained a stiff upper lip as he made his way along an ice-covered sidewalk outside the American Legion Hall in Amagansett. Inside were almost 350 residents, property owners and developers, many of them outraged over proposed building moratoriums, one of which would freeze construction on an estimated 250 of the town's most affordable building lots.
After six years on the East Hampton Town Board, Mr. Potter knew the next several hours were not so much about the first three weeks since a Democratic majority took over Town Hall and any missteps that had been made along the way, but whether those three weeks and those missteps would linger in the minds of voters when election time comes around again in 2005.
The moratoriums are intended to buy the town some time as it completes a much-postponed comprehensive plan, a blueprint for preservation and development over the next 15 years. They would not halt all construction but would, almost exclusively, affect property in lower- and middle-income neighborhoods.
As Mr. Potter described the proposals before the Amagansett meeting, a public hearing held on Jan. 21, ''We are really trying to stop big spec houses on little lots that do not fit the neighborhood.''
Nobody is sure exactly how many lots would be affected, and that, Mr. Potter said, is exactly the problem. Continued construction, though regulated on a case-by-case basis, might jeopardize the broader goals of the comprehensive plan. Still, he conceded that the moratoriums would have an ''inevitable impact'' on builders and on working families who live here year round, but he added, ''I think it will not be nearly as much as people think.''
Inside the American Legion Hall speaker after speaker disagreed, berating the Town Board's new Democratic majority for drafting moratoriums that, they said, would shake the town's service economy.
Philip J. McSweeney, a local builder, assured the board that memories were long in a small town. ''There is definitely a failure to communicate here,'' he said. ''The failure is between the Town Board and the people.'' The proposed nine-month moratoriums would not keep undeveloped lots affordable for local families, as the board had hoped, but would, he said, reduce the supply of available building lots overnight, driving up prices.
Instead of ensuring working families a place in the Town of East Hampton, Mr. McSweeney said, the board was working against them. ''Steven Spielberg does not come out from Hollywood, jump on his John Deere and cut the grass,'' he said. ''People have to live here to work here.''
One of the board's proposals would revise and extend an existing moratorium against commercial construction in targeted areas, primarily along Montauk Highway. The second would ban subdividing parcels anywhere in town for nine months. The third moratorium, by far the most controversial, would halt construction on so-called urban renewal lots, parcels of less than half an acre that were carved out by developers before the town adopted zoning in 1957 and well before half-acre lots were made mandatory for new homes in 1976.
Even before these latest moratoriums were proposed, urban renewal lots were difficult to build on. Approvals had been decided on a case-by-case basis and usually depended on meeting county septic and well-water standards. Still, the lots have long been ''some of the only affordable plots in town,'' said Richard Hammer, a former assistant town attorney who went into private practice when the administration shifted to a 4-to-1 Democratic majority on Jan. 1.
Skyrocketing real estate prices have meant that many would-be homeowners -- including would-be second-home owners -- have turned to urban renewal lots, largely in working- and middle-class neighborhoods, as an alternative to larger and more expensive lots, Mr. Hammer said in a telephone interview.
''There are people out there who, after years of saving, planned to build a home in the next year and now do not know what is going to happen,'' he said. ''There are plenty of people who are going to be hurt by this.''
And while there were a handful of speakers at the Jan. 21 meeting who supported the moratoriums -- most citing the failure of the previous administration to complete the comprehensive plan, despite several missed deadlines -- most of the speakers opposed them.
Pat Mansir, now the sole Republican on the Town Board, questioned the zeal with which the Democratic majority put forward their land-use proposals, calling them ''too final too soon.''
''I think they did not make an effort to include the whole Town Board or the public,'' she said before the meeting, giving the impression the moratoriums were already a done deal, even before the public hearing. Ms. Mansir has since come out against the moratoriums altogether.
For their part, the Democrats have backed off, saying that they received a clear message at the public hearing and will now rework their proposals, this time with public input. ''I am loath to criticize our performance so far,'' Mr. Potter said. ''There are so many people out there doing it already, and I am not sure they need my help.''
William McGintee, the newly elected town supervisor, said: ''Everything is easy to judge in retrospect. We should maybe have taken more time. The upside here is that we have kick-started the comprehensive planning process.''
Mr. McGintee defended the board's performance. ''We didn't stumble coming out of the gate,'' he said. ''In fact, we hit the ground running as we tried to move ahead with what the last administration couldn't and moved to get the job done.''
