THE economy is a crucial issue this election season as the nation shakes off the effects of a recession. But a look at the seven states holding primaries and caucuses Tuesday shows there is not one economy, but many.
National and international trends interact with local strengths and weaknesses to create a mosaic of economic health, as a survey by Economy.com, a research firm in West Chester, Pa., that follows regional trends, indicates.
States dependent on manufacturing are struggling. Those ahead of the game in the high-tech field have strong prospects. The whims of federal spending can have a huge impact.
Here is the outlook of the seven states.
ARIZONA
Delegates at stake: 55
The economy is expanding, helped by defense-related manufacturing, exports and tourism. A potential surge in biotech activity could be significant. A diverse roster of high-tech industries make the state well-positioned for the information economy. Population growth and low business costs are helping to bring businesses in. The state is an important entry point for immigrants, which, in some ways, drives economic growth, but also weighs on the state's fiscal health because of high poverty rates.
DELAWARE
Delegates at stake: 15
The economy is stabilizing. Manufacturing is a drain, but it is a smaller portion of the overall job base than in the nation as a whole. Consumer finance companies, law firms and other professional services are proving strong. Also helping: low business costs, above-average incomes and an influx of new residents.
MISSOURI
Delegates at stake: 74
It has one of the worst economies in the nation. Still mired in recession, the state is saddled with older industries. Auto manufacturers are losing ground, hurt by the relatively high pension and production costs that are characteristic of the Midwest. It has strong defense spending. Decisions on contracts for Boeing could help make or break a recovery.
NEW MEXICO
Delegates at stake: 26
It has one of the best performing economies in the country, with unusually consistent employment growth. Health care is a principal source of growth. Strong population gains have increased demand for housing, fueling construction activity. Intel, one of the largest contributors to manufacturing output in the state, is leading a high-tech recovery. A limited supply of water continues to be a hurdle. Helping: An influx of retirees, strong growth in the labor force and low business costs.
NORTH DAKOTA
Delegates at stake: 14
The economy is stable. Job creation is proceeding slowly. Prospects for high-tech industries appear promising, partly because of the construction of a manufacturing plant at North Dakota State University's Research and Technology Park. It will produce radio-frequency identification tags for the Defense Department and private industry. Dependence on federal spending, agriculture, as well as poor demographic trends, will limit long-term growth.
OKLAHOMA
Delegates at stake: 40
Conditions are weak but firming. Government job cuts are weighing on the economy, while consumer-related industries suffer from weak household cash flow. There is an absence of higher-skill positions. Expected military base closings in 2005 could create major difficulty. High-tech industries will stabilize, but Texas has become the region's technology epicenter.
SOUTH CAROLINA
Delegates at stake: 45
Tough times. Personal bankruptcies per household are at an all-time high and continue to climb. The jobless rate is above the national average and is rising. The struggles of the textile industry are acting as a drag. Growth will primarily depend on a continued shift away from low value-added manufacturing to durables, as well as technology and services. The Port of Charleston is benefiting from rising U.S.-China trade volumes.
State by State
