IT never quite captured the public's imagination the way, say, Pets.com did with its sock puppets or Kosmo.com did with its plan to deliver videos and ice cream to the masses. On the other hand, those Internet upstarts, and hundreds like them, fizzled a long time ago, while the Web company that Jim Toffey founded in 1998 to make bond trading more efficient has grown into a Wall Street powerhouse.
Maybe it has something to do with the size of the fixed-income market, which is measured in the tens of trillions of dollars.
Late last month, Mr. Toffey's company, TradeWeb, announced that its trading volume in 2003 had surged for the fifth year in a row, reaching $18.3 trillion, up 70 percent from 2002. In its six-year history, TradeWeb has executed more than four million block trades with a total volume of more than $38 trillion, making it the leading electronic trader of fixed-income securities. As Mr. Toffey, 42, likes to say, that is a higher daily dollar volume than passes through the New York Stock Exchange and the Nasdaq combined.
Institutional investors, TradeWeb's main customers, say the company has taken the mystery out of a once-maddening process. Tim Frechette, director of fixed-income trading at the Northern Trust Company in Chicago, describes a simple United States Treasury bond transaction in the days before TradeWeb.
''Say I was going to trade one of the most liquid bonds in the world, a 2- or 10-year Treasury,'' he said. ''I'd be able to look on electronic screens and determine what people were buying and selling. Then I'd have to call one of my brokers and ask them to give me a price. Meanwhile, that takes time, and the market is moving around. I might like the price. If so, I'd buy. If not, I'd have to hang up and call another broker.''
Using TradeWeb, Mr. Frechette says, he can compare offers from five sellers within seconds and pick the best. And that means that he -- and other fixed-income traders -- have a lot more time for analysis and talking with clients.
Mr. Toffey was a bond trader at Credit Suisse First Boston in 1996 when his boss, John Costas, asked him to figure out how to use the Web to automate the buying and selling of government bonds. He assembled eight programmers and went to work with them in a loft in the TriBeCa neighborhood in Manhattan.
Unlike so many other Internet start-ups back then, he said, TradeWeb shied away from hype.
''My business plan didn't even use the word e-commerce,'' he said. ''We just put our head down and focused on execution. Our mantra was underpromise and overdeliver.''
Credit Suisse First Boston and three other banks put up the initial $12 million investment in the company. Mr. Toffey is no longer employed by Credit Suisse First Boston, but it is the majority investor in TradeWeb. Over the years, four other banks joined.
First, TradeWeb tackled the market for Treasury bonds, highly liquid securities that lend themselves to electronic trading. It had plenty of competition, said Sang Lee, an analyst at Celent Communications in Boston, who recalled receiving calls or news releases ''every other week'' about start-ups that were creating electronic bond trading rooms.
Several investors, including some of TradeWeb's backers, put their money into two or more rival firms because they figured that electronic trading was the wave of the future but ''weren't sure who'd come out on top,'' Mr. Lee said. He said many of the early players had either gone out of business ''or are just limping around.''
The ones that survived the shakeout and are thriving today generally specialize in different markets, like MarketAxess for corporate bonds and the MuniCenter for municipal bonds, Mr. Lee said.
''But TradeWeb is the clear leader in the electronic trading of U.S. Treasuries in the client-to-dealer market, which means investors who go to a dealer to buy or sell bonds,'' he said.
After working out of a 1,000-square-foot loft space four months, Mr. Toffey and his original eight programmers moved to larger offices in the World Trade Center in 1998.
Then came 2001, the year that the company was supposed to break even -- and the year of the terrorist attacks. With about 70 employees on the 51st floor of the north tower, TradeWeb survived Sept. 11 without any loss of life. By chance, it had installed a disaster recovery system in London a few months earlier, and was able to route all transactions through the London office.
''We got back up in two weeks, but it involved a lot of scramble and hustle,'' Mr. Toffey said. By the end of the year, though, it had met its break-even goal.
The company moved to temporary offices in Jersey City, and later into a 38,000- square-foot space there that it has made its home.
TradeWeb's current focus is breaking into new markets and providing extra services for the clients who use its platform.
But some industry insiders warn that this could be a tricky proposition if it starts dealing in less-liquid securities than it does now. In such markets, margins are generally higher, and traders might resist competition that would lower their profits, said Bruce Usher, former chief executive of TreasuryConnect, an electronic platform for interest rate swaps that was acquired by eSpeed in 2001.
''If TradeWeb tries to enter less-liquid margins, it may face resistance from dealers,'' Mr. Usher said.
MR. TOFFEY comes by his interest in bonds almost genetically -- his father was in charge of fixed-income trading at First Boston. But he says he did not fully understand the importance of the bond market until his college years at Dartmouth.
''As a student of economics you really realize that bond markets drive a lot of the economy,'' he said.
Today, Mr. Toffey says, he struggles to explain to his three children, ages 10 to 14, exactly what he does. ''We play these games, but it will take awhile for them to understand,'' he said.
Private Sector
