After three days of private strategy sessions, the Republican leaders of the Senate have decided to scale back two of their major legislative initiatives: the energy bill and a measure that would impose strict caps on jury awards in medical liability cases.
The decision came at the annual retreat of Republican members of Congress, which featured presentations by lawmakers and pollsters, entertainment by the comedian Dennis Miller and a speech on Saturday by President Bush. On the eve of releasing his 2005 budget, the president urged Congress once again to make his tax cuts permanent.
''The tax cuts we passed are working, and I look forward to taking the case to the American people,'' Mr. Bush said, in a reference to the elections in November.
Aware that many members of his party are dissatisfied with the ballooning federal deficit, Mr. Bush reminded his audience that his budget was intended to cut the deficit in half within five years. ''This is going to be a challenging year for making sure we spend the people's money wisely,'' he said. ''And I sent up an initiative to do just that.''
Mr. Bush's 11-minute talk, delivered in a folksy style to an admiring audience of lawmakers, spouses and their children, was the only event at the retreat open to journalists. The question-and-answer session that followed was closed to reporters.
Mr. Bush took the opportunity to clarify his position on an issue dear to some conservatives, a proposed constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage, Representative Marilyn Musgrave, Republican of Colorado and a White House spokesman said.
Mr. Bush said that if necessary, he would support the version of an amendment sponsored by Ms. Musgrave, Jimmy Orr, a spokesman for the White House, said. The specificity of his comments moved him a small step closer to backing an amendment. But they stopped short of satisfying some of the most determined Christian conservative groups. Many argue that a Massachusetts court ruling in favor of gay marriage makes an amendment an urgent necessity, and some are holding out for stronger language banning same-sex civil unions as well.
In his public remarks, Mr. Bush made scant, if any, reference to his legislative failures on Capitol Hill, including the energy and the medical liability bills, which passed the House last year but failed in the Senate. Before the speech, Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, who as chairman of the Senate Republican Conference was a host of the retreat, told reporters that the leadership believed the bills would have to be rewritten to pass the Senate.
Instead of pressing forward with broad malpractice law changes, Republicans now plan on using what Robert Stevenson, a spokesman for Bill Frist of Tennessee, the Senate majority leader, called a ''rifle shot'' approach. This approach will focus on narrower issues, for example the difficulty obstetricians face in obtaining malpractice insurance.
On the energy bill, the Republicans' strategy is less clear. Some lawmakers have said they might attach parts of the bill to highway legislation, which could come before the Senate as early as Monday.
''I think, clearly, everyone in the energy debate now understands that the bill is too big, has too much money in it,'' Mr. Santorum said. ''Too many things were thrown in at the last minute that do not have the kind of broad support that can pass the Senate.''
He said the cost of the $31 billion bill, which includes hefty tax breaks for businesses, would have to be reduced, especially given Republicans' concerns about fiscal responsibility. The issue of the deficit loomed large at the conference, with a number of Republicans saying Mr. Bush's plan to cut it in half within five years does not go far enough.
''I'm talking to people who believe that cutting it in half in five years is a worthy goal,'' Representative Steve King, Republican of Iowa, said in an interview before the retreat. ''I believe getting the budget balanced in five years is a worthy goal. We should have more discipline than we have shown.''
The issue of unconventional weapons also took center stage, in light of testimony by David A. Kay, the former chief weapons inspector, that he thought Iraq did not possess large stockpiles of banned weapons at the start of the war. Representative Porter J. Goss, Republican of Florida, and chairman of the House Select Committee on Intelligence, briefed lawmakers on how to respond.
''He made the argument that we had this intelligence, we had had evidence even as late as 1998, so there's no doubt that weapons existed,'' said one aide who attended the session. ''The question, in Goss's words, is, 'What happened to them?' ''
The retreat was held at the Loews Hotel here and the security was intense. Reporters were strongly discouraged from coming; the few who did were shooed off the sidewalks when they tried to catch lawmakers going in and out. The retreat was billed as the ''Congress of Tomorrow,'' the same title it had last year.
