ON the day after Christmas in 2002, Angelica Berrie, then the senior vice president for strategic planning at Russ Berrie &amp; Company Inc., sat in the boardroom while directors discussed the future of the company. She was in a fog, she recalled. Russ Berrie, the company's founder and Ms. Berrie's husband, had died of a heart attack the previous day, and the executive committee had gone directly to work to choose a successor.
''I had to leave his body at the funeral home and come over for the board meeting,'' said Ms. Berrie, who was named chief executive of the company, which is based in Oakland, N.J., and makes toys and gifts.
Ms. Berrie remembers little of that day, she said, but she knew that she could not, as she put it, indulge her grief. It was almost January, the month when buyers from all over the country would descend on the company's showrooms to look at new product lines.
''I had to be highly visible,'' she said. ''We have 1,600 employees around the world; we have investors and customers. I had to make everyone sure that everything would be all right.''
There is no road map for how executives should deal with grief. As it relates to rank-and-file employees, bereavement is the subject of studies and is addressed in company handbooks. But there is little along those lines for the boss.
Yet a senior executive's bereavement can affect even the largest companies, as in the cases of Gerald M. Levin, the former Time Warner chairman, whose son Jonathan was killed in 1997, and Loida Nicolas Lewis, who took over as chief executive of TLC Beatrice International Holdings after her husband, Reginald, died in 1993.
Ms. Lewis took six months to grieve after her husband died. ''I was on automatic pilot,'' she said. ''I could not deal with anything. I was totally devastated.''
The company, meanwhile, was floundering. After her time of grieving, she stepped in and became chairman and chief executive in 1994, and by 1999, she said, TLC Beatrice had turned around and she was able to sell off the company piece by piece. She advised other executives to ''grieve, grieve, grieve.''
''Let it all out,'' she said. ''Then find time for work.''
Indeed, for many senior executives, the loss of a close relative poses unique professional challenges, experts in health care and management say. ''To run a company, you have to be able to use your head; grieving has nothing to do with head and everything to do with your heart,'' said Scott Stacy, clinical program director at the Professional Renewal Center in Lawrence, Kan., which helps managers during crises. Emotions, Mr. Stacy said, are ''experienced as a kind of enemy in the context of business.''
In 1999, six weeks after Stephanie Kugelman became chairwoman and chief executive of Young &amp; Rubicam's flagship office in New York, her husband, Arthur, died of complications related to lung cancer. She took a week off after his death and then returned to work.
Ms. Kugelman had friends and family to give her comfort, she said, but she felt that there was no one to talk to about her particular circumstances: dealing with grief and running a company. ''People would say, 'How do you do it?' You do it because you have to,'' she said. ''You know you can't unravel, can't let your family and your company down.''
When she was consumed by emotion at the office, she would take a walk around the block to compose herself, she said, but it was hard to maintain her attention span. ''You're reading something and not retaining it,'' she said.
NO one ever suggested that she take time off as if to imply that she wasn't doing her job well enough, she said. Indeed, she is now vice chairman and chief strategic officer at Y&amp;R Advertising. But in retrospect, she said, ''I should have taken more time off.''
Conducting business as usual is especially important during a time when many investors are keeping a close watch on executives, according to Joel Freeman, owner of the Freeman Institute in Severn, Md., which provides executive coaching. ''It's like the C.E.O. is sitting in a room behind a one-way mirror with stockholders, potential investors, workers, all watching them, their leadership and how strong they are,'' he said. Not all executives, however, can suppress their grief.
In 1993, James Grimes was president of a joystick manufacturer based in Sacramento that had $30 million in annual revenue and 300 employees. But after his wife, Shari, committed suicide that year, he fell apart emotionally, he said.
Mr. Grimes could not function at work, he said, and relinquished control of his company to two trusted managers who had worked for him. He returned to the company a couple of years later, but business was getting worse, and it went bankrupt in 1998. He blames himself in part. ''Maybe I should have shaken it off,'' said Mr. Grimes, who felt that he had let down his employees most of all. Still, he added, ''I may have sacrificed the company, but I didn't sacrifice me.''
He now runs the GID Development Corporation, a design and engineering development company in Yorba Linda, Calif., with $1 million in annual revenue, that he started in 2001.
Expressing grief is healthy for executives, said Dr. Stacy of the Professional Renewal Center.
Yet he cautioned against showing emotion in the office or confiding in associates or directors who are not close friends. Instead, he recommended that bereaved executives take some time off -- a few weeks or even a few months. And they should distribute some of their workload for a while and teach lower-level managers to take on more responsibility, he said.
Dr. Kenneth Doka, professor of gerontology at the College of New Rochelle in New York and co-editor of ''Living With Grief: At Work, School and Worship,'' noted the different ways people deal with grief. ''Some people grieve by doing, working,'' he said. ''Not everyone cries.''
But, he added, ''One of things we do know about grief is it does affect your judgment, and you do not process information as quickly, and are more likely to make cognitive missteps.''Executives have good coping skills, but be aware of your limitations.''
Executive Life
