MOST weekdays, Michelle Salmieri and her husband, Darren, board the train together in East Norwalk for the ride to Grand Central.
''We try to get the same seat every morning,'' Mrs. Salmieri said. ''We call it 'the love seat.'''
The Salmieris are among a select group of commuters who ride the train with someone they love, sometimes in both directions. Like most other commuting couples, they relish the time together and use it to chat about such mundane matters as weekend plans, grocery shopping and what went on at work. They also planned their October wedding while riding the train.
''Every morning she'd pull out her notebook,'' Mr. Salmieri said.
''We'd talk about the invitation list, songs to be played, choices of entrees,'' Mrs. Salmieri said.
The two were introduced by a friend, but the romance blossomed on the train.
''At the time, Darren only came in to the city twice a week,'' Mrs. Salmieri recalled. ''Those couple of days when I knew he would be commuting, those were exciting. I'd get butterflies, knowing I was going to see him.''
Now, people on the train see them as a unit.
''Other commuters would recognize us as a couple and get up so we could sit together,'' Mrs. Salmieri said. ''It's nice to be recognized as a couple. If one of us isn't here, people will ask about the other one.''
She admitted, however, that there is a limit to togetherness. ''I like to talk, Darren likes to relax,'' she said. ''He puts on his headphones, and that's the sign that he wants me to be quiet. Then I get out my book or a newspaper.''
Debbie Bussey of Darien knows how it is.
She and her husband, Don, have been married 22 years and they ride the train together only occasionally. But when they do, she said: ''If I so much as open my mouth, he's not a happy camper. He'll either read the paper or read a book. It's his reading time.''
As a result, she said, ''When I'm riding the train with him, I usually will strike up a conversation with someone else.''
At first, commuting together was uncomfortable for Christine Eaton and her boyfriend, Robert Schmaling, who moved to East Haven last June from Greenwich, where they both work.
''Initially, it was hard because we were stuck together, we had to talk to each other,'' Ms. Eaton said. ''Around the end of October, it started to change. It started to be fun. Now I get upset if he has to stay late.''
Mr. Schmaling agreed.
''It was a difficult transition going from a five-minute commute to two hours door-to-door,'' he said. ''But now, its relaxed, and I find it rather enjoyable. It's nice. And it's time we spend together.''
Ms. Eaton added, ''We've been together for four years, but our relationship has definitely gotten stronger since we've been riding together.''
William and Ellen VanHerwarde of Darien have had to learn to make do without that time and they miss it. They began riding together in 1990 until 1994, when they had their second child.
''For her sake, I'm not sure I can say I wish that Ellen was still commuting with me,'' Mr. VanHerwarde said, ''but it was fun to have some company during that time. It was a high spot of the commute to share it with somebody.''
Mrs. VanHerwarde said she misses the chance to talk about what's in the news and to take care of household business.
''We used to share the newspaper and talk about it,'' she said, ''Now, as a mother of three, I haven't touched a newspaper in I can't remember how long.''
But more important, she said, ''We used to be able to plan. I guess now I do all the planning, and I tell him.'' When there are matters that need to be discussed, she added, ''I have to make a list and make sure that he gets it.''
Paul and Margherita Magnano of Southport ride to and from New York together, but the ride home is more important in terms of their relationship.
''We use the time to talk about what went on in her day and what went on in mine,'' Mr. Magnano said.
''It gives us the opportunity to catch up,'' Mrs. Magnano added. ''We don't have that barrage when you get through the door. We're able to relax more when we get home.''
To be honest, Mrs. Magnano also enjoys the days when her husband works from his office in Fairfield and doesn't take the train.
''I'll talk with other train friends,'' she said. ''I look forward to catching up with them. You hear about the lives of the wives, what the kids are doing.''
But observing the men whose wives don't commute has also brought on a bit of jealousy, she admitted.
''I'm always amazed that the men are coming home with flowers for the women who have been home all day,'' she said. ''I'll say to Paul, 'What did I do wrong? I'm here, I'm working, I'm riding the train, where are my flowers?'''
COMMUTER'S JOURNAL Jack Kadden is an editor at The Times. His e-mail address is kadden@nytimes.com.
