The new Australian Open women's champion had been crowned an hour before, and it was easy to see where Justine Henin-Hardenne was heading: down the corridor deep inside Rod Laver Arena, clasping the hand of her husband, Pierre-Yves, in the direction of the now customary postmatch, precelebration photo shoot.
It was much harder to know where her fellow Belgian Kim Clijsters goes from here. Clijsters was the first player from their country to reach a Grand Slam singles final, the first to win the Tour's lucrative year-end championship, the first to reach No. 1 in the world ranking in singles, the first to do it in doubles, too.
But she has yet to win the tournaments that matter most in the sport, coming closest the first time against Jennifer Capriati in the 2001 French Open final, which she lost by 12-10 in the third set.
Clijsters beat Henin-Hardenne in the semifinals of that event, or perhaps it is more accurate to say that Henin-Hardenne beat herself, surrendering a 6-1, 4-2 lead and speaking openly afterward of her inability to control her nerves. Two and a half years later, the nerves are still there, and Henin-Hardenne still speaks openly about them. But she is no longer in the habit of beating herself. And though Henin-Hardenne, the world's new No. 1 player, might surrender leads on occasion, she rarely surrenders big matches.
Clijsters, more than anyone, has paid the price, losing to Henin-Hardenne in last year's French Open final and United States Open final, then losing to her again Saturday, 6-3, 4-6, 6-3, as Henin-Hardenne took a significant step toward becoming one of the sport's greats.
''Kim will win these tournaments; she has the level; she's a great player, and I'm sure it will happen for her,'' Henin-Hardenne said, sitting comfortably on the terrace of the players restaurant. ''At the same time, it must not be easy. I wouldn't want to be in that situation. But I think she's also someone who has her feet firmly on the ground. There are things that are very important for her besides tennis. She is happy in life and is able to put things into perspective pretty well.''
Only moments before, Clijsters had been in the restaurant, too, exchanging no words or glances with Henin-Hardenne and grabbing a slice of cake as her new fiancé, the Australian star Lleyton Hewitt, waited for her. He was passing the time by playing computer games and yelling ''Come on Lleyton!'' to himself.
The combative Hewitt has won two Grand Slam singles titles, but his wife-to-be has yet to break through. What, Clijsters said, helped soften the blow this time was that she played here with a tender left ankle after injuring it last month at the Hopman Cup.
''Each one is very disappointing,'' she said of her three losses in Grand Slam finals to Henin-Hardenne. ''I wouldn't say one more than the other. They're all disappointing. But with this one, I'm, in a way, very lucky to have been out there, as well.
''At least I gave myself a shot at it.''
Henin-Hardenne has taken her shot at the top seriously. After breaking through to win two Grand Slam titles, she took two weeks of vacation and headed back to work in late November in Wesley Chapel, Fla., with her fitness trainer, Pat Etcheberry, who helped her reach a higher level of stamina, strength and confidence in 2003.
''It wasn't easy to go back to work like that again; I admit it,'' Henin-Hardenne said. ''It wasn't that obvious to get remotivated, but Pat was there to push me from the first day. He put me back to work, and you know, he has always said to me, 'You will remember all this when you lift the trophy.' And every time I lift a trophy I do think about it.''
She managed to lift this one despite playing well only in spurts in Melbourne. Her first-serve percentage for the tournament was an unimpressive 49 percent. She made more unforced errors than winners, but she showed a champion's knack for raising her level under genuine duress, and Saturday was no exception. She recovered from losing the second set to take a 4-0 lead in the third set. She recovered again after Clijsters rallied to 4-3.
Henin-Hardenne won that critical eighth game, with Clijsters serving, after the chair umpire Sandra De Jenken of France overruled a line call on the baseline. Replays, using the new Hawkeye technology that relies on computer imagery to pinpoint ball locations, showed that Clijsters's shot had landed on the line. De Jenken defended her decision. She also said that Henin-Hardenne had not influenced her by pointing an index finger to indicate that she thought the ball was out. ''I announced it before Justine Henin-Hardenne lifted her arm,'' De Jenken said.
Though Clijsters expressed disappointment with the call, she declined to blame De Jenken for her defeat.
Henin-Hardenne will soon focus on defending her French Open title and, above all, on Wimbledon: the only Grand Slam event she has not won, although she did reach the 2001 final, losing to Venus Williams. ''It's going to be another goal, for sure,'' she said. ''I still have to improve my game on grass, especially against the strong players like Venus or Serena.''
She does not, in her estimation, have anything to prove if and when the Williams sisters return to full strength. ''I'm at peace with myself; the only person I have to prove anything to is me,'' she said. ''It will add spice to the Tour when they come back, but I don't need to win a tournament they are in to prove I'm a great tennis player.''
She has arrived at tennis greatness in a hurry. This time last year, she had won none of the four majors, but as she walked hand in hand with her husband through the halls of Melbourne Park on Saturday, she passed in front of the large color photographs of previous Australian Open champions clutching their trophies: Steffi Graf, Monica Seles, Martina Hingis, Jennifer Capriati and Serena Williams. Henin-Hardenne's picture will be on the wall soon, too. The question is whether Clijsters's will ever be.
TENNIS
