WESTCHESTER'S lively arts community benefits from the resources and diversity of New York City but by no means lives only in its shadow. One measure of the creative activity in the county is the list of Arts Alive grants announced each January by the Westchester Arts Council.
The grants, which are allowed to reach $5,000, are intended to help new and emerging arts groups establish roots in their communities and older groups to conduct new projects. They are part of the decentralization program of the New York State Council on the Arts, which allots funds to be distributed by local arts agencies.
Westchester received a total of $50,600, 15 percent less than last year, as a result of cuts in the state council's budget.
The highest awards, $3,000 each, went to the Greenburgh Arts and Culture Committee for writing workshops for children, and to Songcatchers of New Rochelle for a children's music composition program conducted with the Westchester Chamber Orchestra.
Forty-two groups, the same number as last year, were granted an average of $1,200 by the council . In addition, awards of $2,500 each were granted to two photographers working on individual projects, Betsy Braun-Lane of Ossining and Mariella Briceno-Rosenfelt of Mamaroneck.
Ms. Braun-Lane received an individual artist grant for a project called ''Choosing Freedom: Following the Spirit of the Underground Railroad,'' which will focus on the Underground Railroad in Peekskill. Ms. Briceno-Rosenfelt, who plans to interview and photograph day laborers, calls her project ''Day Laborers in Westchester: A Hidden Force in the Community.''
Barrie Gelles, the program manager of the Westchester Arts Council, said that a panel of seven artists, arts administrators and community leaders studied 63 applications in making their recommendations, which were screened by the council's grants committee and ratified by the board in December. The total amount of funds requested by arts groups was $220,700.
The grants, which tend to favor cultural programming and minority participation in less affluent areas, were centered in southern Westchester, where 29 grants were awarded, 21 of them in the cities of Mount Vernon, New Rochelle, White Plains and Yonkers. Music projects accounted for 18 of the total awards, compared with eight for art, five for dance, three for theater, two for writing and six for multidisciplinary, multicultural workshops and festivals. The awards were granted according to the amounts the groups requested, Ms. Gelles said. As a result, she said, some of the projects are ''tiny and real meaty.'' She said the panel was especially excited about the Tarrytown-based Tappan Zee Dance Group's ''Robert Brown Oral History Project,'' which will base storytelling, dance and photographs on the oral history of a longtime Tarrytown resident, Robert Brown. ''They were funded for the full amount they requested, $1,420,'' she said. ''They put together a very organized budget.''
Several Westchester choruses received grants to put on concerts, and funds were also given for band concerts, free summer theater performances, folk dance classes, after-school arts programs and an opera production by the New Rochelle Opera. Other awards went to ethnic festivals featuring African-American and Asian arts and culture.
The Katonah Library received money for a series of readings by noted poets for which Billy Collins, the former poet laureate, will be the host, while the Peekskill Arts Council received a grant for two days of open studio visits. The Dance Theater in Westchester, based in Yorktown Heights, will present three performances of an original, full-length production of ''Coppelia'' with its grant. The Fine Arts Orchestra Society of Yonkers will use its award for Sunday afternoon concerts and a performance with student concerto winners in June.
The Mount Vernon Hip Hop Culture Gallery, which is under construction, is a new addition to the county's art scene. A grant will help pay 10 summer interns to explore hip-hop culture at the gallery next summer. In addition, the Hamm &amp; Clov Stage Company in Yonkers received a grant to develop an original theater piece with Irish immigrants in Yonkers.
Ms. Gelles said she found it impressive that ''despite the difficult funding climate throughout the state and county, the grass-roots organizations are still doing wonderful work in the county.''
