IN one classroom, young children were carefully drawing their versions of Noah's ark. In another, older children discussed ways they could demonstrate kindness to others, before getting ready to learn Sabbath morning prayers.
Such activities are echoed throughout the county on Sunday mornings, as children pursue religious education. But for these particular children at the Solomon Schecter School here, Sunday morning religious school is perhaps less of a chore than a welcome opportunity.
''These are kids who have tried to be in Hebrew school and have not been successful,'' said Stacy Berrin Wasserman, the director of the project, called Project SNOW (Special Needs of Westchester). ''People are unaware there are a few kids who may not be able to partake in the programs at a synagogue.''
While the educational requirements of children with special needs is a familiar enough concern in public schools, sometimes it can seem somewhat more elusive in religious education.
A program of Matan, a nonprofit project that works with families and synagogues in the community, the weekly one-and-a-half-hour program began last fall. It is primarily financed by the UJA-Federation of New York and the Rita and Stanley Kaplan Endowment Fund. Parents also pay about $1,000 in tuition. Twelve students are currently enrolled, grouped according to age and ability. The children's problems are not mild learning disabilities or attention deficit disorder; rather, some students are autistic. Others have significant language delays, or severe learning disabilities and other problems.
David Roher, a special education teacher at White Plains High School, is one of Project SNOW's teachers. He says working with his students, who are 9 to 11 years old, is particularly gratifying.
''What we teach them is the basics of Jewish practice that gives them a sense of pride in their identity,'' he said. ''It's just a modification of the regular curriculum. We don't set a ceiling on what they can do. We draw from them, and what they're teaching us. We try to empower the children.''
The studies may mean doing a yoga class to teach the Hebrew alphabet, incorporating singing and music as much as possible, and essentially doing whatever it takes to make the classes more engaging for children who may find pen-and-paper tasks difficult.
While Matan's newest effort is perhaps the latest attempt to address these issues, it's not the only one.
''In Westchester, a majority of synagogues have programs for children of congregants with special needs,'' Irene Lustgarten, the director of the Board of Jewish Education in Westchester, said in a telephone interview. ''Synagogues make every effort to help. Many parents value the social aspect of synagogue life, and work out compromises with the rabbi and the school.'' She said the Matan educators ''are well trained in Judaica and special needs.''
''There are children with very special needs who may not be able to do a synagogue program,'' she added. ''But Matan is not all there is.''
Catholics, too, have worked to make religious education available to all. ''All our parishes have special religious education,'' said Linda Sgammato, the director of special religious education for the catechetical office, the Department of Education for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, which includes Westchester, Rockland and Putnam Counties, in a telephone interview.
''Right now, we seem to have a great number of children with autism coming into religious school,'' she said. ''We don't want to turn somebody away. We want them to understand their faith, and have a relationship with God.''
Irene Kollar, the director of religious education at Our Lady of Fatima in Scarsdale, said in a telephone interview: ''Every child has the right to their own spiritual development. We work with each family and don't just offer one type of program.''
For parents who watched wistfully as their friends, neighbors and family members took religious school for granted, such educational opportunities are deeply appreciated.
''This program is a godsend,'' said Jackie Israel Saril of New Rochelle, whose 9-year-old daughter, Jami Israel, attends to Project SNOW. ''I have such a feeling of pride on Sunday. I'm like all the other Jewish parents in taking their child to Hebrew school.''
IN THE SCHOOLS E-mail: wested@nytimes.com
Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about religious education for children with special needs misstated the availability of such programs in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York. Such religious education is available in most parishes, but not all, according to Linda Sgammato, director of special religious education for the archdiocese's Department of Education.
