A man fell through the ice and nobody missed him. Nobody reported him gone. Nobody wondered where he was. Not the day he fell through the ice or the next day or the day after that. For an entire week, nobody missed him.
People out walking their dogs had seen him fall through the ice in Prospect Park Lake in Brooklyn on the frosty morning of Jan. 18. Police scuba divers did all they could to find the man, clawing through the bone-chilling waters, looking everywhere. But as the days lapsed without progress, it began to seem as if there was no man who fell through the ice.
Even in this city of the famous and the forgotten that passes so many by, could someone be that invisible?
Then, last Saturday, one of the scuba divers found the man who fell through the ice. He had a name: Miguel Flores, he had an age, 23, and he had one of those dark stories of someone who discovered himself in New York by chance and hoped for promise and met doom. Things happen at high velocity in New York, and it took only two months for the city to settle his destiny.
The story of the man who fell through the ice is sketchy, and many of its clarifying details are gone with him, but the ominous event that seems to have propelled him on a downward spiral that would end at the bottom of a partly frozen lake was something simple but annoying, the loss of his wallet in Virginia.
According to his relatives, the man's short life flowed from Honduras to Florida to Virginia to New York. He was from a large family, one of eight brothers and sisters, four of each sex, born in San Pedro Sula, Honduras. His full name was Miguel Angel Flores Alvarenga. Relatives offered different birth dates, but his oldest sister and brother-in-law in Honduras said he was born on Nov. 21, 1980. He and his twin brother, Jose, were the youngest of the siblings. His father, who died eight years ago of complications of diabetes, had been in the merchant marine and then ran a small grocery store, and his mother and other relatives still live in Honduras.
Isabel Alvarenga de Rodriguez, Mr. Flores's eldest sister, said that when Miguel was 15 he apparently inflated his age and joined the merchant marine. His twin brother followed him to sea a few months later. One by one, most of his siblings came to the United States in pursuit of jobs. In 1998, Mr. Flores decided to do that too. He settled in Miami, where another brother lived. He found work as an auto mechanic for a couple of years. Then, looking for higher pay, he moved to Norfolk, Va., where several relatives lived and worked.
His brother-in-law, Roy Escobar, who is married to his sister Dora, has a construction firm, Roy's Contracting, and he said he gave Mr. Flores work installing drywall in commercial buildings. Mr. Flores was good at drywall -- fast, didn't make many mistakes. He rented an apartment with some roommates.
Sometime in October or November, his relatives said, his wallet was stolen. He went into the bathroom of his apartment and when he came out it was gone. All of his identification papers were in it. In November, he decided he was going to go to the Honduran Consulate in Washington to get his papers replaced. One reason he wanted them all in order, he told one of his sisters, was because he was thinking about joining the military.
For some reason, he traveled on to New York. His relatives don't know why. But some men that he met in New York said he spoke of always wanting to see New York, and they think when he saw it he was entranced and did not want to leave.
Without much money and without identification papers, he apparently lived on the street for days. On Nov. 24, according to the city's Department of Homeless Services, he turned up at the Atlantic Assessment shelter in Brooklyn to be evaluated for placement in the homeless system. Homeless Services said he was not found to be abusing drugs or alcohol but was depressed, and he was assigned on Dec. 27 to the Kingsboro Men's MICA shelter in Flatbush, which takes the homeless who are mentally ill or chemical abusers.
About four weeks ago, Mr. Escobar said, Mr. Flores called a cousin in Virginia, asking if he could locate his Social Security number for him. He said he was in New York but did not divulge that he was staying at a shelter, that he was homeless. They did not hear from him again.
''Nobody knew he was living in a shelter,'' Mr. Escobar said. ''If I knew he was in a shelter, I would have come and gotten him right away.''
Eric Caesar, the director of social services and acting program director at the Kingsboro shelter, liked Mr. Flores. ''He constantly volunteered to do things around the grounds,'' he said. ''He shoveled snow. He cleaned fans. He cleaned up the dining room area after meals.''
His English was imperfect, and he told Mr. Caesar that he wanted to go to school to improve it.
His caseworker, Sheila Black, said she helped Mr. Flores fill out an application for a Social Security card and an application for permanent residence, but he needed a $100 fee that he didn't have, so she put him down on the list of men interested in working in the shelter to earn some money.
Other residents at the shelter found him likable, if sometimes remote. ''Dollar'' Bill Daniels, whose nickname comes from his perpetual desire to make a dollar and hang on to it, said Mr. Flores played spades and checkers with the others, took his meals, went to his shelter meetings. ''We talked a lot and smoked cigarettes and laughed,'' Mr. Daniels said. ''He missed his family. He was looking to get his life together.''
Mr. Flores was assigned a room with six beds. Jose Urena was one of his roommates and said that Mr. Flores was very religious and preached to him from the Bible. He said Mr. Flores was writing a book about his life, unlived as it still was, filling up notebooks by hand, and sometimes he read excerpts to him. But Mr. Urena did not pay close attention.
Mr. Flores was quiet, Mr. Urena said, and often seemed morose. The last time he saw him, Mr. Urena said, Mr. Flores was downcast and, shrugging off interaction, went and sat alone in the corner to watch TV.
Prospect Park is in walking distance of the Kingsboro shelter. Mr. Caesar said Mr. Flores did not like to be idle. He preferred to be doing things. He was a young man, fit. Maybe that is why on Sunday, Jan. 18, he went to the park in the cold.
The dog walkers told the police that the man was wandering alone on the western part of the 60-acre lake, not heeding the numerous signs warning people off the ice. It was around 9 in the morning when they saw him fall through. He shouted for help. He managed to pull himself out of the water and right himself. Almost at once, he fell through again. Thrashing in the water, he again yelled for assistance. Then he went down for good.
One person tried to rescue him, before falling in and then retreating to shore. Soon police scuba divers and other emergency personnel arrived. The conditions were dreadful, the temperature below freezing, visibility in the lake virtually nonexistent. The scuba divers searched for two hours, then gave up until the next morning. Day after day, the divers plunged in. One day, they went through an opening and while they were under water the opening froze up. They had to chop their way out.
Around 10 in the morning on Saturday, Jan. 24, Officer Albert Kaufmann, 16 years a police diver, six months from retirement, had been in the icy waters for a half-hour, tied to a line held by divers on the shore, able to see barely a foot in front of him. ''I saw something -- a dark silhouette,'' he said. ''I saw a hat, and a jacket. Then I touched the body, and sure enough that was it.'' He was face down, the ways the bodies always seemed to be, the man who fell through the ice.
Officer Kaufmann said the body was three-quarters frozen. Mr. Flores had a card on him with his name and the name of the shelter, a summons for jumping a subway turnstile and a religious book of some sort.
On Wednesday evening, a funeral service for Miguel Flores was held at the small Woodside Funeral Home in Bushwick, Brooklyn, folding chairs tidily arranged before the coffin. Around 20 relatives and friends had come up from Virginia for the service. A handful of residents from the shelter came, and they solemnly paid their last respects. The coffin was open, and Mr. Flores was dressed in a brown suit, looking his best, and no one could have guessed that he had been beneath the ice.
A priest who did not know Miguel Flores said some prayers, and there was singing and abundant tears. The next day, the body was put on a plane bound for Honduras for burial.
At the Kingsboro shelter, the men had not wondered about Mr. Flores during the week he was not there. On Jan. 18, he missed the 10 p.m. curfew, but he had done that before. It went that way in shelters, here some days, gone others. Once again, his fellow residents imagined, he must have found someplace else that consumed his attention. They assumed he might come back the next day or the day after that. He did not. He had fallen through the ice.
