YOU know the drill, if you take the Metro-North regularly: You step on the train and look around. First you look for people talking on cellphones. You move on. Then you scan the rows for riders holding dormant cellphones. You move on.
It's a bit like musical chairs. The prize, if you're lucky, is a peaceful 35 or 40 minutes of reading time on your way to or from the city.
The trickier step (yes, alas, many of us are guilty of digital profiling): guessing which riders are likely to whip out a phone and start a loud discourse on the stock market or the evening menu or some seemingly confidential legal matter. Finally, fingers crossed, you pick a seat.
Invariably, you pick wrong. Just when you've settled into a good book, a high-pitched melody shatters the peace. A voice seemingly inches from your head booms out: ''Yes, we're leaving Hastings now. Now we're passing Greystone. Where are you exactly? I'm lifting my right foot now. We should be in Yonkers in a few minutes. I'm scratching my left ear now. Wait. Hold on. I've got another call. Hello! Yes, I lifted my right foot already. Have you scratched your ear yet? Let me know. Can I put you on hold?''
And on it goes. Another peaceful ride is destroyed. You can change seats, of course, but then you're sure to hear a new set of beeps, more stentorian babble. You can suggest, gently, that perhaps the republic would stand if the caller could possibly lower his voice, but then you open yourself to all manner of abuse. (My favorite: after I repeatedly tried to get the attention of a woman sharing her life's intimate details with half the Hudson Valley, she finally registered my presence and snapped, ''I'm ON the PHONE!'' Actually, that was such a gem of cluelessness that I wouldn't have missed it.)
It needn't be this way. The solution is glaringly obvious: designate some cars cellphone free. The first and last cars. The first of each pair of cars. Whatever.
Metro-North, through its complaint line, balks at this idea. It's a matter of free speech, it says. Nonsense. Free speech doesn't extend to talking on the phone during a movie or concert. Look around the train: by overwhelming consensus, you're in a rolling reading room. Violating that peace is as bad as violating the peace in a theater.
Metro-North also says that, in a survey, only 27 percent of riders favored phone-free cars. Only? That's an awful lot of unhappy riders -- more than a car's worth on a four-car train. And quiet cars seem to work fine on Amtrak. On a recent trip from Washington to New York, I had to ask several conductors where, exactly, the quiet car was, but once I found it, it was a haven of blissful peace. A woman across the aisle had barely pulled a cellphone out of her bag when a hissed whisper emanated from the seat behind me: ''This is the quiet car.'' The woman quickly, sheepishly, put her phone away.
And Metro-North has yet another rationale: On crowded trains, the logistics would be too difficult, there'd be too much danger of riders not finding a seat in the type of car they wanted. Nonsense. People who really value a peaceful ride will get to the train early enough to get a seat in the quiet car. At least some people would be spared. It's a start.
And those who, apparently, thrive on noise? Oh, how terrible it would be for them to, for once, wind up in the quiet car -- all those excruciating minutes deprived of their omnipresent cellphones. Help them out. Lend them a book. ''The Quiet American,'' perhaps, or ''All Quiet on the Western Front.'' Or maybe ''The Very Quiet Cricket.''
SOAPBOX Hubert B. Herring, an editor at The Times, lives in Dobbs Ferry.
