BERNARDO BERTOLUCCI'S steamy, turbulent new picture, ''The Dreamers,'' is conclusive proof that the former enfant terrible -- who gave us ''Before the Revolution'' (1964), ''The Conformist'' (1970) and ''Last Tango in Paris'' (1972) before he hit his 33rd birthday -- has achieved his lifelong goal of never growing up. For the last decade or so, Mr. Bertolucci (who is now, improbably, 63) has been showing signs of mellowing, but in ''The Dreamers,'' which is set in Paris in May 1968, he has returned to the time of his own youth and to the provocative spirit of that era, when no one over 30 was to be trusted, and sex and politics and movies all seemed to be the exclusive property of the young. And he's here to tell us that the young are still the rightful owners. Especially of sex.
Eroticism is, of course, the movie's selling point: the distributor, Fox Searchlight, has chosen to release Mr. Bertolucci's original cut with an NC-17 rating rather than trim it for an R. It's unlikely, though, that ''The Dreamers'' will generate the controversy (or the business) that the X-rated ''Last Tango'' did three decades ago. There's no Marlon Brando here -- the three young leads are all relative unknowns -- and screen sex just doesn't shock audiences the way it used to. Besides, what was most profoundly shocking about ''Last Tango'' was the emotional violence it depicted. The kids in ''The Dreamers,'' which opens on Friday, are messed up, volatile, unstable, but they are kids: their passions haven't had time to curdle like those of the Brando character in ''Last Tango.'' For Mr. Bertolucci's young dreamers, sex is still new, and sweet.
The movie is based on a novel called ''The Holy Innocents,'' by the English film critic Gilbert Adair (who also wrote the screenplay), and it's evident that innocence is precisely the quality that attracted Mr. Bertolucci to this material. He has throughout his career frequently been tempted by variations on the ''got to get ourselves back to the garden'' impulse of the Woodstock generation. (Though as a conflicted, guilt-ridden bourgeois European leftist intellectual he's always had a little difficulty transforming himself into a flower child.) The diverse utopias he has tried to imagine on screen have sometimes been Marxist (as in ''1900''), sometimes Maoist (as in ''The Last Emperor''), sometimes Buddhist (as in ''Little Buddha''), but most often sexual: think, for example, of the bizarre Oedipal melodrama of ''Luna,'' or of the idyll ''Stealing Beauty'' in which Liv Tyler finds her father and loses her virginity to a beautiful Italian boy in the Tuscan moonlight.
''The Dreamers'' is, in its peculiar way, an idyll, too: this time, an urban one, which means that the reality of the world outside the spacious, labyrinthine apartment that the twins Isabelle (Eva Green) and Theo (Louis Garrel) and their American friend Matthew (Michael Pitt) turn into their personal erotic playground has to be denied by an act of will. While most of young Paris, in 1968, is taking to the streets, Isabelle, Theo and Matthew, perversely, take to the sheets.
These are hothouse flower children, grown in the dark, smoky screening room of the Paris Cinémathèque. Matthew meets the twins at a demonstration to protest the firing of that institution's legendary founder and curator, Henri Langlois -- an event that would eventually mushroom into the full-scale riots of '68, and effectively shut down the city. With the Cinémathèque closed, Mr. Bertolucci's kids playact bits from favorite films, venturing outside only infrequently, and reluctantly, when their cinematic recreations require a location; at one point, they sprint through the Louvre, in imitation of the three charming young crooks of Godard's ''Band of Outsiders'' (1964). But for the most part this is a band of insiders, content to drift from room to room in search of the images and the sensations that might tell them who they are.
Fortunately, Mr. Bertolucci has a pronounced soft spot for people who live, willingly or not, inside their own heads; he's the movies' great poet of narcissists and spoiled children. The key, I think, to the generally disturbing portrayal of grown-up sex in his films -- from ''Before the Revolution'' to ''The Conformist'' and ''Last Tango,'' and ultimately to the Saharan sexual apocalypse of ''The Sheltering Sky'' (1990) -- is that, in his view, adults live with the bitter knowledge that the most intimate contact, which promises to bring us closer to other people, instead too often serves to remind us that we can never escape from ourselves. For the young, that's O.K.: the discovery (or invention) of a self is the thrill of adolescence. Mr. Bertolucci's adults invariably find that living with that self is harder and less rewarding work.
''I don't like grown-up people,'' says Gina, the self-loathing thirtyish heroine of ''Before the Revolution,'' who is having an unhappy fling with her moody nephew (and obvious Bertolucci surrogate) Fabrizio. ''They're not attractive.'' Mr. Bertolucci, after years of strenuous attempts to disentangle the twisted psyches of grown-ups, appears to have decided that Gina was right. Since the bleak ''Sheltering Sky,'' he has all but turned his back on adults: ''Little Buddha'' (1993) is largely about children, and proposes reincarnation, rather than sex, as the best way to get inside the skin of another person; the heroine of ''Stealing Beauty'' is a sweet-natured 19-year-old virgin; and even the grown-up man and woman, a pianist and his housekeeper, who are the main characters of the lovely ''Besieged'' (1998) are unusually shy and childlike -- almost presexual.
The funny thing is, ''Besieged'' is a pretty sexy movie -- sexier, in some ways, than ''The Dreamers. ''Besieged'' is a slow, hushed, gentle sort of picture: all foreplay and no payoff. That means that the viewer in this case gets the benefit of Mr. Bertolucci's formidable powers without also having to experience the emptiness and rage that sometimes, in his films, are the price of consummation. This is probably as close as he can get to a vision of pure, selfless love, but it's not exactly Buddhist detachment; it's highly eroticized altruism. The man can't help it: Mr. Bertolucci's style is so rhythmic and sensual that it seems to eroticize everything it touches.
In ''The Dreamers'' the self rears its head again, with the consequence that the film feels more unstable, and therefore more typically ''Bertoluccian,'' than the three rather tranquil pictures that preceded it. The spirit's been willing, but the flesh, and the restless, perpetually adolescent sensibility, are weak, and Mr. Bertolucci can't resist having one more head-on, full-monty go at the subjects that have obsessed him all his life: sex, politics and the cinema itself. And in doing so, he seems to evoke both the substance and the New Wave style of his first major film, ''Before the Revolution.''
Fabrizio, in that early self-portrait, is so intellectually irresolute and emotionally divided that he clings tenaciously to the illusion of order provided by Marxism, and abandons it only when he can no longer deny that his ''bourgeois'' indecisiveness is his truest self. He lives, he admits, as if ''before the revolution,'' in a permanent ''nostalgia for the present.'' To put it another way, for Fabrizio, systems like Marxism mean to possess the world, to have their way with it, to nail it, while he prefers to caress it -- to remain in that state of constant anticipation in which everything is possible. There's no joy in this self-knowledge, though: he feels as if he has betrayed something. It's tempting to see the messy, fumbling, ardent ''Dreamers'' as Mr. Bertolucci's belated attempt to find the joy in his own taste for the beauty of irresolution.
But then, he always tempts us to try to figure him out, teases us with the possibility that, this time, the raging contradictions of his nature will resolve themselves into a clear portrait, a consummated argument: the Hegelian wham-bam-thank-you-ma'am of thesis, antithesis, synthesis. But I suspect that at the end of his career that synthesis will still be elusive -- a mirage as seductive and unreachable as any in ''The Sheltering Sky'' -- and that the voluptuous, melancholy before-the-revolution disorder of Bernardo Bertolucci's work will look like its essence. (Anyone inclined to test this hypothesis should check out the American Museum of the Moving Image's complete retrospective, which will run from Feb. 14 through March 7. And tomorrow night Mr. Bertolucci is scheduled to be at the museum in Astoria, Queens, to discuss ''The Dreamers.'')
What makes him so frustrating, so fascinating and finally so indispensable is a quality he shares with the radiant, randy, spoiled children of his films: he isn't afraid to wear his heart and his head (and occasionally other organs) on his sleeve. All Bernardo Bertolucci has been trying to do, in his long exploration of the sensual properties of the cinema, is lose his virginity again and again.
FILM Terrence Rafferty is the author of ''The Thing Happens: Ten Years of Writing About the Movies.''
