When MetroCard Fails
Q. Occasionally my unlimited MetroCard will fail, and there is inevitably a long line for the attendant -- or no attendant at all. Am I breaking any laws if I save everyone's time and hop over the barriers?
A. Don't do it. In the eyes of the law, it's still fare-beating. As Paul Fleuranges, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, says: ''A police officer who sees you go through doesn't care that you have a monthly card. He's going to give you a ticket.''
You should go to the nearest booth and tell the clerk your problem. ''The clerk can see that the card is damaged,'' Mr. Fleuranges said, ''and either correct it or give you an envelope to send it back, and he can buzz you through the gate legally.''
In general, if your MetroCard does not work:
With a regular, pay-per-ride MetroCard, go to a station booth and ask the agent to transfer your money to a new card. If the card is too damaged to read, it will have to be mailed to New York City Transit.
An unlimited-ride MetroCard must be mailed to New York City Transit for replacement. To receive a full credit for time remaining on your card, the envelope must be postmarked no later than one day after the problem occurs or five days for the one-day Fun Pass. Sundays and Federal holidays are not counted.
Addressed, postage-paid envelopes are available at subway station booths and on buses. The envelope comes with a questionnaire that lets you describe the problem.
N.F.L. in Staten Island
Q. Now that it's Super Bowl time, I was wondering if it is true that the National Football League once had a team in Staten Island.
A. Yes, from 1929 through 1932. Since the N.F.L. was born in 1920, New York has been well represented, not only by the Giants and Jets. There was a Giants team that played the 1921 season and died. There was the New York Yankees gridiron version in 1927-8. Brooklyn had the Lions, who lasted just one season, 1926, and the Dodgers (no relation but inspired by Dem Bums), who moved from Dayton, Ohio, for the 1930 season and played until 1944, when they merged with the Boston Yanks.
But you're asking about the Staten Island Stapletons, who were in the league from 1929 through 1932. The Stapes began as a semipro team in 1915, owned and led by Dan Blaine, a halfback from the Stapleton section. As a semipro outfit they were successful. Blaine became rich as a restaurant owner, and when the Giants, owned by the Mara family, moved into the Polo Grounds in 1925, he decided to take a step up.
It would take four more years before the Stapletons were admitted to the league. They played in Thompson's Stadium, a cozy minor-league park in the neighborhood that gave them their name. Of their four N.F.L. seasons, their best was 1930, when they were 5-5-2, finishing sixth of 11 teams. After the Depression hit, the team played to sparse crowds and lost a lot of money.
Blaine received permission from the league to suspend professional operations and the team played one more season of semipro ball before quietly folding.
On a Short Street
Q. Where did the name Mosco Street come from? Did someone forget how to spell Moscow?
A. Nyet. Mosco Street, in Chinatown between Mott and Mulberry Streets, got its name in 1982. Under its two previous names, Cross Street and Park Street, it was longer and quite a bit more infamous, in the heart of the notorious Five Points district.
Where the street crossed Orange and Anthony Streets (now Baxter and Worth), it formed two of the five points. It originally ran from Chambers to Mott. But with the creation of Columbus Park, the building of the county courthouse and other changes, the street now runs one short uphill block.
The street was renamed for Frank Mosco, a Lower East Side community activist who died in 1982. He was known for his work on issues of youth, the elderly and low-income housing.
GEORGE ROBINSON
F.Y.I.
