THE Villages of Sleepy Hollow and Tarrytown are embroiled in a stormy campaign over a school bond referendum for $98 million in improvements.
On Tuesday, residents here will vote on the bond issue money to pay for a complex, multistage repair and renovation of four aging school buildings, with the eventual closing of a fifth, over seven years in the Public Schools of the Tarrytowns.
The Tarrytown school district has not done any major construction work for more than 50 years, said Superintendent Howard W. Smith. During the last 30 years, for instance, he said, the school district has proposed and passed just one other bond referendum, borrowing $1.5 million in 1996 to expand the Washington Irving School.
Still, the $98 million price tag has stunned many residents. ''The seniors are scared, they're worried about the dollars and cents,'' said Gertrude Bracchitta Arduino, 76, a Tarrytown resident and retired elementary school teacher in the district who is the president of the Tarrytown Seniors.
Supporters of the bond issue point out that in light of the long period with no bond issues, the money isn't really that much. ''When I first heard $98 million, I had sticker shock,'' said Matthew Brennan, 44, a lawyer who lives in Sleepy Hollow and has two children. After analyzing the figures, however, Mr. Brennan said, he calculated that the district would be spending about $33,000 per student when completed: while Irvington's recent renovations cost $33,000 per student and Pleasantville's latest additions totaled $44,500 per student. But many are anxious, both older residents as well as parents. For example, Myles Biritella, 40, a lifelong Tarrytown resident, wrote an article in a local monthly paper criticizing district officials for proposing such a large project.
''For $98 million we should be getting the Taj Mahal, but we're getting bare bones,'' said Mr. Biritella, who is divorced and has four children. ''It's unfortunate that the school board didn't act years ago, so now we're behind and we're running to catch up.
''We went from no action to overreaction,'' he added.
Other parents, however, say the amount is not unreasonable.
''Mr. Biritella has put fear into people, and he's just wrong,'' said Katharine Swibold, 43, a Tarrytown mother of two who presented a response to Mr. Biritella's article at a recent school board meeting. ''To be a responsible citizen of any community, you need to do what's right for the schools.''
Both Mr. Brennan and Ms. Swibold have been the host of or organized dozens of informal meetings, ''to alert people to the upcoming bond referendum vote and to let them know why the schools need to be renovated and expanded,'' Mr. Brennan said.
Doubters tend to be convinced, he said, after ''they learn about the extent of the problems facing the schools, and how old, how inadequate and how outdated the systems are for school buildings today.''
Another contentious issue is the uncertainty about the ultimate cost of the project to taxpayers. Annual school tax increases for the owner of the average house in Tarrytown and Sleepy Hollow could range from almost nothing to an average of $100 a year for seven years, depending on the outcome of several development projects in both villages, Mr. Smith said.
If the General Motors site on the Hudson River waterfront is developed according to the current $1 billion plan, for example, tax revenue from the site will approach $6 million by 2008, nearly enough to cover the total debt service of the bond proposal, said Mr. Smith. In addition, if Ferry Landings, another planned Hudson River waterfront development, is built in Tarrytown, it could bring in an additional $1.6 million, he said.
School taxes in Tarrytown are on the low side, averaging about $6,000 a year for a house worth $500,000, Mr. Smith said. In Briarcliff Manor, the annual school tax on the same house would be about $6,700; in Ossining, $6,500; and in Irvington, $6,447, according to local officials. All of these figures include the state-sponsored STAR exemption. According to figures provided by the Westchester-Putnam School Boards Association, spending per pupil is also slightly lower in Tarrytown, where the school district spends, on average, $15,200 per pupil; in the Briarcliff Manor school district, $19,600; and in the Irvington school district, $16,791.
Philip Zegarelli, the village mayor, said he is optimistic about the future of the Sleepy Hollow development. Of the school bond proposal, he said, ''It's a big price tag to come all in one fell swoop.''
Mr. Smith, the superintendent, agreed. ''Ninety-eight million dollars is a lot of money,'' he said, adding that the district has not undertaken any new construction since 1953.
''Since that time, the approach has been to fix it as you go,'' he said, adding that he regretted that his predecessors did not have the foresight to begin renovations years ago.
''In the late 1980's, there was not a lot of public support for new schools, and when the General Motors plant was leaving in the 1990's, they took a lot of tax money with them,'' he said. ''It was short-sighted not to do more, but to float a bond without those revenues would have been counterintuitive.'' In any case, Mr. Smith said, ''It's clearly time now.''
The new plan includes enough money for the installation of a new roof, windows, plumbing, heating and electrical systems at all four schools, to build classrooms for art, music, libraries and special education, to create larger elementary classrooms that would comply with state standards, and to build new classrooms in two elementary schools and in the middle school. The district would then close the Winfield L. Morse Intermediate School, a four-story brick building that was built 80 years ago for high school students but now houses second and third graders.
Mimi Godwin, the school board president who has presided over a two-year planning period to analyze the lack of space and inadequate buildings, said teachers have been using closets as classrooms and gyms as cafeterias for years. The situation will only get worse, she said, when the current enrollment of 2,500 students increases to 2,900 in six years.
Ms. Godwin added that the 50-year-old boiler in the high school and middle school can be turned only on or off, but cannot be set to a particular temperature. Even in the recent frigid cold, some classrooms have been so hot that teachers have had to open windows, while students in other classrooms wear coats.
Last week, residents of both villages received an oversize newsletter from the school district to answer questions about the bond, including a description of the project, its cost and the projected impact on taxpayers, depending on the outcome of proposed riverfront development in both villages. In addition, the school district has set up a Web site, www.tufsdbuilds.com, for residents to learn more about the building plan. As for that large number, $98 million, it's by no means a state record. Several years ago, a Long Island school district passed a $220 million bond, according to Curt Miller, the project director of the Office of Facilities Planning at the New York State Education Department in Albany.
''Construction costs being what they are, $98 million is far from the highest I've heard,'' he said. Paying that much for school construction in Westchester is the equivalent of spending $65 million in Syracuse, Mr. Miller said.
EDUCATION
