I WAS cruising down a freeway here when I glanced over to see a middle-age guy, driving alongside in the previous-generation Dodge Durango, checking out my 2004 test model. I was tempted to open the window, peer down at him from my taller Durango and imitate the Dodge commercial by growling, ''That thing got a Hemi?''
Then I'd have snickered, floored the accelerator and left him in my dust, knowing full well that his old Durango lacked the muscular Hemi engine I had in my new one.
Indeed, the headline news about the latest Durango is the availability of Chrysler's Hemi V-8, patterned after the legendary muscle-car engine. But there is more to the story; everything about the Durango is new.
The latest version of this family-size S.U.V. is priced about the same as before, yet it is bigger, roomier, more comfortable, better-equipped and flat-out nicer in nearly every way than the vehicle it replaces. With the Hemi, it is also far more powerful.
When Chrysler brought out the original Dodge Durango as a 1998 model, it broke new ground for sport utility vehicles by squeezing a third-row seat into a midsize body. That gave the Durango an advantage over the Ford Explorer and Chevrolet Blazer, which lacked the extra seat, and over the Ford Expedition and Chevy Tahoe, which had three rows but were larger and more cumbersome.
Dodge's extra-seat feat has been widely copied in a wave of new, more carlike S.U.V.'s. But the latest Durango has managed to carve out another new bit of turf.
It is seven inches longer, three inches wider and more than three inches taller than the vehicle it replaces, making it nearly a foot longer than the Ford Explorer but five inches shorter than the Ford Expedition.
It is just the right size, from my suburban car-pooling, child-schlepping point of view. The third seat, an option that lets the Durango haul seven people, is easily accessible and actually fits adults, unlike the seats in smaller sport utilities. While shorter than full-size S.U.V.'s like the Nissan Armada, the Durango uses its space well.
Dodge has aimed the Durango primarily at young families with two to three children; about half of its drivers are expected to be women. It is also likely to appeal to families with grown children, to empty nesters and to outdoorsmen.
Dodge seems to have hit its primary market. The Durango that I drove for a week attracted considerable notice from men and women in their prime child-rearing years, like the small crowd that surrounded it at the loading dock of a furniture store where I picked up bookshelves. That task was a breeze, thanks to the split third-row seat that easily folds down to form a flat floor that is lower and wider than the previous Durango's. The cargo space behind the second row is larger than the Expedition's.
Despite the redesign, everyone recognized the new Durango as a Durango, and this being car-crazy Michigan, everyone asked about the Hemi, which is one of two available V-8 engines.
The smaller V-8, a 4.7-liter unit that produces 230 horsepower, is adequate for most people, and Dodge expects most buyers to choose it. (The base engine, a 3.7-liter, 210-horsepower V-6, comes only with rear-wheel drive.)
The Hemi, a 5.7-liter monster, is over the top, churning out 335 horsepower and 370 pounds-feet of torque. The old Durango's largest engine, a 5.9-liter V-8, had 90 less horsepower.
The Hemi would be my choice, since it delivers smooth, quiet power and 8,950 pounds of towing capacity. But fuel economy is poor, at about 13 miles per gallon in city driving.
In January, Chrysler recalled 21,000 Durangos with the 3.7- and 4.7-liter engines -- including 5,000 that were already in the hands of customers -- to replace throttle cables. The Durango is covered by a seven-year or 70,000-mile powertrain warranty; most of its competitors are covered for three years or 36,000 miles.
While the V-6 is paired with a four-speed automatic transmission, the V-8's are mated to a smooth-shifting five-speed automatic, which is unusual in the segment. The transmission has a tow-or-haul feature that holds a gear longer, to prevent constant shifting when going up and down hills.
While the first-generation Durango was based on the Dakota pickup, the engineers created a new body-on-frame truck architecture for the new model. In addition, they came up with a new suspension. It retains the solid rear axle common to trucks but adds a control system designed for a smooth, comfortable ride even when the Durango is fully loaded. Certainly, the ride was excellent in my mostly unloaded test vehicle.
The steering, too, is quite responsive. The turning radius is among the tightest among large S.U.V.'s, making it easy to maneuver into supermarket parking spots. The Durango feels much smaller than it is.
Still, the Durango feels tough and should be capable of off-road feats.
In contrast to its chief competitors, Chrysler offers a choice of four-wheel-drive systems: full-time all-wheel drive, which is always on and requires no action from the driver, or a part-time system that has a low gear range for off-roading.
There are three trim levels: the base ST, midlevel SLT and upscale Limited. The SLT and Limited come with two-tone leather seats. My test truck was an SLT with all-wheel drive, which Chrysler expects to be the most popular combination.
The comfortable interior is one of Chrysler's best yet. The layout is straightforward, and while there is nothing truly fancy about the cabin, the grade of materials is higher than those in most Chrysler products. My favorite touch was the well-designed air vents that close like miniblinds.
The rear doors swing open 84 degrees for easy entry to the back. Storage abounds, including a large container at the bottom of the center dash that designers call the McDonald's bin -- a handy receptacle for burgers and fries.
The Durango remains readily recognizable. Its bold design, with a formidable grille, flared fenders and taillamps that imitate afterburners, send a message: this is a powerful, capable machine.
Chrysler engineers expect the new Durango to score highly in crash tests. It is also designed so that if it meets, say, a Dodge Neon head-on, the subcompact will not slide beneath the sport utility.
Antilock brakes and three-point belts for all seven occupants are standard. Options include side-curtain air bags that inflate from overhead and cover all three rows of seats, traction control and adjustable pedals -- one of my favorite features.
Still, the Durango lacks side air bags in the seats or doors, like those available on the Chevy Tahoe. Nor does it have a stability control, which is standard on the Toyota Sequoia.
But many comfort and convenience features are offered, including Sirius satellite radio, a DVD entertainment system, an MP3 player and, for the first time in a Durango, a sunroof. Later this year, Chrysler will offer Uconnect, which uses Bluetooth wireless technology to permit hands-free use of a cellphone through the truck's electronics system.
The Durango is a 'tweener in price as well as size, straddling the midsize and full-size segments. The ST starts at $26,565, less than the base price of the previous Durango; the highest base price, $34,900 for the Limited 4WD, seems a bargain compared with, say, the $44,760 Sequoia Limited. Chrysler expects the typical Durango buyer to spend $32,000, roughly the sticker of my test model.
The Durango represents a return to what Chrysler has long done best: carving out a niche for itself. The revamped Dodge fits neatly into this new market, but it is unlikely to have the space to itself for very long.
INSIDE TRACK: Dodge tries on a larger size, and it fits just right.
Behind the Wheel
