JOHN MAYNARD KEYNES, famously compared investing in the stock market to voting in an unusual sort of beauty contest: your choice wins only if the other voters make the same pick.
It is an analogy that voters in the Democratic primaries seem to understand.
''My heart still belongs to Howard Dean because of his passion, but my head says Kerry is the one who can get elected,'' Pradipto Bagchi, 30, a financial analyst, told The New York Times in Nashua, N.H., on Monday.
For Democrats determined to win back the White House, the only important thing is to choose a candidate who will appeal to enough people to win the beauty contest in November. Finding a political soulmate doesn't matter. And making that choice is not unlike picking a hot stock.
''This is a political market,'' said Lord Robert Skidelsky, author of a multivolume biography of Keynes, ''and everyone is not choosing on the merits of the individuals but on whether they think he's a winner or not.''
He added that Keynes also compared the market to a casino.
Of course, if the historical inability of investors to pick winning stocks with regularity is any guide, trying to predict the voting preferences of another person or another 80 million people -- all of whom are trying to predict the same thing about everyone else -- may well be a fool's errand.
''What Keynes said was, it's a crazy system,'' said David Colander, a professor of economics at Middlebury College. ''When you have markets that are that complicated, essentially there is no way an individual can figure out what's going on unless you have inside information.''
Still, given how fiercely many Democrats oppose Republicans and this president in particular, a number of primary voters have said in interviews that ''electability'' is their primary concern.
''The incredibly deep, partisan rift in this country has changed what voters are looking for in candidates,'' said Joe Lockhart, a former press secretary to President Clinton and now a partner at Glover Park Group, a communications consulting firm.
''If you look back to the 2000 election, it was very clear that the Republicans settled on George Bush early, based on electability,'' Mr. Lockhart added. ''It could've been Bozo the Clown, and if he had polled well, that's whom they would've gotten behind. That's what's happened with Democrats now.''
But Jano Cabrera, spokesman for the campaign of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, said that voters who think too much about casting their votes for the most electable candidate may find themselves regretting their choice in November. He compared the decision for primary voters to that of high school seniors predicting who will look good at the 10-year reunion.
''If they pick the wrong guy, they'll find that he's gained a little weight, lost a little hair, and whatever the analogy is for being weak on defense and being able to stand toe to toe with Bush on taxes,'' Mr. Cabrera said.
Burton G. Malkiel, the author of ''A Random Walk Down Wall Street,'' said voters will never be able to accurately make this sort of prediction, and should avoid trying to second-, third- or fourth-guess the tastes of the electorate.
''My view is, don't even try to do these things,'' Mr. Malkiel said. ''Don't try to think that you're smarter.''
Even if Democratic voters make the best possible pick, unforeseen developments can change everything, Lord Skidelsky said. ''Your best expectations can be upset by events. That's as true of stocks as of administrations.''
