THE FOUNTAIN AT THE CENTER OF THE WORLD
By Robert Newman.
339 pp. Brooklyn:
Soft Skull Press. Paper, $14.95.
ALL novels are, to some extent, political novels -- that is, they are concerned with the nature and deployment of power. But some novels are pushier about their agendas than others. Take Robert Newman's ''Fountain at the Center of the World.'' It's a mucky title for a sublimely frisky novel, one that throws more acid-tipped darts at Nafta and the World Trade Organization than a foot-high stack of Mother Jones and Nation back issues. Newman's book follows three characters (one in London, one in Mexico, one in Costa Rica) in the years leading up to the 1999 W.T.O. protests in Seattle, and it reads like what you'd get if Tom Wolfe clambered inside the head of Noam Chomsky -- it elegantly and angrily scorches a lot of earth. You wouldn't want to read many novels that were as hyper-politicized as this one is, but there's something almost old-fashioned about the way Newman wears his heart utterly on his sleeve.
I wouldn't be surprised, in fact, if ''The Fountain at the Center of the World'' became the talismanic ''Catch-22'' of the antiglobalization protest movement, the fictional complement to Naomi Klein's influential treatise ''No Logo.'' Expect to see copies of it peeking out of battered rucksacks from Berkeley to Burlington. Though if you are the kind of person who will want to retch at the notion of a novel in which one of the primary characters is named after Daniel Ortega, consider yourself warned.
Newman is such a fleet and funny writer -- in a scene set during one protest march, cops don't merely arrest the ''legal observers in lime-green bibs,'' they snatch them ''like a fruit particularly delicious to the gorilla'' -- that you will begin to ask yourself, about 10 pages into the novel, Who is this guy? Newman, it turns out, is a big deal in his native England. He's a 39-year-old chain-smoking political comedian who, in the late 80's and early 90's, was a cast member of a very silly and very popular comedy show called ''Mary Whitehouse Experience,'' which ran on BBC radio and television. (A video of the group's sold-out performance in Wembley Arena sold 800,000 copies in its first three days of release.)
In recent years Newman has largely abandoned performing for fiction; he has published two previous novels in Britain, though this is his first to be issued here. But he remains so popular over there that a BBC documentary was made about the writing of ''The Fountain at the Center of the World.'' It's pretty entertaining, too, for a film that often seems to consist of shots of Newman pacing outside while taking nervous drags on his cigarette. None of this would matter if Newman didn't deliver on the page, but he does -- his characters squirm to life, and his punches land. The problem with most left-leaning novels is that they're as earnest and mopey as a Sarah McLachlan ballad on a rainy day. ''The Fountain at the Center of the World,'' on the other hand, is as ferocious as a jar of freeze-dried Paul Krugman columns.
At its bleeding heart, this book is a Dickensian adoption novel -- it's about two Mexican-born brothers, Evan and Chano, who have never met. Evan was adopted by English parents, went to Cambridge and is now a high-level corporate flack; Chano was raised by Mexican relatives and now makes beer in a shack in northeastern Mexico. Both men are desperately looking for something. Evan has discovered he has leukemia and needs to find Chano for a blood and bone marrow transfusion. Chano is searching for his own son, Daniel, who was also given up for adoption and believes Chano is dead.
Newman is as good on Evan's world as he is on Chano's. He nails the trappings of Evan's life, including the ''weird corporate glamour'' that comes with dressing impeccably while at the same time looking wizened and ill. Evan is an expert at massaging public opinion for his multinational clients; he keeps ''hands-on control of the intellectual thermostat'' surrounding globalization issues, and is fully cognizant of the fact that ''it is easier and less costly to change the way people think about reality than to change reality.''
To spend time with Evan is to get a master class in how P.R. guys deploy their resources, from how to ruin an opponent's book tour to why certain kinds of advertisements are more important than others. You know those enormous, full-color, nonspecific corporate ads that you sometimes see in magazines and newspapers, the ones with the company's name under, say, a photograph of a leopard beside a waterfall? Here's Evan's take on producing one of those: ''It's not for the readers, it's for the owners. The message says We are your largest advertisers. We giveth and we taketh away. And that's all. The more profligate you are with the space the stronger that message comes across. . . . Anything to take up a double page.''
Evan ultimately leaves London to look for his brother in Mexico, but Chano can't be found -- he's a bumbling eco-terrorist on the lam after a halfhearted attempt to sabotage a toxic waste plant that was polluting the groundwater in his town. Chano is as jumpy and conflicted as a character in a T. C. Boyle novel, and his usually mushy politics come in for almost as much fire as Evan's. Chano is one of those guys, another character observes, who always shy away from recommending direct action while managing to ''sound more revolutionary than everybody else in the process.''
Upon Evan's arrival in Mexico, the action of ''The Fountain at the Center of the World'' grows almost absurdly complicated -- there is a plot to privatize the world's water supply, multiple dangerous border crossings, surprises about the nature of Evan's illness and, once all the characters arrive in the Pacific Northwest, some startlingly vivid scenes of the Seattle W.T.O. protests. Newman writes about all these things like a man who has done his research. But he is just as good on the little things -- how it feels to be seriously ill in a remote foreign country or how Chano's son's face ''was transnationally identifiable: he had that look of the international poor (and would've had even in brand-new clothes).''
Newman's book is about as bleak as a comic novel can be, but he leaves multinational corporations, at least, with some room for optimism. Once the cheap labor has vanished in Mexico, they can still move to other countries. And after that, there's always the hope of finding ''little green women in space'' to exploit.
Dwight Garner is an editor at the Book Review.
