AFTER a few very tough years, shares of chemical producers have been flourishing. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Chemicals index is up by more than 30 percent over the last 52 weeks.
But chemical companies have some major problems, including a surge in the price of natural gas, an essential raw material for a wide range of products. Moreover, the industry is awash in overcapacity. And balance sheets at most of the big companies are far from pristine.
Graham Copley, a senior research analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, talked last week about the industry. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. Why are you bearish about the chemical industry?
A. There are two schools of investing thought. First, that we are going to have a global economic rebound that will create shortages everywhere, which will lead to a sharp rise in prices, particularly for plastics, and that everything is going to be great.
And then there is my school, which is that none of this is going to happen.
But the stocks are trading today as if I am going to be wrong. They are trading at massive multiples relative to current earnings.
Q. What are the reasons for your pessimism?
A. First, let's start with plastics prices, which are rising at the moment. However, there have been only two big up cycles in plastics prices in the last 30 years. One started in 1987 and lasted for three years. The other was in 1995 and lasted for eight months.
The guys hanging on right now and avoiding consolidation are praying for a 1987-like price peak. Also, a lot of these companies went on a spending binge in 1999 and 2000 on the expectation the economy would remain robust and that natural-gas prices would stay low. Now, balance sheets are in terrible shape, across the industry. They all are very leveraged.
Q. Are natural-gas prices a major problem for the chemicals industry?
A. Historically, this country has been a very, very cheap place to make chemicals.
Now, natural-gas prices are above $6 per million British thermal units. Historically, they were under $2 per million B.T.U.'s, well under the world average. And being under the world average for 20 years allowed the United States to construct a major export advantage. Now, it is suddenly uncompetitive. And the export business represents about 22 percent of the industry's revenues. There is a natural-gas crunch, and the chemical industry is realizing this is not a temporary problem.
Q. Last week, Cargill said it would merge its fertilizer business with that of IMC Global, a fertilizer giant. Is this deal representative of what may be coming in the broader chemical industry?
A. What we have seen in the fertilizer and methanol businesses is a proxy of what will have to happen elsewhere. It is simply a matter of time.
Chemical companies are buying feed stocks from the likes of Exxon Mobil and selling them to big, block retailers. That leaves them squeezed between two very big, consolidated sets of industries. But they are a fragmented industry themselves.
The risk is that the U.S. chemical industry will shrink by 30 percent to 40 percent. The only thing that could prevent this from happening in the near term is a resurgence in global demand. That will lead to a temporary reprieve.
Q. Would it make much difference if more of the chemical business shifted overseas?
A. Environmentalists would love to see the chemical business go away altogether. From the consumer's perspective, if we end up with cheaper goods from a country like China, do we care? We have seen plenty of other industries go away, like textiles, where we lost our competitive advantage.
Q. Are you positive at all about chemical stocks?
A. The stocks haven't been terribly good investments. It was the technology industry of the 1960's and 1970's, but innovation has lagged badly since then and products were commoditized relatively quickly.
I do like the industrial gas business, because you can't move it very far. That means the business is regionally competitive, not globally competitive, and that pricing is much more stable.
There are only four big players in the business: Air Products; Praxair; BOC, a British company; and Air Liquide, which is French.
The market is well structured and not competitive, with all sorts of barriers to entry, lots of organic growth and very nice returns. I have an outperform rating on Praxair, but the other guys have great businesses, too.
I also have an outperform rating on Rohm &amp; Haas. They have the pre-eminent position in house paints and have a very strong franchise in electronics, which uses a lot of complex chemicals.
MARKET INSIGHT
