WHEN the City of Yonkers proposed to raze the store that Martin and Harvey Goldman own here to make way for a new minor league baseball stadium and retail complex, the Goldmans resolved to fight the proposal. They marshaled community support, circulated petitions, and filed a lawsuit over their store, the C.H. Martin store in Getty Square.
They have also chosen a different approach to blocking the project: they are seeking to place their granite-sheathed Gothic-revival building on the state and national registers of historic places, which can prohibit or restrict changes in historic districts, buildings and artifacts.
''We believe it's a beautiful building and it shouldn't be knocked down,'' said Harvey Goldman, who has owned the building since 1979 and has nine other stores in the metropolitan area. ''We're going through every avenue to save it.''
The state register is administered by the state's Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation. According to the state preservation law, properties are eligible when a ''significance in American history, architecture and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling and association'' or they ''embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction,'' among other criteria.
The first step toward being listed is to submit a nomination and application. The Goldmans started the process in November. Now they have heard from the regional historic preservation officer that the building is eligible for listing. A letter has also been received by the certified local government, in this case the City of Yonkers, saying that the proposal will be put on the calendar by the State Historic Preservation Board at its next scheduled meeting, which is in March.
This two-month stretch is the public comment period, during which the city may object to the listing. Even if the city does object, that is not necessarily enough to scuttle a listing, said Wendy Gibson, spokeswoman for the State Parks Department.
Then the preservation board votes on the proposal. In case of a yes vote, the proposal is passed to the state parks commissioner, Bernadette Castro, who may approve, disapprove or postpone a decision, and she has six months to decide. If she adds the property to the list, it is in turn recommended for the national register and is usually added pro forma, said Ms. Gibson.
Obtaining a listing on the state and national registers is largely an honor, though owners are often eligible for special tax breaks. Municipal landmarks preservation laws generally provide the toughest regulatory oversight regarding what property owners may do. The Goldmans' building is not a city landmark. Yonkers' landmarks statute, which resembles New York City's, forbids radical alteration of exteriors and requires a stringent permitting process. The state and federal registers allow private owners complete latitude over their properties.
Even the simple determination of eligibility, which happened last week is enough to protect the building. Once a property is simply deemed eligible by the state's regional historic preservation officer -- even before any final determination -- any public or private project financed or undertaken by a state or federal agency that threatens a building listed on the registers is subject to a Section 14.09 review by the State Parks Department, said Simeon Bankoff, executive director of the Historic Districts Council, a nonprofit advocate of New York City's landmarks districts based in Manhattan.
SECTION 14.09 ''kicks in a whole review process'' by which historical implications are considered, Ms. Gibson said. ''Allowing demolition is a last resort,'' she said.
The City of Yonkers wants to buy the building, demolish it, and replace it with the ballpark complex. First floated publicly in 2002, the plan calls for tearing down the department store and 18 other businesses and a small apartment building along Palisade Avenue and New Main Street, replacing them with 100,000 square feet of retail space as well as the 6,500-seat stadium that covers a city-owned parking lot known as Chicken Island.
Legal action over the proposal has dragged on and on. The first developer dropped out. Deadlines on the team's franchise from the independent Atlantic League have come, gone and been extended.
Another challenge to the project comes from the lawsuit filed by the Goldmans' lawyers. The suit charges that the private for-profit company Yonkers Baseball Development, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Yonkers Industrial Development Agency that would build the stadium and stores and manage their operations, is illegal. Several current and former Yonkers officials, including Mayor Phil Amicone, sit on the baseball corporation's board, said Richard Halevy, spokesman for Mr. Amicone.
The Goldmans' suit, still pending, claims that ''the Yonkers Industrial Development Agency has no power to create Yonkers Baseball Inc.,'' said Debra Cohen, a lawyer representing the Goldmans. The city, which has said it would like to have the complex open for the start of the 2005 baseball season, has been unable to negotiate with property and business owners over buyout terms because the last City Council remained deadlocked, Mr. Halevy said. The Council's composition has changed; three new members have joined the seven-person body. It is not clear how the new Council will vote on the project. There are no plans to use federal money for the ballpark project, Mr. Halevy said. ''We're waiting on word from the governor and the legislators if state funding is available,'' he said.
The Goldmans' building dates to 1930. According to the state register nomination application prepared by Phillip Esser and Paul Graziano, consultants, it represents ''an intact example of a chain of department stores significant to the commercial history of the United States'' and also meets the criteria for local architectural significance.
The building sits on the site of the original saw mill, along the banks of the river, which still passes beneath Chicken Island. Getty Square became a manufacturing and retail center in the mid-nineteenth century. In 1848, a hat manufacturer, Ethan Flagg, built Flagg Hall, the first three-story brick building in town, on the site. The 250-seat room on the second floor served as the ''first public meeting hall in Yonkers, and the center of public life for decades,'' according to the application.
By the end of the century, John T. Waring, a hat manufacturer who built the opulent mansion known as Greystone, bought out Flagg's operation. The Waring Hat Manufacturing Company, operating around the spot where the Goldmans' store now stands, became the city's largest employer.
After World War I, Getty Square evolved into the city's commercial center. In 1930, the W.T. Grant department store chain, which eventually opened 1,200 stores across the country, built its neo-Gothic store in Getty Square. Bronze letters, green with oxidation, spell out the name ''Grant'' beneath one of the parapets. The company went bankrupt three years after the founder, William T. Grant, died in 1972.
In addition to the Art Deco streamlining and its sheer heft, the building's most distinctive feature is the brown granite from Weymouth, Mass., which is used as veneer on the upper facade. This stone is also used at Yale, Brown and Vassar.
''It's like 'The Pelican Brief,' where an endangered bird brought down a large development project,'' Ms. Cohen said. ''A long-forgotten building could end up playing the same role here.''
IN BUSINESS
