WINTER is upon us. There have been record-breaking cold snaps, icy sidewalks and blizzards. Nobody wants to leave the apartment. And why should we?
This is New York City, where anything can be ordered in. We are not the Donner party, you and me. Me especially. My assignment this last week, as the great blizzards threatened the city: Retreat to my cramped one-bedroom in Greenwich Village, with the office in the bedroom and the picturesque, but wobbly, junkyard pedestal sink, and attempt -- aided only by the phone book and the Internet -- to transform it into the Winter Palace. Does being a shut-in have to mean moo shu chicken and HBO? Or can I import the lush life?
Do not, for once, be burdened by concerns about cash. Order in a masseuse, a hairdresser, a manicurist. Do not fret about missing the white sale at Bloomingdale's; ask the personal shopper to find you the sheets. Better yet, order silk pajamas.
Turn cabin fever into caviar dreams.
I have my own idea of the luxe winter life: curling up on the couch with a trashy book, a box of fancy chocolates and a nice fat cat. I don't happen to have a cat, but this is New York; I know of an animal talent agency -- I can rent.
Five p.m. Tuesday, with WINS predicting 5 to 10 inches of snow, I am home. Provisions are scant: I am out of my most important food group, Caffeine Free Diet Pepsi. But in a town that delivers, that can be fixed.
First order of business: Call Ariston Florist, just down the way on 14th Street. For a blizzard, they suggest lilies, roses and freesia -- maybe hyacinth. Damage: $175, plus $20 tip. Restocking the Diet Pepsi is not so easy: it's too late for Gristedes and the Jefferson Market to deliver. Things could get ugly if I do not get my Diet Pepsi; I could have my own little Donner party moment, I could become a Donnette. Still, who needs Diet Pepsi when you can call up Bouley or Le Cirque 2000 and have dinner delivered with the magic words, ''Money'' -- no, too crude, make that -- ''Cost is no object.''
That evening, with the heavy snow falling, I call Balthazar and request dinner for two in the West Village.
''Only Pastis delivers,'' they say.
Sorry, Charlie, I love Pastis, but tonight it's going to be luxe. On to Bouley.
''We don't do that,'' they say.
On to Le Cirque.
''Sorry,'' a man says, ''But we do not deliver dinners here.''
Big fat liar! I bet if your name is Kissinger. . . .
The luxe life is getting to be very stressful. I call Bergdorf's and Bigelow's for bath oil, but at 6, it's too late for delivery today. No luck with a cat, either. The Dawn Animal Agency, which supplies animal actors, is manned by an answering service. Bide-a-Wee will not do a three-day loan.
Getting my books in New York, however, will certainly be a snap. Barnes &amp; Noble has posters all over the subway touting their same-day delivery service, with Shakespeare running down the street. I want Carrie Fisher's new book, ''The Best Awful,'' a roman à clef about her failed marriage to a gay studio chief, and ''American Sucker,'' so I can feel smarter than David Denby, even though he writes for The New Yorker.
I phone the closest Barnes &amp; Noble, on Union Square. ''We don't deliver books from this store,'' a salesperson says.
What about that picture of Shakespeare running down the street?
''That's 1-800-The-Book.'' That turns out to be the Internet division, but it's so confusing I'm not sure how fast anything will get here.
My friend Lew, a media writer, will be here any minute for dinner. Pastis suddenly seems like a great idea.
''Twenty dollars for delivery,'' they tell me, ''the zone ends at Sixth Avenue.''
My apartment is between Fifth and Sixth, but why haggle? I order steak frites with béarnaise and fried chicken and chocolate mousse and a tarte Tatin. Damage: $126.50. Then I call Crossroads, my local wine store. The saleswoman, Suzanne Stevens, suggests a Château Léoville Poyferré 1997, St. Julien, for $29.99, and a 1997 Lesec Hermitage red Rhone wine for $44.99.
The wine is nice, but the Pastis meals disappoint. The frites are froid; the steak is kind of cool, too. I reheat the frites, first in the microwave, which makes them soggy, then in a pan, which does the trick. Twice-fried frites. Just about then, Barbara Austin calls me from the Dawn Animal Agency.
''Cats don't adapt just like that when they go into a strange environment,'' Ms. Austin says. ''It's not going to be sitting on your lap. They've got to get to know you.''
But what I want is so simple, I say. A loving fat cat to sleep with me as the winter winds howl. The sound of its soothing purr. Their animals are actors, right? Let 'em act. I just need the cat a few days.
''We do not leave animals with strangers,'' Ms. Austin says, coolly. ''There are a lot of weird people in the world. We don't want to provide a kitty for somebody's pit bull to practice on.''
Wednesday morning there is six inches of snow on the ground -- a wonderful morning for coffee, croissants, pan chocolat, and the papers. Cafe Lebowitz in SoHo delivers, even though I am out of the district.
''I told him you'd tip really well,'' the young clerk says. I do $10 for an $8.70 tab, even though he forgets the papers.
Securing my books, however, is still a problem. Barnes &amp; Noble's 1-800-The-Book has me on hold for 20 minutes, until I hang up on them. Carolyn Epstein, the owner of the Biography Bookshop, on the corner of Bleecker and 11th Streets, has the books, but not the staff -- it's out shoveling snow. She suggests Your Neighborhood Office, a few blocks away, at 332 Bleecker Street; their people run errands.
Now we're talking! I have a Neighborhood Office guy to get my books, pick up the papers, then stop across the street at the Magnolia Bakery and get half a dozen cupcakes. I prefer pink and blue icing. I will have the perfect snowbound lunch, reading how dumb David Denby was and eating the icing off the cupcakes with my finger. Only the icing! Live large, toss the cake away.
There's no time for relaxing, however, because I have to take another shot at elegant dining. I call restaurant Alain Ducasse and explain that it is my one-year anniversary and my husband is trapped in the house with a broken leg and I long to do something elegant only Ducasse could do. A cold, light supper perhaps? I could send a car. The woman I speak with seems sympathetic. The maître d'hôtel will be in at 3:15, she says, and she will ask.
Promising. Now, I'll shop.
''The key here is comfort,'' I tell the Bloomingdale's personal shopper. ''I want to get into bed and not come out until spring.''
''Move over!'' she says.
While some things I want -- the cashmere socks and silk pajamas -- are sold out, the shopper has other suggestions for comfort: a soft, cuddly robe; scented candles and bath oils (I think citrus would be nice); exotic chocolates. My massage, on the other hand, is a problem. I call half a dozen spas, including exhale, Completely Bare, La Prairie, Elizabeth Arden, the Spa at the Peninsula. It's getting to be as draining as reporting a tough news story, only in this case it's a mellow, soothing voice telling me, ''Please Hold,'' ''Let me transfer you,'' ''No.'' No one wants to send anyone to a private home; it's an insurance liability. Finally, someone suggests an independent contractor, Juan Johnson, who is working Midtown. I have by now become intrigued by something called hot stone therapy. Mr. Johnson, who says his friends call him J. J., says that would be kind of a hassle -- he'd have to go home to Mount Vernon to get the roaster for the stones. But he's game. He'll be at my house around 6.
The call back from Ducasse comes soon after: Sorry, they're not equipped to do takeout. The Four Seasons? ''Not equipped.''
Six-thirty, the Bloomie's box arrives. The robe is a terrible shade of greenish-beige. The body oil's scent is grapefruit. The exotic chocolate is a box of Godivas, which, while I love them, are not the exotic mix I had in mind. The only thing that works for me is the Aromatherapy of Rome scented candle, with its ''rejuvenating mix of orange and ylang-ylang.'' The rest of this stuff will have to get back to Bloomingdale's. Correction. Somehow, I have to get it back.
The lush life, by now, has me wrung out. I'm desperate for a Diet Pepsi, I've been so busy trying to have a luxe dinner experience that I forgot to order it, and now it's again too late in the day for delivery.
A few minutes later, J. J., who I have started to think of as Hot Rocks, calls. There's the sound of traffic behind him and he's sounding very shook-up. He got into a blizzard-related car accident on the Deegan, he says. There was a little spin-out in front of him, everybody hit the brakes, he got rear-ended. Then he had to wait for the cops to come. If I really need him, he'll come, but he'd rather not.
You sound as if you need the massage more than I do, I tell him.
''I'm going through a little trauma,'' Hot Rocks says. ''When things happen, you get the nervous excitement. It'll be better after I get some sleep. Not that I think I'll get much sleep tonight.''
I need a drink. Cristal! I call my pals at Crossroads and, after telling me how to chill it properly (small cubes and water for maximum coverage), they send the delivery guy over with their last bottle: $249.84 with tax. They've also had him pick up the ice.
''On the house,'' he says.
Okay! The lush life, my first taste of Cristal, at last! It would probably be even lusher if I did not have to find my tarnished Salvation Army silver Champagne cooler and shine it, and the scent of silver polish was not overwhelming the rejuvenating mixture of orange and ylang-ylang. It would also be nice if I had been able to clean the house for the old friends I have invited over to try the Cristal. Or if I had a staff to get out the flea-market Limoges, the antique linen and Champagne glasses. After a full day's reporting, I am having a last-minute dinner party, which I never do. But for food, I'm finally getting smart: I've ordered in sushi from my very fine local joint, Japonica. They're happy to deliver.
For desert, I revert to a luxe attempt. I call Vosges, a new chocolate place in SoHo. The woman who picks up the phone is enthusiastic. She suggests something called the Vincent Gallo collection.
The only Vincent Gallo I know is the director whose independent film ''The Brown Bunny'' caused a scandal last year because of the scene in which Chloë Sevigny, his one-time girlfriend, gives him oral sex. The director who did that ''Brown Bunny''? I ask.
''That bunny,'' the woman says. ''It's Vincent's persona of sorts, there's a segment that's a tall conical truffle, made with taleggio cheese with walnuts, vanilla and dark chocolate. Then there are two olive oil and white chocolates. Then there are two wild fennels. It comes with directions: You close your eyes and take three deep breaths before you taste it.''
How did Vincent Gallo come to have his own chocolate line?
''Vincent Gallo is a friend of the owner. I'm the owner.''
The owner's name is Katrina Markoff. Her messenger service is closed, but she delivers the chocolates ($60.83) herself, leaving her date waiting in the taxi.
My friends and I eat chocolate, which we find a little weird, though possibly that is the essence of Vincent Gallo. Then we drink the Champagne. Then everybody tells me what I am doing wrong.
I know exactly what's wrong: I need a personal assistant -- a middleman to make all those calls and run errands and spare me from the awkward moments in life. Returning all that stuff to the personal shopper at Bloomingdale's, for instance.
Thursday morning, someone suggests Cross It Off Your List, a service that will, for $65 an hour, send over just such a person. Two hours later, a beautiful woman named Michelle (hyphenated assistant-actress) is at my door.
I rattle off my needs: Return stuff to Bloomie's, take the linens to be laundered, procure cashmere socks and fabulous chocolates, order a cold supper for tonight. Get me two packs of Caffeine Free Diet Pepsi.
Three and a half hours later, she's back. She's got a pound of Champagne truffles from Teuscher ($63), pink cashmere socks from N. Peal ($70.61), a sauvignon blanc blend ($12). She got the Diet Pepsi. She's got 2.5 ounces of beluga caviar from Caviarteria, which happened to be on sale; two little packages of mini-blinis; two ounces of smoked trout -- for a total of $268.95. Her firm has also arranged for a private chef to come over with the rest of the cold supper, which he will lay out.
The chef, Andy King (hyphenated chef-event-planner-wannabe-television-host) arrives late afternoon, in Gucci pants, a Chesterfield coat and a St. Bart's tan. He is handsome enough to be an actor and soon may be. He is shopping a reality makeover show that he describes as Martha Stewart meets ''Queer Eye'' meets ''Trading Spaces.'' People call up; in 24 hours they redo the people, their homes, their dinner.
For my dinner, he has done a grilled salmon with orange-citrus-tomato dressing, couscous and grilled vegetables. He's brought the garnishes for the caviar and a little tiramisù cake. Time was short, so he got it from Dean &amp; DeLuca. His fee, which will be added to the Cross It Off Your List tab: $174.
Hot Rocks, meanwhile, has arrived. I put on Luther Vandross's ''Dance With My Father.'' He sets up the massage table. While the rocks are heating up, he does a salt scrub. I take a hot shower. Then he puts warm rocks in my palms and under my shoulders, rubs my back with a hot rock. He has big, powerful hands. The heat radiates into my muscles, the tension melts away, and so do the walls of my cramped bedroom. There is no winter. After two hours, I give him his $300 fee and a $60 tip, which pretty much cleans me out. Then I give him some Teuscher's truffles and say goodbye.
''Unless I marry a surgeon, I guess I'll never see you again,'' I tell him. ''But it's been great.''
