Before Harold Watts retired to become a full-time winemaker, he was a professor of economics at Columbia University. Like many economists, he seems to be a no-frills, down-to-earth man. If his Ternhaven Cellars wines express a thought-through thesis, their argument is that Long Island reds should use Bordeaux as a model. Ternhaven, he tells customers, is ''the last winery before France,'' because of its location on the far East End.
Mr. Watts's idea of full flavor and girth and a long aftertaste, expressed consistently in vintage after vintage, results in steady-state wines that, allowing for Mother Nature's whims, are predictable in style.
In the way that you know how, say, a certain cranberry sauce, soft drink or chocolate will taste, you know that Mr. Watts's Bordeaux-style blend, his merlot and his cabernet sauvignon will be big mouthfuls.
Otherwise, he thinks small. Ternhaven, housed in a converted gasoline station in Greenport, produces only 600 to 700 cases a year.
Mr. Watts's Francophilia, gravitas and whimsy come through most fully in his 2000 Claret d'Alvah, his Bordeaux-blend, consisting of 73 percent merlot, 18 percent cabernet franc and 9 percent cabernet sauvignon.
Claret, of course, is a British term for red Bordeaux. The grapes for the 2000 come from Alvah's Lane in Cutchogue, the site of Mr. Watts's five-acre Wesley Hall Vineyard, which was planted in 1986 and came to the fore in 1994, his first commercial vintage.
With a low-key sales approach, Mr. Watts abundantly stocks back vintages, enabling you to buy 1998's and 1999's, and now 2000's, and taste them side by side.
The 2000 Claret d'Alvah ($25), a beefy, chunky wine, indulges Mr. Watts's taste for woodiness. He likes barrel effects, and induces you to like them, too. In addition, this agreeable wine offers hints of chocolate and cocoa in the bouquet. The 1998 Claret d'Alvah ($14), full of power and with years of maturation ahead, is still big, deep and fully enjoyable.
The 2000 merlot ($20), an agreeable mixture of fruit and wood, offers a sweet bouquet and a soft texture.
For maximum effect, Ternhaven reds need to be decanted at least an hour before being served.
Mr. Watts's tasting room is closed until April, but his business continues yearlong. He can be reached at (631)477-8737.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
