MARQUETTE 77, LOUISVILLE 70
It was hardly the homecoming that Rick Pitino had anticipated, or hoped for. After missing one game, on Wednesday, when he checked into a Cleveland hospital for an abdominal ailment that he called a scare, he returned to coach his Louisville team with a clean bill of health.
His Cardinals were the nation's fourth-ranked team, with 16 consecutive victories and a 16-1 record -- 6-0 in Conference USA. Marquette was the visitor at Freedom Hall before some 20,000 devoted Louisville fans. Marquette, though not a pushover, was 12-5 and 3-3.
Almost from the beginning, it was uphill for Louisville. And the Cardinals never did get over that hump. Marquette, paced by forward Steve Novak's 30 points, including 8-of-13 shooting from 3-point range, defeated Louisville, 77-70.
Pitino had returned to coaching on Thursday, after two days at the Cleveland Clinic, and said his team was ''out of sync.''
''We didn't get good practices in, but there is no excuse,'' he said. ''Give Marquette a lot of credit. They came in here and made a lot of difficult shots.''
Novak's shooting, he added, ''was the difference.'' Although Pitino criticized his team's perimeter defense for allowing Novak the shots, he said that Novak ''may be the best shooter in college basketball today.''
After the game, when this was mentioned to Novak, Marquette point guard Travis Diener replied for him.
''He is,'' Diener said.
Francisco Garcia, the sophomore forward from the Bronx, led Louisville with 20 points despite playing on a bad ankle.
''As usual, when we play here, it's always a great game,'' Marquette Coach Tom Crean said. And like Diener, Crean noted that even when Louisville closed the gap -- and even briefly went ahead, 41-40 -- ''we didn't panic.''
Luke Whitehead had 14 points and a career-high 19 rebounds for Louisville, which shot a season-low 33 percent (21 for 64) and went 5 for 34 from 3-point range (15 percent).
There was speculation that Pitino might even miss the season with his urological problem, but there he was, back at his stand, prowling in front of the Louisville bench, explaining to the referees where they might be in error and exhorting his players to mind their X's and O's against Marquette.
Pitino, who, at 51, has been coaching for 30 years, including seven and a half in the N.B.A. and two as head coach of the Knicks, said: ''You think sometimes why coaches continue on for years. You wonder why they just don't hang it up. Now I know.''
One of the touching moments for him during all this, he said, came during his trip to Cleveland, when he received a phone call from Rick Majerus, the coach of Utah. Majerus voiced his concern for Pitino and recommended doctors in Santa Barbara, Calif., if Pitino needed them.
''There's a coaching fraternity that we have,'' Pitino said, ''and I thought that was very nice of Rick. Then the next day I learn that he was quitting coaching at the end of the year because of a heart problem. And here he was worrying about me! That blew me away.''
Besides his own problems, Pitino has had a few to deal with regarding his team, despite its outstanding record. Kevin Willard, the assistant who led Louisville during Pitino's absence, was recently charged with driving while intoxicated. Garcia's brother was shot and killed in the Bronx last month. This month, the longtime caregiver of Pitino's ailing mother died, as did the infant son of a former nanny who was considered virtually a part of the family.
When Pitino returned to coaching, he said, he went ''full bore'' in the practice.
''If there is anything lingering,'' he said, ''we'll take care of it at the end of the season.''
After the game, Pitino was asked how he felt. ''Except for Novak's shooting and some other stuff,'' he said, ''I feel fine.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
