BILL T. JONES is no stranger to controversy. A few years ago, in support of an N.A.A.C.P. boycott protesting the flying of the Confederate flag atop the statehouse in South Carolina, he refused to perform at the Spoleto Festival. His ''Still Here,'' a performance piece that included photographs of people suffering from terminal illnesses, was famously criticized in a 1994 New Yorker essay by Arlene Croce, who called it ''victim art.'' She declined to see the production.
Starting on Tuesday, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company will present the New York premiere of a 45-minute work provocatively titled ''Reading, Mercy and the Artificial Nigger.'' It is based on ''The Artificial Nigger,'' a complex and beguiling short story by Flannery O'Connor, which is read aloud during the performance. (Susan Sarandon and Mr. Jones will be the readers on opening night.)
The story opens with its main characters, Mr. Head and his 10-year-old grandson, Nelson, who live together in rural Georgia, preparing for a trip to Atlanta. Mr. Head sees the trip as an opportunity to teach his grandson a lesson about the sinful ways of the city, in hopes that he will never want to return. Nelson views the trip as a chance to see the place where he believes he was born. As Nelson becomes more infatuated with the wonders of the city, Mr. Head grows more distressed, and eventually abandons his grandson, both physically and emotionally. On their way to the train for the trip home, they encounter a mysterious plaster figure, a black boy about Nelson's size from which the story takes its title, and in a moment of revelation, they find the grace to restore the bond between them.
Mr, Jones, 51, discussed the work with Fletcher Roberts, an Arts &amp; Leisure editor, after a recent rehearsal at a Manhattan studio.
FLETCHER ROBERTS -- Why base a dance on Flannery O'Connor's short story?
BILL T. JONES -- I have for so long been trying to get away from messages or obvious meaning in my work. And not to be condescending to writers, but I always think writers work with something more tangible than dancers do in terms of words and what they mean. For me, dance is free of the literal. But then I ran into a story that stopped me in my tracks because I again realized there was real power in words. I see ''Artificial Nigger'' as a journey by two characters who are dubious in every sense of the word. Who are they? What do they really believe? They claim to be Christians, but there is a great deal of anger and resentment and fear in them. Mr. Head actually has a moment where he realizes he is a great sinner in having betrayed Nelson. But then there appears the artificial nigger. A-ha! The artificial nigger, if you accept Mr. Head's religious rationale -- the Lord forgives in proportion to our sins -- represents a kind of grace. This moment of grace enables Mr. Head and Nelson to heal the rift between them. O'Connor is a believer, a nonironic Catholic. She believes there is this thing called grace, and that grace sometimes hits us between the eyes when we are most debased. She and I may disagree on this, however. And while O'Connor seems to make a connection between religion and race, this story ultimately isn't about race. It's about the dynamic between two people, the grandfather and the grandson. And if it takes a shocking title like ''The Artificial Nigger'' or my accepting a very casual use of a very hurtful word to get at something about human nature, then I have no qualms about embracing it.
ROBERTS -- Have you always been a fan of O'Connor's work?
JONES -- I knew her work, but I didn't really sit down and read all of her stories until a year ago. I was on vacation with friends in New Mexico, and one of them was a writer who was researching her for a book. I read some of the stories and became hooked. This one seemed particularly theater-friendly, not only because of its title but because of its two characters. It also has scenes, structure, a very clear itinerary and a very clear time line.
ROBERTS -- Does the dance try to interpret the story literally?
JONES -- The narrative of the dance is very true to the Flannery O'Connor story. In my work there is a moment-to-moment correlation between the action of the story and the choreography. This results in meanings more provocative than any I could have ever ascribed.
ROBERTS -- Give me an example.
JONES -- Let's take the coffee-colored man on the train, Nelson's first sighting of a black person. O'Connor gives a clear, near-clinical description of a well-dressed portly black man, striding with a cane through a segregated train car. On my stage, the viewer sees rows of dancers reclining on both sides of the ''aisle'' we have suggested spatially, while a muscular young white male dancer walks slowly through the scene. The correlation between the text and the action is clear, but the viewer must overcome a disjunction between what is seen and heard. This is a key to understanding ''Reading, Mercy and the Artificial Nigger.'' These disjunctions throw everything into question: what is really happening here, both on stage and in the viewer's head?
ROBERTS -- Alice Walker once said that O'Connor's work is not about race, but comes out of a racial culture. In what context do you view your work?
JONES -- I could say much the same thing Alice Walker said about all my work. It is often viewed as political, presenting issues of race, gender, etc. I contend that I am simply an artist making meaning out of the language of the era that has formed me. When you look at my stage, what you see is every kind of combination of Mr. Head and Nelson imaginable -- a tall blond woman and a short black woman, a tall black man and a short white woman, a tall Russian man and a shorter Chinese man. You have to ask, are you living in the same world as Flannery O'Connor? Are there niggers on that stage? Or are niggers no longer even the point?
ROBERTS -- What do you think?
JONES -- I am caught in an ambiguous and ambivalent place. As an artist I say I am past it. I live my life in a completely mixed world. I have the anger of a descendant of slaves. I know my grandmother watched her mother whipped. I have been called nigger. But the fact is I am moving forward. That's my job as an artist. The stage should be a place where that word, an ugly, irredeemable epithet, is tested in a particular fire, in the fire of unbridled imagination.
ROBERTS -- Who do you think this work will speak to?
JONES -- Who has my work always spoken to? I haven't been a card-carrying member of the avant-garde for years now. I think in some ways I have become part of the mainstream.
ROBERTS -- That's a far cry from the man who was once called the Muhammad Ali of dance.
JONES -- You know, writers sometimes are very, very clever. But what do they mean by that? Pugnacious? Taking issue with power?
ROBERTS -- And provocative?
JONES -- Yes, maybe. I think that's what all art tries to do. No, I am not a polemicist. If anything I'm a poet. And I'm trying to, without hitting you over the head with anything, ask you to look carefully at what your attitudes are about art and about something like this work. Where are your boundaries? Art asks us to look at ourselves and watch ourselves watching it. So no, I don't want to fight. And now I'm criticized for not fighting more because people need a poster boy. They need a Muhammad Ali.
ROBERTS -- What changed you?
JONES -- I'm more experienced, maybe. I don't know, maybe happier. Maybe more introspective. But that does not mean that I'm still not angry about things. I'm angry as hell about the Bush administration. I'm not pleased with the fundamentalist leanings in this country. I am not pleased that there are people who say whether my union with my companion should be legally sanctioned or not. How dare they? O.K., so how do I make modern dance about that? I don't know how.
I can try to make a modern dance in the way that Flannery O'Connor tried to write her story. She's talking about tough things, real things. People are being killed over the things she's talking about. I mean not only racial things, but religious things. You know, Protestantism versus Catholicism, all those things. But she is an artist who believed in her craft and believed in its power to talk, to inhabit those spaces that are between the officially sanctioned dialogues. Those spaces in between.
ROBERTS -- And you honestly don't believe that just by virtue of the N-word appearing in its title, some might see this work as provocative?
JONES -- Yeah, it probably will be.
ROBERTS -- Some might even say you're exploiting it for commercial reasons.
JONES -- You mean am I being cynical?
ROBERTS -- I guess you could say that.
JONES -- Well, I'm a little offended. That's an unfair question to ask me. You can ask that of any artist who's trying to do something that's strong. We live in a very mediocre world. It doesn't take much to shock people. And quite frankly billions are made with the tripe that Hollywood puts out. You put a pair of well-shaped breasts on a billboard and a catchy title and you're guaranteed to make millions. I'm not doing that, now am I? This is not an easy piece to watch.
Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company  Brooklyn Academy of Music  Tuesday, and Thursday through Saturday.
DANCE
