WHILE the business problems of hospitals like Westchester Medical Center are acute and well known, some private practice doctor groups are doing just fine.
Take the Mount Kisco Medical Group, for example. It started with five doctors in 1942, and now has 87 doctors, double the number it had six years ago, in offices here and in Yorktown Heights and Carmel. Offering virtually every specialty in modern medicine, from rheumatology and neurology to sports medicine and plastic surgery, the group is the dominant provider in the northern part of the county, with all-in-one convenience for what group officials say is a roster of 200,000 patients, pulled from 60 miles in every direction.
The problems of the health-care industry are well known: reimbursement rates for virtually every service are fixed, managed care and health insurance are complicated, and government reimbursements for the poor and the elderly under Medicaid and Medicare are slim. As a result, it seems, doctors are forced to take more and more of a business role, at which Mount Kisco Medical Group has apparently excelled.
''Medicine has changed, unfortunately, for everyone in the country,'' said Dr. Scott D. Hayworth, chief executive officer of the Mount Kisco Medical Group, ''a medical group is really a business.''
The equation seems to be pretty clear. The group has expanded and taken over or merged with doctors in other practices, or has recruited specialists one by one. Almost all specialties are represented, so patients feel they can do one-stop shopping. The group has developed especially lucrative procedures like outpatient ambulatory surgery, taking a substantial chunk of that business away from local hospitals.
Most of Westchester's 2,500 private practice doctors work in groups of one to five, according to Stuart A. Hayman, executive director of the Westchester County Medical Society. Because of its affluence, ''Westchester is really a bastion for small groups, reminiscent of the old days,'' he said. Success with ''the big model,'' like Mount Kisco's, he said, is ''unusual for this county.''
Acknowledged as pioneers by the medical community, the group has still come in for criticism. Doctors outside the group worry, in general, that large group practices risk becoming businesses that feed on themselves, supplying incentives for in-house referrals and de-emphasizing outside second opinions and spending time with patients.
Dr. Daniel F. Peters, a solo-practice surgeon in the area, said there were too many trade-offs to joining a large group. ''Every decision is my own,'' he said. ''Nobody's over my shoulder saying, 'Come on, there are patients waiting out there.''' An independent affiliate of Mount Sinai Hospital, the Mount Kisco Medical Group, according to Dr. Hayworth, is ''the oldest multispecialty group in New York State.'' Last spring the group moved into all 60,000 square feet of T.W.A.'s old corporate headquarters on Bedford Road, in a purchase and remodeling aided by Mount Sinai. Patients are pulled from ''Manhattan, New Jersey, tip of Long Island and up north,'' he said. The group is held privately, and Dr. Hayworth declined to make the group's revenue or cost figures public. He said that of the 87 doctors, 63 were shareholders and that new doctors had to practice two years before being voted a piece of the pie.
The advantages of running a large group private practice range from the obvious to the subtle. Hospitals must deal with acute care, inpatients, the poor and unions, and they have to keep their doors open 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. ''Whether or not there's a CAT scan being performed at 2 in the morning, the CAT scanner is operational at that hour and is staffed,'' said Dr. Michael Finkelstein, who, up until this year, was the medical director of Northern Westchester Hospital, which sits across the street from Mount Kisco Medical Group. ''A private practice can close at 3 in the afternoon.''
Private practices can also turn away nonpaying patients. Hospitals cannot. Mount Kisco Medical's Web site, www.mkmg.com, lists: ''Traditional health insurance, managed care plans, Medicare. . .and patients who pay out of their own pockets.'' Absent from the list is Medicaid; like many other Westchester private doctors, the group doesn't take Medicaid.
''Medicaid is a very poor payer,'' Dr. Hayworth said. ''We don't take new Medicaid patients. As a community service, we see the Medicaid patients we already had, but we don't take any new ones.
''We are still providers of Medicare,'' he said. ''However, we are very troubled by the recent events in Washington. Medicare may have another cut in reimbursement. That will hurt senior access throughout the country. We feel an obligation to our patients, but there comes a point where people can't afford to provide the care that they feel comfortable providing. If the reimbursements drop under a certain level, doctors are going to have to make a tough decision.''
Another big group is the 70-strong Westchester Medical Group, based in White Plains, with seven offices in Mamaroneck, Rye and Purchase. Most of the doctors have an academic affiliation with Cornell-New York Presbyterian. Its president is Dr. Simeon A. Schwartz, who also pointed to Medicare reimbursements as an issue for his practice. Medicare reimbursement rates in 2005 will be the same as they were in 2001, while malpractice insurance has risen about 20 percent, according to Dr. Schwartz.
One of the things that both groups offer is convenience: with a range of specialists, lab and imaging equipment and so on under the same roof, with the patient's records accessible instantaneously through a PC network and no need to go through the trouble of registering all over again, it is convenient for the patient. It also makes sense for a primary care physician or pediatrician to refer in-house. There is a financial incentive for the doctor to refer to a partner. At the end of the day, there will be more revenues in the common till.
There are federal laws designed to prevent doctors from profiting off of self-referrals. The so-called Stark Laws, however, come with a laundry list of exceptions, large group practices being among them.
Internal referrals are permitted, explained Cherilyn G. Murer, a health care legal consultant based in Joliet, Ill., because providers are looked upon not as individuals but rather as members of the group.
Both groups point out that they do not require their doctors to refer in house. Patients can go to any specialist they like. Physician referrals within a group come about naturally, as doctors get to know and trust one another, according to Dr. Barney D. Newman, medical director of the Westchester Medical Group.
''It would be a shame to make that illegal,'' Dr. Finkelstein said, ''and force doctors to send to somebody who's not a partner.''
Perhaps Mount Kisco Medical's most aggressive expansion was the opening of its ambulatory surgery unit in spring 2002. It offers the outpatient procedures that are traditionally the least complicated and most profitable, skimming, critics say, the best-paying business from the neighborhood hospital, sticking them with the most costly and nonprofitable inpatient procedures.
Mount Kisco Medical Group's ambulatory surgery unit was created in partnership with Putnam Hospital Center in Carmel, after talks with Northern Westchester Hospital failed to reach an agreement. No exact figures were available on what impact, if any, the unit has had on the hospital's revenues. At Westchester Medical, Dr. Schwartz said his group had no plans to create an ambulatory surgery unit, because of the ''negative impact'' it would have on the hospitals the doctors use.
Ms. Murer said this trend had grown in the last 10 years. ''That is probably the largest area of financial conflict'' between hospitals and large group practices, she said, ''because when you look at outpatient revenues, ambulatory surgery is one of the more lucrative areas for a hospital.''
The chief operating officer of Mount Kisco Medical, Christopher Sclafani, said a large part of Mount Kisco Medical Group's success had been the result of customer satisfaction. The biggest complaints, he said, are about parking and getting through on the phone. To address parking complaints, he said, the group recently instituted free valet parking. The computer system, he said, now keeps a log of every incoming call, hold time and hang-up rates. And, he said, ''We've hired more staff to man the phones.''
HEALTH
