Friends and I have been contributing money to a leading Democratic presidential candidate. We are, however, Republicans. We feel that President Bush has a better chance of re-election running against this candidate. We considered donating to the president's re-election campaign but concluded that it had enough money, and that this would put our dollars to better use. This could go awfully wrong, but is it unethical?
R. Rothschild, New York
No election law demands sincerity from campaign contributors. Of course, there are legal campaign tactics that most of us would regard as unethical -- appealing to racism, for example, or hammering at the private conduct of an opponent's family members. But the target of such actions would surely object to them, and that's not a bad test, one that your financial maneuver would pass. Were you to reveal to, for example, Howard Dean your real motive for donating to his campaign, I've every confidence he would still cash your check.
Perhaps you feel uneasy because your contributing to a Democrat is a kind of lie, an expression of admiration for someone you actually disdain. By contrast, directly supporting your true candidate or openly attacking his opponents is honest and straightforward. To game the system by trying to promote a pushover for the president to flatten in November requires a falsehood, or at least a bit of trickery.
And yet, in the roughneck context of political life, it is a tolerable bit of trickery, shabby perhaps but not forbidden. And, as you suggest, there is the conscience-cleansing possibility of an unsuspected outcome: fueled by the massive funds you've provided, Dean roars on to victory.
Recently I agreed to join a pro bono project to help with child-labor problems in a developing country. Only after I signed up did my law firm reveal that the project is run by an evangelical Christian group, a movement I morally oppose. However, I am uneasy refusing to help just because I don't like the group providing aid. Should I continue with the project?
Anonymous
To serve a client is not to endorse him. Lawyers have been known to represent murderers and tobacco companies. Yet while a decent legal system must ensure that everyone has access to counsel (except at Guantánamo, apparently), it need not guarantee access to you. Lawyers may choose their clients. Thus, you may continue on this project, but you are not required to. In your place, I would step down. Life's too short (and a good night's sleep too elusive) to spend your days on a cause you find profoundly offensive.
I would feel differently if this client were unable to find another lawyer. There's no doubt that A.C.L.U. members abhorred the neo-Nazis the organization represented in Skokie, Ill., and yet you must admire those lawyers' commitment to free expression and their conviction that unpopular, even odious, clients are entitled to counsel. Fortunately, you are not in such a dicey situation.
There are practical considerations.
Your firm may have erred by withholding information you needed to evaluate this client, but the terms of your employment may grant the firm the right to assign you to any of its cases. To withdraw may jeopardize your position there. And it may open you to charges of religious intolerance, which would be warranted if you harbor an anti-Christian animus. But there is nothing untoward in opposing the evangelical movement as a conservative political interest group. That its ideas are defended on religious grounds neither exempts it from public debate nor makes bigots out of those who contest them.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-1-04: THE ETHICIST
