Tomorrow Still
Andrea McArdle answered the phone sounding like the mop-haired 13-year-old who belted out the song ''Tomorrow'' as Broadway's first Annie. ''My voice hasn't changed much,'' she agreed. ''There's just more texture and life behind it.''
The voice is on the original album of ''Annie,'' the role that won Ms. McArdle a Tony Award nomination for best actress in a musical in 1977. It has also been heard on Broadway in more recent shows like ''Beauty and the Beast'' and ''Les Misérables,'' and on television.
Ms. McArdle, who lives in New Rochelle with her husband, Edd Kalehoff, and their 15-year old daughter, Alexis Kalehoff, says there's no use trying to hide her age of 40 because it's on record in reviews and feature articles. So she will share the celebration of her 30 years in show business with an audience on Friday at 8 p.m. in the Stadther Recital hall of the Music Conservatory of Westchester in White Plains in the first of three cabaret concerts sponsored by Commerce Bank.
Ms. McArdle said she would sing ''songs that fit like a glove'' as well as songs by Sondheim and others. She'll also do ''Tomorrow,'' because ''people get offended if I don't sing it,'' she said.
Tickets to Friday's event are $25. The series will continue with Tom Wopat on Feb. 27 and Joan Crowe on March 12. Information: (914)761-3900.
With Arms Linked
''The Vagina Monologues,'' by Eve Ensler, gave rise to V-Day, a movement to end violence against women and girls that benefits from worldwide readings of the play. Now a one-hour documentary about V-Day, ''Until the Violence Stops,'' which had its world premiere recently at the Sundance Film Festival, will have its New York premiere on Friday at 7:30 p.m. at the White Plains Performing Arts Center in an event to benefit the Pace Women's Justice Center in White Plains.
Jane Fonda, Salma Hayek, Rosie Perez and Isabella Rossellini are among the featured performers. Ms. Ensler will also be there to answer questions, and the actress Glenn Close will receive an award. Tickets are $100.
Before the film's showing, a dinner will be held at 6 p.m. at the Vintage Restaurant in White Plains, where Ms. Ensler is also scheduled to appear. The price for both the dinner and film is $200. Information: (914)422-4102.
A Look Back
John Shearer saw a lot of action in his early years as a photographer. While working for Look and Life magazines, he covered President John F. Kennedy's funeral, the prison riots at Attica, the activities of the Black Panthers and other historic events.
In observance of Black History Month, the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts in Mount Kisco has mounted the first major retrospective of 100 black-and-white and color photographs by Mr. Shearer, including more recent commercial and fine art work. The show, ''Four Decades in Pictures,'' will open on Friday and continue through March 1.
Mr. Shearer, who lives in Goldens Bridge, is now the president and founder of Image Partners, a 10-year-old Katonah-based custom publishing magazine. Although some of his photographs win instant recognition -- Mohammad Ali in his prime, the small figure of John F. Kennedy Jr. saluting his father's coffin -- he has relatively little access to the images he made. ''When Look went out of business, they donated original work to the Library of Congress,'' he said. ''It's unfiled there, with no contact prints.'' Information: (914)241-6922.
If It's Noon
Downtown Music at Grace, an organization that brings 30-minute lunchtime concerts to Grace Church in White Plains, offers world music this month on three Wednesdays at noon. This week the featured band is Mariachi Real de Mexico, which has performed at parties for Rudolph W. Giuliani and Bruce Springsteen. Next week Sharon Katz and the Peace Train will play the music of South Africa, led by the South African-born Ms. Katz. On Feb. 18 Chen Tao will play the bamboo flute and Liu Li will play the Chinese lute in a performance. The concerts are free. Information: (914)949-0384.
For the Blues
To understand the history of black music in America, the place to be is Sarah Lawrence College in Yonkers, where the symposium ''Blues People: 40 Years Later'' will be held from 9 a.m. Friday to 7 p.m. Saturday. Scholars, musicians and music critics will be on hand to discuss jazz and its influences. The 1963 history ''Blues People: Negro Music in White America,'' by Amiri Baraka, is the jumping off point for the symposium. Information: (914)395-2219.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
