''I am 28 years old. My father has just died and I feel nothing.''
Painful memories, tempered by bittersweet rushes of levity and a hint of redemptive power, fill the 90 exhilarating minutes of John Walch's new play ''Circumference of a Squirrel,'' at New Jersey Repertory Company. This one-man work, starring Ames Adamson as Chester, a graduate studies dropout and self-proclaimed ''rodentophobe,'' is directed with creative flair by James Glossman. The play is a co-production with the Playwrights Theater of New Jersey in Madison, where it will run later in the year.
''If I let go of my hatred for my father, then who am I?'' Chester muses. Profoundly lonely, he comes daily to his old campus in search of the family and sense of community he has lost after his father's death and an unsought divorce from his wife, Dara.
''Yesterday I saw a squirrel carrying a bagel in its mouth,'' he announces, solemnly linking his own ''negative fascination with squirrels'' with a traumatic incident from childhood when his father was bitten by a rabid squirrel. ''Fourteen shots in fourteen days'' later, Dad emerges a wild man, obsessed for life with the mission of massacring any squirrels within reach, even if that means burning them to death in the family fireplace. His young sons are enlisted as accomplices. Coincidentally, this unabashed bigot is not at all uncomfortable with ''that crazy son-of-a-bitch Hitler'' incinerating Jews in Europe's crematoria.
Chester's quirky patchwork of recollection is evoked brilliantly by Mr. Adamson. The scenes jump in time, from a hotel in downtown Kansas City, when Chester is visiting home before his marriage, to his temporary digs as a separated husband, to the hospital where his father lies dying, back to the family manse and a ''meet Dara'' (uh-oh, she's Jewish!) welcoming dinner.
The sense of completeness as a human being that eludes Chester is symbolized in the play by a grab bag of circular objects -- bagels, lifesaver candies, an inner tube, a doughnut, wreaths of every description, a tire swing. Working with an almost bare stage, the director exploits these items inventively, producing visual riffs that enliven the monologue. But there is nothing pretentiously ''artsy'' here, just theater that manages artfully to engage each audience member in the creative process.
Which brings us back to Mr. Adamson as Chester. ''Please help me. Life is sacred. Let me live,'' a battered little squirrel pleads to the young Chester. ''Please help me. Life is sacred. Let me go,'' the emotionally battered Chester of 28 begs the unrelenting memory of his dead father. Alternating between raw grief, tender regret and a wry sense of humor, Mr. Adamson gives an extraordinary performance.
''Circumference of a Squirrel'' is at New Jersey Repertory Company, 179 Broadway, Long Branch, through Feb. 15. Information: (732)229-3166.
THEATER REVIEW
