THE front door of Christopher Cerf's East 62nd Street town house was once purple, a faint nod to the purple-and-gold portal at his comic nursery, the Harvard Lampoon -- and an irritant to the block association. But the building's facade has mostly had the blandest of expressions. It is a blank beige scrim -- behind which much mischief is hatched.
Mr. Cerf, the impish polymath, lexicographer and Cookie Monster lyricist, once -- as a co-author with Henry Beard of ''The Official Politically Correct Handbook and Dictionary'' (Villard, 1993) -- described a cliché as a ''previously enjoyed sound bite.'' His credits include ''Sesame Street'' and National Lampoon, and he has been making music and overturning clichés at his town house since 1969.
He was 28 that year, editing Abbie Hoffman and Dr. Seuss at his father's publishing company, Random House -- ''I wonder how I got that job?'' he'll ask you -- and spending Monday nights at the old 71st Regiment Armory at Park Avenue and 33rd Street with the writer John Berendt and other lettered National Guardsmen. (It was an experience he regrets only because he never had a chance to see the television program ''Rowan &amp; Martin's Laugh-In,'' which was broadcast at the same time.)
The town house was a block from where he had grown up, but that didn't deter him, because he had decided he wanted to craft an all-under-one-roof home, just as his parents had done. ''There's not much difference between what I do for fun and what I do for work, and my parents had a situation that was not dissimilar,'' he explained, describing a childhood in a home with a darkroom, two offices and, of course, a capacious library.
''My father was the only person I know who had more going on than I do,'' he said, ''or who did more different things.'' (His dad was Bennett Cerf, who famously co-founded Random House with the notion of publishing a few books ''at random.'' The elder Mr. Cerf, who died in 1971, was variously a columnist, radio host, Miss America pageant judge and panelist on ''What's My Line?'' Christopher Cerf's mother, Phyllis Cerf, was an editor of children's books at Random House.)
The house seemed like a good place to play rock 'n' roll and store books, lots of them. It also felt private, though that perceived domestic advantage was imperiled in the early days by top-floor tenants who would complain to his parents when Mr. Cerf -- who likes to bang on a piano like his hero, Jerry Lee Lewis -- had a prolific musical evening.
''The house cost $248,000, and my dad said, 'You can't afford that!' '' Mr. Cerf recalled. ''But he let me use some Random House stock as collateral. I rented out the top two floors to offset the mortgage and taxes, and I still do, and it's still working out. Well, sort of.''
Many projects for the National Lampoon were spawned here. So was Not The New York Times, a 1978 parody of this newspaper, though its operations were quickly moved to George Plimpton's apartment because Mr. Plimpton had more space. Last fall was the 25th anniversary of the spoof, a date its alumni, who include the director Nora Ephron and the writer Rusty Unger, somehow missed.
This spring the house will play host to a delayed party in the parody's honor, which will carry the name -- offered by Ms. Unger, who coined the title for the original -- of ''Not the Anniversary Party.''
Odd things happen to New Yorkers with houses. Friends expect things from you. The photographer Jonathan Becker has taken over Mr. Cerf's basement, which he uses as a darkroom. ''I used to run into him in the middle of the night, which was when he seemed to favor making his prints,'' Mr. Cerf said. ''It was always a bit alarming.''
A Democratic Party delegation from Guam was feted there twice, for the national conventions of 1976 and 1980. A pal had fingered Mr. Cerf, ''mostly because I had the house,'' he said. ''I said, 'O.K., which delegates do you have in mind?' He suggested Kentucky, and I said, 'Oh no, too big, what about Guam?' The size was appealing, and I also had the idea that if they had the balance of power I might leverage them somehow, hold them hostage.''
IN any case, during the second convention, a New York State official, the commissioner of mental health, addressed the 12 members of the delegation from the second-floor balcony overlooking Mr. Cerf's garden. Mr. Cerf remembered the scene fondly. ''It was beautiful,'' he said.
In addition to providing a haven for the activities of pushy political friends, Manhattan house-ownership has another potential drawback: burglary. About 10 years ago, Mr. Cerf was awakened by a huge crash. He buried his head under his pillow, thinking, ''I didn't hear that!'' The crash was followed by a thud, and Mr. Cerf threw off the covers to face the inevitable. Indeed, a look down his hall revealed the figure of a man.
''How do you do?'' the intruder said.
''How do you do?'' Mr. Cerf replied, shaking the offered hand.
''My name is Ramon,'' the man continued, ''and I want you to know I've just done you a great favor. I saw someone breaking into your house and I've chased them away. Now you can do me a favor and lend me $10 and your bathroom to wash the blood off my hands.''
''Uh, O.K.,'' Mr. Cerf said, and the two parted amicably. Minutes later, the phone rang. It was a neighbor, who had heard the crash and wondered what was up. Mr. Cerf, still dazed, related his experience.
''I see,'' the neighbor said. ''Was it Ramon?'' As it happens, Mr. Cerf's wasn't the only house Ramon had visited that night.
Recently, the house has been fighting off the aggressions of a giant, anthropomorphic-looking wisteria vine. Its gnarly tentacles -- which have largely covered the windows of Mr. Cerf's bedroom and uprooted his garden fence -- remind him of Audrey, the chlorophyll-empowered star of ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' and the work of one of Mr. Cerf's many puppet-making pals, Marty Robinson, a creator of ''Sesame Street.''
Mr. Cerf joined ''Sesame Street'' while still at Random House, helping the show finance itself by making books and toys in its image, as well as writing much of its music.
''Once I saw Cookie Monster,'' Mr. Cerf said, ''I was a goner.''
Mr. Robinson and Mr. Cerf are still collaborating. Mr. Robinson devised the prototype of Theo, a star of Mr. Cerf's latest ongoing project, the PBS Kids reading show ''Between the Lions.''
On a recent Friday morning, Theo and his wife, Cleo, flopped at the foot of the iron staircase that grows out of Mr. Cerf's dining room and slices through three floors. The room was a bit bare, except for an Emmy or four, as well as a few Grammys and an empty puppet box, but its walls were layered with memorabilia, including a photograph of a young Mr. Cerf whacking the keys of a piano while his parents hover behind him, their eyes wide in mock horror.
His many books are here too, including ''The Iraq War Reader,'' compiled with Micah Sifry (Touchstone, 2003), and his latest, ''The Between the Lions Book for Parents,'' by Linda K. Rath and Louise Kennedy, with a foreword by Mr. Cerf (HarperCollins, $23.95).
In the foreword, he writes about his commitment to literacy -- and relates his co-producer Michael Frith's idea that every great project, like ''Between the Lions,'' begins with a bad pun.
Habitats | East 62nd Street
