WANDERING through the dim, low-ceilinged cells of the Slave House on Gorée Island in Senegal, you suddenly come upon a doorway that opens onto nothing but sky and sea. There are some jagged shoals below, but beyond that only choppy Atlantic waters.
Here, visitors are informed, thousands of the people who were captured along the West African coast during the 18th and 19th centuries, then sorted by age and sex and held in this slave house, were loaded onto ships bound for the Americas. Many visitors are moved to tears.
When tiny Gorée was named a Unesco World Heritage Site in 1978, it was with the clear intention that it be developed as a place for reflecting on the evils of the slave trade. Although some historians dispute the place's significance and the number of people held there as slaves, it has been Senegal's biggest tourist draw for decades; President Bush chose it as the backdrop for the first speech of his Africa tour last July.
Just 20 minutes by ferry from the port of Dakar, Senegal's gritty, hustling capital, Gorée was one of Senegal's first permanent European settlements. Its French colonial buildings have been meticulously preserved and repainted in their original hues of brick red, ocher and pale green, and its hilly lanes, framed by trailing bougainvillea, are beautifully calm. Dry heat and ankle-deep sand force you to walk slowly, and the mood of the place is dreamy and contemplative.
In this frame of mind, it would be hard to overstate the power that Gorée's Slave House has in evoking the horrors of the Middle Passage. The cells on the ground floor have been left empty, leaving visitors to wonder about the stories their walls might tell.
Outside the Slave House, my boyfriend, Dan, and I saw evidence that Senegal's more recent past was brighter, from the souvenir stands run by well-dressed islanders, to the boatloads of Dakarois members of Senegal's fledgling urban middle class arriving on Gorée for weekend outings.
Our December week in Senegal was one of those hastily planned trips that result from the sudden, happy realization that you and the person you most like to travel with will soon have some vacation days in common. Other than the music of Youssou N'Dour, which a French friend had introduced me to, and the televised images of presidential visits to Gorée, I didn't know what to expect of Senegal. Dan and I were enticed by the most primal of travel lures: discount flights from London, where we live, and the prospect of a climate much, much warmer and drier than an English winter.
We booked flights to Dakar on TAP-Air Portugal, spent an exorbitant $70 on guidebooks, and mapped out our itinerary. After a day in Dakar, we decided, we would go to Gorée. Then, north to St.-Louis, the old French colonial capital, which lies near the border with Mauritania, which is recommended as a base for visiting some of Senegal's best wildlife parks. Then, we'd spend a couple of days back in Dakar.
After a few hours on Gorée, we were so relaxed that when an errant goat ran in and noisily interrupted our lunch at Chez Madame Siga, a little tin-roofed restaurant on the island's southern end, Dan bleated back at it and we continued flaking away bits of delicious poisson yassa, a whole fish in a sauce of chopped onions, black pepper and lime juice.
As the afternoon wore on, most other tourists piled onto ferries returning to Dakar, and we found ourselves talking to Loulou, the owner of our guesthouse, the Auberge Keur Beer, about the changes tourism has brought. Loulou, a chatty, sardonic man was raised on Gorée by a Senegalese mother and a Corsican father.
''Most tourists don't stay more than half a day,'' he told us in French, the language of Senegal. ''It's very important to spend the night on Gorée. You'll see.''
A few hours later, I could see what Loulou meant. In the evening, a new Gorée seemed to emerge. The souvenir sellers disappeared, to be replaced by groups of little boys playing soccer with homemade balls, and by women pounding millet and chatting in the twilight.
The next morning, after hot chocolate and buttered baguettes in the Keur Beer's courtyard, we caught a ferry back to the mainland, then took a taxi to Dakar's gare routière. Since few Senegalese own cars, every major town has one of these ''road stations,'' a sort of huge parking lot where travelers can bargain for a seat on a bus or in a private car.
We picked our way among acres of idling motors until we found the section of cars that would be making the four-hour journey to St.-Louis. Most Senegalese are staunch Sufi Muslims, so many of the cars were decorated with religious slogans like Alhamdoulilah (Thanks be to God) or black-and-white portraits of the beloved mystic Amadou Bamba.
Eventually, we bought the last two seats in one of the ancient seven-seater Peugeots that are known as bush taxis. For the first hour, we inched our way east through dense traffic. But as we passed the town of Thiès and started north, the drive became breezy and pleasant. I'd never seen such perfectly flat landscape: brown, open country covered with scrubby bushes and acacia trees, and the occasional walled compound of thatched houses. We stopped twice, to much grumbling from the driver, because another passenger, an imperious older woman in a green boubou gown, wanted to greet relatives as we passed through their villages.
By 2 p.m., when we arrived in St.-Louis, we were caked with dirt, our eyes and noses running hideously from the grit blowing through the car's open windows (our fellow passengers had simply unwrapped the turbans they all wore, and draped the loose ends over their faces). Yet Dia, the manager of the Auberge-Restaurant Harmattan, gave us the warmest possible welcome, bouncing ahead with our bags and gently probing to see what manner of tourists we might be. Were we jazz fans (St.-Louis holds an international jazz festival each spring, and local bars have regular concerts the rest of the year)? Or aviation history buffs (St.-Louis was once a refueling point for flights from Europe to South America)? Or nature lovers (there are three significant wildlife preserves in the region)?
When we nodded eagerly at the last suggestion, Dia phoned a friend, Djiby, who worked as a guide, and arranged to have him stop by our room. Under other circumstances, this might have seemed pushy, but Dia's enthusiasm was so disarming that we agreed instantly.
We made a plan to view the famous migrating-bird colonies at the Parc National des Oiseaux du Djoudj the following day, and set out to explore St.-Louis. The oldest part of the town is on an island in the mouth of the Senegal River, and its collection of 18th- and 19th-century French colonial buildings is said to be the finest in Africa. We admired the graceful, slightly crumbling edifices of the old trading houses and municipal buildings, then worked our way toward the northern, more residential, end of the island, where we caught glimpses of women fanning coal fires under the baobabs in their household courtyards, and listened to children chanting their lessons in the Koranic school.
The next morning we set out early, driving north with Djiby toward the Sahara and the Mauritanian border. The Djoudj bird preserve is about two hours from St.-Louis, so we had plenty of time to talk. Djiby, at 28, was between us in age, and he was intensely curious about our lives. Why did we live so far away from our parents? Was it true that all American women worked, even if they had husbands? Did we know people from Senegal in New York?
When we arrived at Djoudj and hired the motorized pirogue to take us through the park's connecting lakes, marshes and channels, Djiby's tour-guide demeanor returned. With his help, we spotted fat, iguanalike varans swimming along next to our boat, their patterned skins glinting like mosaics. Wart hogs rooted in the dust on the banks, and crocodiles lurked in the marshy shallows.
And, of course, we saw birds: huge flocks of them, ibises and cormorants and serpent-birds, flamingos and pelicans by the tens of thousands, circling in the sky and roosting on their islands. Djiby delivered astonishingly detailed lectures on the birds and Sahel wildlife. Want to know how many grams of fish the white-faced Gambian goose eats each day? I can tell you.
Our next two days in St.-Louis passed more quietly. We explored the beautiful, wild beaches at the tip of the Langue de Barbarie, where the Senegal River meets the Atlantic, and listened to a local sextet play African-inspired jazz at the Bistrot Le Monte-Charge, in the historic Maurel et Prom building (a former slave market; St.-Louis too was founded on the slave trade).
ON the day before our departure for Dakar, Djiby invited us to his village for a meal of tiéboudienne: rice, fish and root vegetables cooked in a spicy tomato sauce. I was disappointed that the women of the family weren't permitted to eat with us, but Djiby was good company, and we spent a lovely last few hours with him, drinking sugary Sahelian tea and playing with his baby daughter.
But my first dream for our time in Senegal -- to hear Youssou N'Dour in person -- could be satisfied only in Dakar. When he's in town, N'Dour and his band still play at Thiossane, the club he founded. The desk clerk at the hotel where we stayed at the beginning of our trip told us that we were in luck: Mr. N'Dour had just returned from a European tour, and would be playing that very night.
We arrived at the club shortly after midnight -- a beginner's mistake, apparently, for we were alone with the floor sweepers for more than an hour. But by 2 a.m., when Mr. N'Dour and his band started warming up, the club was packed. Tight-knit groups started to colonize the dance floor: teenage Dakaroises, tall and slim as gazelles in their evening dresses; serious young men in traditional boubous, intent on the music; less serious young men in shiny suits, intent on the girls; and a group of European women in safari suits.
As the evening wore on, the groups seemed to soften around the edges. The flashy young men subtly rearranged themselves so that their circle included the gazelle girls. The shortest and stockiest of the safari suits began a wild, solitary dance, knees and elbows flying crazily side to side, as several young men in boubous cheered her on. Over the frenetic beat, Mr. N'Dour's agile voice swooped and moaned, and we all danced and danced until it was time to go home.
The bottom line
We spent $81 a day on transportation, food, hotels, and activities during seven days and nights in Senegal.
Lodging
On Gorée Island, we stayed at the Auberge Keur Beer, 1, rue du Port, (221) 821 38 01. Our room in the annex, a house opposite the ferry jetty, was enormous, with private bath, kitchenette and refrigerator. One night cost $46 (prices at 542 C.F.A. francs to the dollar).
In St.-Louis, we stayed at the Auberge-Restaurant Harmattan, at the Rue Adboulaye-Seck and the Rue Guillabert, (221) 961 82 53, fax (221) 822 34 30. Our lovely double room with adjoining garden courtyard was $30 a night.
In Dakar, we stayed at the modern Hotel Ganalé, at 38, rue Assane-N'Doye; (221) 821 55 70, fax (221) 822 34 30. Our air-conditioned room was sparkling clean, with tiled floors and lemon-yellow walls. The television got exactly two channels, one of which was CNN. A double room is $65.
Food
On Gorée, we had lunch at Chez Madame Siga, on the hill leading up to the old fort. Heaping portions of fried fish and vegetables, mineral water and rice-flour beignets for dessert, came to $7.50.
In St.-Louis, La Saigonnaise, (221) 961 64 81, on the Place de Liège at the north tip of the island, has wonderful Vietnamese food and a view across the mouth of the Senegal River into Mauritania. Lunch for two, including appetizers, came to $18.
Also in St.-Louis, the Restaurant Galaxie, 25, rue Brière de l'Îsle Nord, (221) 961 24 68, serves traditional Senegalese dishes. Dinner for two, including hibiscus juice, came to $10.
In Dakar, the friendly Restaurant ? 2 (pronounced ''Restaurant Point d'Interrogation Deux''), 40, rue Assane-N'Doye, (221) 822 50 72, serves hearty Senegalese stews. Lunch for two came to $9.
Also in Dakar, Chez Loutcha, 101, rue Moussé Diop, (221) 821 03 02, specializes in dishes from Portuguese West Africa, Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau. Dinner for two (enough garlicky fried squid, bean stew and salad for four) came to $17, and we endured a scolding from our waitress for not having sturdier appetites.
Le Dagorne, at 11, rue Dagorne, (221) 822 20 80, is one of Dakar's oldest French restaurants. It has been in the same location since the French colonial era and is popular with wealthy Senegalese. Dinner for two, including a half bottle of wine, came to $39.
Activities
A guided tour of the Parc National des Oiseaux du Djoudj, including a four-hour round-trip taxi ride, park admission, boat trip, and tips, came to $74 for two.
Cover charge at Thiossane, Youssou N'Dour's music club, was $11 for two.
KATHERINE ZOEPF
FRUGAL TRAVELER KATHERINE ZOEPF is a graduate student at the London School of Economics.
