IT was the coldest January in a decade. It's been the sort of weather that leads to exchanges about the temperature with strangers on subway platforms, and to fantasies inspired by billboards advertising Caribbean sunshine. But it is winter, after all, and Northeasterners are supposed not just to endure the challenge, but prevail over it -- to misappropriate a line from William Faulkner.
Of course, the poor and the elderly may face the cold in circumstances that do not allow for fortitude. And even those who survive encounters with nature's bitterest weather often speak of having been marked forever by the experience. Here are a few examples of life far, far below 32 degrees Fahrenheit.
PETER EDIDIN
From The New York Times, Jan. 24, 1882:
The bitter cold weather which capriciously set in on Sunday afternoon continued through yesterday, rather increasing than diminishing in intensity. ... The street lamps made feeble efforts to light the benighted wanderer home, and in too many instances flickered out in utter darkness. Milkmen found the contents of their cans solid, which might be partly attributable to the cold and partly to diluting the lactosal fluid too freely.
At the Bull's Head Drove-yard, 100th Street, several head of cattle were found frozen to death. ...
The police report many cases of frostbite and temporary loss of consciousness from the extreme cold, particularly among the car and omnibus drivers. ... A number of the car drivers had to be removed from the cars at the end of the route having ears, fingers and legs frozen. ...
One case of death from cold occurred at No.60 Baxter Street. ... A woman named Anna Oakley, who it appears was too poor to supply herself with bed clothing, was found on Monday morning frozen stiff. It appears ... that the temperature has not been so low as it was on Sunday night and Monday morning, in this latitude, since the year 1806.
From ''The Worst Journey in the World: Antarctic 1910-1913'' (1922), by Apsley Cherry-Garrard, a member of the Scott expedition, who nearly died searching for emperor penguin eggs to bring back to Britain:
It was the darkness that did it. I don't believe -70 temperatures would be bad in daylight, not comparatively bad, when you could see where you were going, where you were stepping, where the sledge straps were, the cooker, the primus, the food; could see your footsteps lately trodden deep into the soft snow that you might find your way back to the rest of your load.
But in these days were never less than four hours from the moment when Bill cried ''Time to get up'' to the time when we got into our harness. It took two men to get one man into his harness, and was all they could do, for the canvas was frozen and our clothes were frozen until sometimes not even two men could bend them into the required shape.
From ''Alone'' (1938), by Richard E. Byrd, who wintered by himself in Antarctica:
July 7
Everything -- myself included -- is saturated with cold. For two solid weeks the red thermograph trace has been wandering through the minus 40's, 50's, and 60's. A moment ago, when I turned the flashlight on the inside thermograph, the pen was edging past -65 degrees. The ice over the skylight is fanning out to meet the ice on the walls, which has risen level with my eyes. I hope fervently that the cold will let up, for I simply must have more warmth, even at the expense of less ventilation and more fumes.
I am still in wretched condition. My brain seems unspeakably tired and confused. Last night was agony. This morning was one of my worst. The gloom, the cold, and the evenness of the Barrier are a drag on the spirits; my poise and equanimity are almost gone.
From ''The History of the Donner Party'' (1879), by C. F. McGlashan:
We would sit or lie on the snow, and rest our weary frames. We would sleep, only to dream of something nice to eat, and awake again to disappointment. We would strike fire by means of the flintlock gun which we had with us. This had to be carried by turns, as it was considered the only hope left in case we might find game which we could kill. We traveled over a ridge of mountains, and then descended a deep canyon, where one could scarcely see the bottom. ... On reaching the bottom we would plunge into the snow, so that it was difficult getting out, with the shoes tied to our feet, our packs lashed to our backs, and ourselves head and ears under the snow. But we managed to get out some way, and one by one reached the bottom of the canyon. When this was accomplished we had to ascend a hill as steep as the one we had descended. ... Our feet had been frozen and thawed so many times that they were bleeding and sore. When we stopped at night we would take off our shoes, which by this time were so badly rotted by constant wetting in snow, that there was very little left of them. In the morning we would push our shoes on, bruising and numbing the feet so badly that they would ache and ache with walking and the cold, until night would come again. Oh! The pain! It seemed to make the pangs of hunger more excruciating.
From ''Rachel Calof's Story'' (1936), recollections of a homesteader in North Dakota in 1894:
At this time the in-laws had a flock of 12 chicken and Abe and I also had 12. There was no outside coop for the poultry, but if there had been we would have lost the flock in short order because the temperature would soon be going to 40 or more degrees below zero and chickens would have frozen to death. We needed to keep them alive in hopes of having their eggs as well as their meat later on. Each family was to keep its chickens under its bed and the ends and sides were closed off to form a cage. Also there was a calf which had to be accommodated inside. It occupied the remaining corner. ...
This is how 5 human beings and 25 animals faced the beginning of the savage winter of the plains in a 12-by-14-foot shack. This was how we lived and suffered. The chickens were generous with their perfumes and we withstood this, but the stench of the calf tethered in the corner was well-nigh intolerable.
From ''Siberia: The New Frontier'' (1969), by George St. George:
In January and February, temperature readings of -70 degrees are not uncommon through Yakutia, causing human breath to freeze instantly with a crackling noise which is locally known as ''the whispering of the stars'' -- a poetic name, but a highly uncomfortable phenomenon. In fact, on frosty days all Yakutian towns are enveloped in a man-made fog caused by the exhalations of men and animals, a weird phenomenon not found anywhere else.
From ''This Cold Heaven: Seven Seasons in Greenland'' (2001), by Gretel Ehrlich:
Greenlanders say that only the qanuallit -- the white people -- are afraid of the dark, while Eskimos like nothing better than long winter days of storytelling and talking to spirits. Rasmussen told the story of two Danes -- Gustav and Olaf -- who overwintered together every year on the east coast of Greenland, where they hunted foxes and sold the skins in the spring. Olaf made dinner one night. Later, Gustav said he had a bad stomachache. Shortly after, he died sitting in his chair. In Olaf's grief and the shock of utter solitude, he found he could not part with his friend. He set Gustav's corpse, still in the chair, outside to freeze and in the evenings brought him back inside, seating him at the dinner table so he would not have to eat alone. In the spring, when Gustav began to thaw, Olaf took him home to Denmark to be buried.
Word for Word | Weather World
