Last January, my husband, Dick, and I sorted through the day's mail at home in Los Angeles and almost threw away a nondescript bulk mailing from Radisson Seven Seas Cruises. Stunningly, the letter inside offered us our choice of two free Mediterranean cruises in early March on the cruise line's newly completed luxury ship the Seven Seas Voyager.
As loyal passengers (we spent four months circling the globe on a Radisson Seven Seas ship in 2002 and sailed with them in French Polynesia in 2001), it announced, we would have to pay only for an air-fare-and-hotel package (if needed), plus a port charge of $180 a person; the cruise itself would be free.
In nautical parlance, these were shakedown cruises, meant to get the crew of a new ship operating as a team and uncover any defects, mechanical or human, before taking on paying passengers.
In the almost-discarded letter, Janet Galiszewski, the manager of the Seven Seas Society (a program for returning passengers, to build brand loyalty) offered 2,000 households two cruise dates: March 3 to 9 or March 25 to 30. To be eligible, passengers had to have sailed 75 nights with Radisson.
The inaugural cruise for Voyager's first paying passengers would sail from Nice to Venice on April 1.
Dick and I didn't hesitate. We began to clear our calendars and call friends who were also frequent Radisson sailors and would be receiving the same invitation.
We chose the March 3 sailing, but later discovered that the cruise line would accommodate its society members who could not make either date on other short, regularly scheduled trips. Our friends Tom and Susan took one of these make-up trips in October -- seven nights, Rome to Venice.
According to Andrew Poulton, the director of strategic marketing, Radisson also offered other free cruises ''to our best travel agent partners and our society members and prospective clients in our two major European markets, the U.K. and Germany.''
The 700-passenger Voyager carried 361 guests on the first shakedown cruise and 395 on the second, with a full crew of 445 on both. The second cruise would also begin in Nice and would stop in Barcelona, Palma de Majorca and Cannes, and end in Monte Carlo.
On the fourth day of our cruise, Mark Conroy, the president of Radisson Seven Seas, came aboard and asked the happily freeloading passengers for their opinions and feedback at a sort of town meeting in the largest lounge. Most of the suggestions involved the line's policy of having passengers on regularly scheduled cruises pay for mixed drinks, rather than including it in a slightly higher fare. We were drinking free on the shakedown cruise, but memories of past bar bills lingered in many minds.
Skirting the coasts of France and Italy, the ship was never too far from land, in case of major problems, but there were none. There were minor hitches: a restaurant ran late and the computers were not installed yet in the topsy-turvy computer room, so there would be no easy e-mail communication with friends and family back home. Nor did the beauty salon have all of its supplies. But these minor distractions just added to our sense of adventure.
Perhaps the biggest inconvenience was arranging our flights. Los Angeles to Italy was a long flight for a six-night cruise, and there were uncertainties on top of that:
There was some initial difficulty securing our desired airline tickets as part of the Radisson travel package. Then, in calls to a shakedown hot line that Radisson had set up and to our travel agent we discovered after booking our flights that the final sea trials for the ship had been delayed, leaving us in a cliffhanging position. If the ship flunked its sea trials, our trip would be off.
The Voyager passed its tests, and on Feb. 28, we flew on Lufthansa from Los Angeles to Frankfurt, then over the Alps to warm, sunny Nice. We opted for Radisson's business class fare of $2,868, rather than its $1,269 economy fare, given the 14 hours we'd be spending each way in airplanes and airports. We chose to stay in the least expensive Nice hotel in the package, the West End, paying $205 a person a night.
Three pals from our world cruise joined us. Karen and Woody, who live outside San Francisco, explored Nice on foot with us -- the museums, the Carnaval floats, parades and raucous end-of-Lent crowds. After we all boarded the Voyager in the Nice harbor on March 3, Bill, who lives in south Florida, joined us for activities and dinners.
The mood on board was festive, the international cuisine top-notch, the ship luxurious, with glass elevators and a dramatic central atrium. Our captain, Dag Dvergastein, was tall, erect, blond and jovial. Meeting a few people we knew from the world cruise, passengers and crew, added to the fun.
We were upgraded to slightly larger quarters than the standard deluxe suite we would ordinarily have taken. Our 320-square-foot ''penthouse'' suite had a 50-square-foot balcony and came with a butler (shared with other suites) -- a new experience for us.
Though hardly a behemoth, the Voyager was several hundred passengers larger than any ship we'd previously sailed on, and we would probably not want to try anything larger. But we found its size did not bother us. The ship's four restaurants offered more choices than we were used to.
Built and launched in Genoa, Italy, the ship's first baby steps were taken close to home. From Nice, our cruise stopped in Catania, Sicily; Sorrento and Livorno, on mainland Italy; and Cannes, before returning to Nice. Dick and I had been to Sicily and the south of France, but we found new things to do or took day trips to places we'd avoided as too crowded during summer trips: Pisa, Capri, St.-Paul de Vence in the hills above Nice, and Antibes.
We had one day at sea, between Nice and Catania, and I was the only participant in several exercise classes and in the beauty parlor when I got a manicure. Clearly, the other passengers were on the ship to relax and enjoy their good fortune -- another big difference from our world cruise.
I was always the first person on deck in the morning, when we came into port. On the top deck at 7 a.m., I was alone when taking pictures of Mount Etna and of Mount Vesuvius, and wondered how my fellow passengers could sleep through such an exciting approach, even if they had seen it all before.
Between ports, I squeezed as much into each day as I could: fitness classes, lectures, debarkation briefings, afternoon tea, evening entertainment, cocktail parties and receptions.
Dick and I especially enjoyed the Voyager's four open-seating dining rooms. Room service was also available for all meals, and we had tea served by the butler in our room once, but otherwise, we preferred to dine with our friends. The men enjoyed not having to pack black tie gear, which is required at least once a week on most Radisson sailings. Every night, the dress code was casual or informal.
The largest dining room, the Compass Rose, had waiter service for all meals. A more casual, buffet-style restaurant, La Veranda, also served breakfast, lunch and dinner -- mostly Mediterranean fare. At the two smaller, elegant, reservations-only restaurants for dinner, Signatures and Latitudes, we managed to eat as a group on four evenings.
At Signatures, the purpose of a shakedown cruise was evident one night when slow service caused us to miss the evening entertainment. The cruise director apologized but said that there was no time for another show.
AT a memorable dinner in Latitudes, the chef, Siegfried Zanier, literally set the stage in a theatrical presentation of the meal from an unusual open galley. What followed was a five-course extravaganza, including a superb New England clam chowder, spinach and cheese-stuffed chicken breast with marsala sauce, and espresso gelato. The wines were a California Central Coast viognier and a Sonoma cabernet sauvignon.
Unlike other Radisson cruises, where passengers pay for mixed drinks but are entitled to selected wine at dinner and two free bottles of alcohol per cruise, all drinks were free. We ate, drank and made merry on the cruise line's nickel.
After debarking on March 9, a Sunday, we had to stay in Nice overnight to catch a flight to Frankfurt, connecting to the only nonstop flight to Los Angeles. The cruise line picked up the tab one last time -- at Le Meridien.
Dick and I dropped our bags at the hotel, consulted railroad timetables and headed by train to nearby Antibes and its Picasso Museum, with Bill as company. We arrived during the museum's lunch break, so we found a harbor-side restaurant for our own Sunday meal, securing an outdoor table at the venerable-looking Les Vieux Murs.
As we enjoyed a substantial meal and drank a bottle of wine, we discussed the cruise, mutual friends and hoped-for future trips together. We watched sailboats glide over the smooth, deeply blue surface of the Mediterranean and French families strolling together to their own luncheon destinations. Great art awaited us next door, in an ancient castle-turned-museum.
Life was good that sunny Sunday in the south of France, a deeply satisfying end to our first shakedown experience.
Short but free
Most shakedown cruises take place before the new ship's first paying passengers board for the inaugural cruise. They are usually by invitation only, and not all cruise lines offer them.
Those that do may invite only their best customers, or they may invite travel agents, cruise line employees, friends and family. Shakedowns are short and free, and may involve some slight on-board disorganization.
Between Dec. 31 and Jan. 6, Cunard Lines, (800) 728-6273, www.cunard.com, offered three two-night shakedown cruises in the English Channel on its mammoth Queen Mary 2. The company invited employees, their families and friends.
For information about Radisson Seven Seas Cruises, call (800) 285-1835 or go to www.rssc.com.
SPRING-SUMMER CRUISES ANN COSTELLO is a freelance journalist in Beverly Hills.
