BOB HURLEY has a reputation of not backing off. He didn't accumulate more than 800 coaching victories and 21 state basketball championships at St. Anthony's High School in Jersey City by being a pushover.
No one knows that better than his son, Dan, who as coach at St. Benedict's Prep here is putting together quite a record of his own.
In his third year as coach of the boys' basketball team at St. Benedict's, Dan Hurley is looking for his third straight state prep-school championship. His Gray Bees -- who play the nation's top teams, from Newark to Salt Lake City -- were 46-10 in his first two years and owned a record of 21-1 this season going into the weekend.
So far, there has not been a shootout between St. Benedict's and St. Anthony's, Hurley vs. Hurley.
''It certainly wouldn't be a pleasant situation for either one of us,'' said Dan Hurley. ''My dad is on that special list of coaches who coach for the right reasons. I just wouldn't look forward to that at all.''
Nor is his father looking for that match anytime soon.
''I don't know how we would do against them, and there will always be speculation because we are never going to play,'' said Bob Hurley, who wants his son's legacy to be his own, without any fatherly interference. ''We're good at what we do, but I don't think we'll ever get into true comparisons with one another.
''There are 30,000 high schools in the United States,'' he added. ''I think I can find 24 games a year to play, excluding St. Benedict's, and I'm sure Danny could do the same.''
Dan Hurley spent most of his youth not only being Bob Hurley's son, but Bobby Hurley's little brother. Bobby was a star guard on the basketball team at St. Anthony's -- under his father -- and then at Duke University. He went on to play for the Sacramento Kings in the N.B.A., but he was involved in an auto accident in his rookie year and never fully recovered.
Dan Hurley, though a star by the time he was a senior at St. Anthony's, was never on a par with Bobby. He went to Seton Hall, where he, too, played basketball, but primarily coming off the bench as the sixth man. He left the team for a time as a junior, suffering from depression, but eventually returned to become seventh all-time in assists with 437. After graduation, he assisted his father at St. Anthony for a year before becoming an assistant coach at Rutgers.
But when the head coach at Rutgers lost his job after the 2001 season, Dan left, too, landing the job at St. Benedict's. That his name was Hurley certainly helped, though neither his father nor his brother interceded on his behalf.
''I think that in the coaching field, nobody is ever going to draw comparisons to us,'' Bob Hurley said. ''I'm a dinosaur and I'm on the way out. And he's a young gun who is going to make his own mark.''
Nonetheless, it has to be somewhat daunting for Dan Hurley - or even another person not named Hurley -- to follow up on Bob Hurley's accomplishments. In his 33 years at St. Anthony's, Bob Hurley, at 56, holds the record for state championships with 21 and ranks second in total victories. He had a 66-game winning streak, which ran from January 1995 until February 1997. Twice, St. Anthony's teams finished the season atop national polls as the best in the country. And five of his players - Terry Dehere, Rodrick Rhodes, David Rivers, Rashawn McLeod and his son, Bobby - have played in the National Basketball Association.
The bar was set high for Dan Hurley, who has established a reputation as a no-nonsense, never-let-up kind of coach.
''Now that I've had two-and-a-half years to build this program, the team that we have now goes into every tournament and every game expecting to win,'' said Dan, 31. ''And we find ways to win games. It is just part of developing a winning attitude.''
He also wants to cultivate a reputation for getting his players in class and then on to college. St. Benedict's is often left off local and national polls because it allows fifth-year seniors to play. While Dan Hurley and his staff contend that St. Benedict's adheres to the same age requirements - no player is older than 18 -- as other high schools, it does not follow the eight-semester rule regularly applied to high school athletes.
''Not being ranked in the polls drives us more because they don't consider us a normal high school,'' said Junior Smith, a 6-foot-7 forward who came to St. Benedict's in the fall as a fifth-year senior. Though Smith struggled academically at Lakewood High School, he now plans to attend the University of North Carolina next year.
Ultimately, Dan Hurley said, his reputation will not rest simply on where his forwards and guards play college ball, but what they do with their lives.
''My greatest comparison is going to be where the kids that played for me are in 10 years,'' he said. ''Are they successful or not? That's how I'll judge myself and what I'm able to do.''
His players said he drives them toward excellence both on the court and in the classroom, and that his involvement extends to the families of his players as well.
''Coach Hurley did wonders with me,'' said Smith, who averages 23 points a game. ''He told my family and me what I needed to do to graduate and what I needed to do to play in college. And I just worked hard and tried to live up to what he wanted me to do.''
While Smith and his teammates would like nothing better than to square off against St. Anthony's, they are well aware of the heavy baggage that goes with being a Hurley in top-flight New Jersey basketball.
''It has to be difficult for a guy to have a great family like he has,'' said Smith. ''His brother played in the N.B.A. and everyone wants him to live up to his expectations. Now being a coach he has to live up to his father's expectations. He has had some pretty big shoes to fill, but I think that he's going to fill them because he's a great coach, great guy, and he's going to do whatever it takes.''
SPORTS
