IT didn't take long for the residents of sleepy Lake Helen, Fla., to realize that their newest neighbor, a young entrepreneur from California named Dan Rubin, was not your average Joe.
Mr. Rubin, a 32-year-old self-made millionaire with a degree from Princeton, showed up in Lake Helen in 2002 after buying a local legal-referral company called 1-800ATTORNEY. He raised eyebrows his first day at the office when he handed out $20 bills to any employee who asked him a question. Mr. Rubin roared through the quiet streets in an outrageous 12-cylinder Lamborghini Diablo. He began buying up houses -- eventually acquiring nine -- and a rumor got out that he had once dated Paula Abdul. It was all a bit mysterious, but not nearly so as Mr. Rubin's next move: he ran for mayor.
Townspeople were so unsettled by this interloper -- who promised to cover shortfalls in the city budget out of his own pocket -- that they mobilized against him. They forced him out of the race when they found that he wasn't registered to vote locally, a requirement to run. ''He basically said he would buy things for the city,'' said Mark Shuttleworth, who opposed Mr. Rubin and went on to win the mayoral race. ''He was a checkbook kind of character -- a Donald Trump kind of guy.''
Skipper Morgan, who owns the Lake Helen Gas-N-Shop, a convenience store, said: ''He put everyone on edge, is what he did. They didn't know what the heck he was up to.''
These days it is relatively easy to figure out what Mr. Rubin is up to: he spends a lot of time with his own lawyers, working to fend off a federal investigation into charges of stock fraud. He was arrested last fall at his offices on the 50th floor of the Chrysler Building in New York and, along with three other associates, was charged in a complaint filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn with running an old-fashioned Wall Street con, a pump-and-dump scheme involving penny stocks. The United States attorney's office in Brooklyn has taken the case before a grand jury, and a wave of new subpoenas was handed out last week.
While the trials of Martha Stewart and L. Dennis Kozlowski stand out as grand examples of end-of-the-millennium excess, Mr. Rubin's case shows another trope of the age: the peril of small-time players who wanted desperately to be big. To many who know Mr. Rubin -- his old Princeton classmates, business associates, the citizens of tiny Lake Helen -- his arrest, like his mayoral bid, is the latest odd development in a Gatsby-like life that from the outside, at least, has struck many as more than a little improbable. They describe him as a young man who encountered remarkable early success -- and who made no secret of it. Mr. Rubin arrived at Princeton, for example, with no obvious wealth, but by his sophomore year was being chauffeured to campus in a Mercedes S-Class.
While other students spent days poring over economics or art history texts, he bought and sold real estate around the university, precociously pursuing the 1990's boom. He became something of a campus legend, and also a polarizing figure.
''It's either love or hate with Dan,'' said Rob Lyszczarz, a friend and business partner of Mr. Rubin's for the better part of a decade. ''He's a very strong personality, and even sometimes people on his own team aren't exactly sure where he's heading. To that extent he's somewhat of an enigma: what is it that motivates him?''
Mr. Rubin would not comment for this article, but his lawyer Alan Vinegrad, a former United States attorney in Brooklyn who prosecuted the mobster Vincent Gigante, issued a statement expressing confidence that ''at the end of the investigation this matter will be favorably resolved for Dan.''
Mr. Rubin is originally from Woodland, Calif., a suburb of Sacramento, where, friends say, he grew up in circumstances that were not lavish, but for one notable amenity. Mr. Rubin's father, an anesthesiologist originally from South Africa, built a squash court for his three sons, who all went to Princeton and played varsity squash.
At Princeton, where he enrolled in 1989, Mr. Rubin's first business foray was a T-shirt company he started with Greg Lauren, a nephew of the designer Ralph Lauren who is now a painter and an actor. The venture turned a modest profit, and Mr. Rubin was soon on to more ambitious things. His next big idea, he told friends, came from watching late-night infomercials on how to buy real estate with little or nothing down.
Realizing the inherent advantage of buying from desperate sellers, Mr. Rubin sought out homeowners on the verge of bankruptcy, offering them cash and then either selling the property at a quick profit or renting back to the original owners.
While such schemes might seem predatory, Mr. Rubin used his personal charm to pull them off, apparently without leaving the homeowners feeling they had been exploited. Sandra Adase and her husband were facing severe financial hardship in the early 1990's when Mr. Rubin called them out of the blue and offered cash for their condominium in a New Jersey retirement complex. Mr. Rubin flipped the property three months later at a profit, but Ms. Adase said she was delighted with the deal.
''He helped me out of the woods,'' she said last week. ''It was like God sent him to us.''
As those real estate deals netted gains, Mr. Rubin's profile on campus began to change to reflect his newfound wealth. He bought a 5,000-square-foot house in Princeton, and hired that chauffeur. Though he played on the squash team and was a member of Cloister Inn, a university eating club with a hot tub out back, he was rarely seen on campus, preferring instead to tend to his real estate deals and his new company, the Rubin Investment Group. He took semesters off, disappearing for long stretches, and for a time commuted by plane from Los Angeles.
Mr. Rubin became a source of campus intrigue. Rumors circulated that he was related to Robert E. Rubin, then the secretary of the Treasury. (He's not.)
James Gillespie, a member of the class of 1997 at Princeton who is now a lawyer in Paris, described Mr. Rubin's campus reputation as ''something that combines arrogance and flamboyance.''
''He created an image for himself so that people were ready to believe anything about him,'' he said.
In fall 1995, when a story began to circulate on campus that a student had handed in a paper inadvertently including a receipt showing that it had been purchased, suspicion fell on the mysterious Mr. Rubin. The student newspaper, The Daily Princetonian, reported the incident, mentioning no names, but to this day -- despite a lack of evidence -- Mr. Rubin is associated with the tale, which remains part of campus lore.
Asked about the incident, Michael Hiles, a spokesman for Mr. Rubin, said, ''Dan Rubin graduated from Princeton University because his work and conduct there met the university's high code of moral and academic requirements.''
Mr. Rubin left Princeton for three years (he returned in 1998, and completed his degree nine years after enrolling) and devoted himself completely to business. In addition to his real estate dealings, he invested in a failing fast food chain called Country Star Restaurants. Though the company was hemorrhaging cash, it happened to own a valuable lot off the Strip in Las Vegas, which Mr. Rubin was able to sell to the casino developer Stephen A. Wynn. In recounting the story to newspapers and business publications, Mr. Rubin portrayed himself as having outwitted the legendary developer, saying that Mr. Wynn offered $1.5 million for the property, then raised his bid to $1.65 million.
Mr. Rubin also made money brokering block trades of over-the-counter shares, which can be hard to unload because of their low trading volume, and invested in other financially distressed companies. In an interview with The New York Times in 1997, Mr. Rubin described his m.o. this way: ''I trade big positions in small companies and terrorize the chairman.''
As Mr. Rubin's bank account swelled, so did his public profile. He was featured on tabloid shows like ''Extra'' and ''National Enquirer TV'' as the flamboyant ''millionaire bachelor'' and occasionally appeared on financial programs on CNBC and Fox News during the market boom. Many news accounts from the time, which Mr. Rubin posted on the Rubin Investment Group's Web site, included his boasts of owning half a dozen Lamborghinis; a sky box at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, for Lakers games; and even a Picasso and a Renoir.
In 2002, Mr. Rubin heard about 1-800-ATTORNEY, a struggling company in Lake Helen. He invested $1.23 million in it, and as majority shareholder appointed himself chief executive. Friends say he was taken by the simple life in Lake Helen, whose residents sometimes ride horseback through town, and moved there in part to pursue a quieter lifestyle.
But what was quiet to Mr. Rubin was noisy for Lake Helen -- sometimes literally so. Neighbors called the police to report that he was cutting down trees and having construction done on his Arts and Crafts-style home without proper permits. But it was his run for mayor that really stirred people up.
After he was forced out of the race, one former employee of his business said, Mr. Rubin went back to work, struggling -- so far unsuccessfully -- to bring the money-losing 1-800-ATTORNEY to profitability and working trades, mostly in penny stocks, through the Rubin Investment Group. The former employee said Mr. Rubin was particularly close to an employee named Andrew Saksa, who had been barred from the New York Stock Exchange for two and a half years in 2001, the exchange said, for lying to customers.
It was with Mr. Saksa, the government contends, that Mr. Rubin got into real trouble. The complaint filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn says that last August, the two men met with the officers of two struggling companies, Marx Toys, which makes action figures, and a New Jersey company called the Classica Group, which makes microwave sterilization devices, and arranged to buy large blocks of their shares at a deep discount.
Then, the complaint says, Mr. Rubin's company issued press releases announcing that it was acting as an investment banker for the two companies to help them find buyers -- a claim that the government says was untrue. Then, as the share prices spiked on the news -- Classica, for example, shot up to $1.34 a share from 63 cents -- Mr. Rubin and Mr. Saksa sold off their shares, the court papers say. In the Classica case, the filing says, the two men sold 1.2 million shares they had bought for just 40 cents apiece. While Mr. Rubin and Mr. Saksa made out handsomely, the government argues, average investors were left holding the bag when the share prices collapsed to near their old levels.
To make matters worse for Mr. Rubin, Mr. Saksa was recorded telling a government witness that their company had conducted a number of similar schemes in the past.
Mr. Rubin and Mr. Saksa were arrested on a chilly October day by F.B.I. agents in the Rubin Investment Group offices in Midtown. A few days later, after he was released from custody, Mr. Rubin returned to his Lake Helen offices and called a meeting of employees, where his defense strategy became clear.
''He said Andrew was doing things he wasn't aware of,'' said a former employee who was present. ''He pretty much threw Andrew under the bus.'' Mr. Saksa's lawyer, Timothy McInnis, declined to comment.
Federal prosecutors have until Feb. 9 to issue indictments in the case. In the meantime, friends say, Mr. Rubin is keeping a low profile. The millionaire bachelor has sold his Lamborghinis, and he recently became engaged.
Mr. Rubin still has his house in Lake Helen, but local residents say their little town is once again quiet.
''Ever since that other stuff happened he's dropped out of the public eye,'' said Mr. Morgan, the Gas-N-Shop owner. ''You don't see him anymore. He's totally clammed up.''
