For New Yorkers with schoolchildren, it is a question more pressing than the meaning of life. What school is my kid zoned for?
The answer seemingly lies in the school zoning maps, which are created by the Department of Education and which break down school assignments by various geographical regions. But some critics say the maps are like rush-hour cabs: often discussed, rarely seen.
''Parents are always asking me where they can get a map,'' said Eva Moskowitz, who represents the Upper East Side in the City Council. ''When somebody is moving, the most important thing they want to know is where their child will go to school.''
Scott Durkin, the chief operating officer at the Corcoran Group, a real estate firm, knows how intense family interest is. ''Moving to an area with a good public school can save parents as much as $25,000 on the tuition of a private school,'' he said. ''Our agents have practically memorized the zoning of the neighborhoods in Manhattan.''
In fact, the maps are less elusive than parents may realize. Since October, they have been available online; plugging in an address at http://maps.nycboe.net pulls up the corresponding schools in that neighborhood. In addition, parents can click on a particular school for information about academic programs, staff and even standardized test scores.
Asked why they have only been made available recently, Margie Feinberg, a spokeswoman for the Department of Education, said: ''It's part of the new organization in the department. We're trying to be more customer friendly.''
But in the eyes of some, the Web maps are not enough. ''Nursery schools should have these maps,'' Ms. Moskowitz said. ''Perhaps even a letter should go out to parents.''
Ms. Moskowitz, co-chairwoman of the Council's education committee, said she tried to obtain a copy only to be tripped by bureaucratic red tape. ''I had to put up a stink to get a copy of the map,'' she said. ''It shouldn't take political pull.''
She has since passed them out to her constituents. ''These maps go like hot cakes.''
Mr. Durkin, like many real estate agents in the city, said his office has a copy of the zoning map. It dates to the 1970's, photocopied and passed down from agent to agent like an heirloom.
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK SCHOOLS
