SECRETS OF THE CITY  By Anne Roiphe  Shaye Areheart  ($24, hardcover)
At first there had been a run on the Korean markets as well as the chain food stores, but then no one wanted to buy anything fresh, arriving at checkout counters with jars and cans of nearly out-of-date applesauce. No one bought anything from the hot dog vendors who stood on street corners staring at passersby with the sad dark eyes of far-off places they now wished they had never left.
The entire city was hungry. Slim-Fast and Ensure sold and frozen food sold, but most of it ended up in the trash unopened. When it came right down to eating, most people preferred to go hungry. But the death count was rising: 64, 72, 89, 114. With each passing hour the number climbed. In neighborhoods poor and rich, victim after victim was found reeling around, passed out, beyond help.
The media reported huge economic losses. Pizzerias rolled down their metal gates, waiting for graffiti artists to do their worst; restaurants kept the tablecloths fresh, but waiters had plenty of time to regret they had not won a part in a play, completed high school, taken a computer course.
Everyone who could was trying to leave the city. The airports were jammed with reservationless would-be passengers. The mayor had declared an emergency and closed the toll booths on the bridges and tunnels, and still the cars moved like reluctant snails, never more than a foot or two apart, hour after hour.
FULL HOUSE  By Wendy Fairey  Southern Methodist University Press  ($22.50, hardcover)
Now, though, we sat at Eclair on West 72nd Street, the down-at-heels, past-its-prime little pastry shop to which Willy had introduced me.
''I can meet you for a cup of tea after my recorder lesson,'' I had said, calculating the time available to fit him in between recorder and dinner. I liked the daring of the moment, when, emerging into the street from Courtly Music Unlimited, I would disengage from Leslie, who played the tenor recorder, and our other friend Mary, who played the alto in our little trio.
''No I'm not taking the subway. I'm meeting a friend,'' I would murmur, and they didn't seem to give it a second thought. While Leslie and Mary disappeared into the station house, I would cross 72nd and walk the half block to the restaurant. Dependably, Willy would be waiting out front. ...
In warmer weather he might be wearing one of his checked short-sleeved shirts, which I liked so much because they reminded me of the shirts boys wore to school in junior high. His shirts made Willy seem innocent, as did his taste in restaurants. At Eclair the pastries had too much cream in them, and the old Russian waiters had spots on their white shirts.
THREE BEDROOMS IN MANHATTAN  By Georges Simenon  New York Review Books  ($12.95, paperback)
His footsteps resounded in the nearly empty streets of Greenwich Village, and he was still thinking about the couple who once more had made it impossible for him to sleep. He had never seen them. He didn't even know what the initials J.K.C. stood for. He'd read them, painted in green, on his neighbor's door.
And he knew, after passing by one morning when the door was open, that the floor was black, probably varnished. ...
He knew a lot about the two of them, but only in pieces he couldn't quite fit together. That J.K.C. was a painter. That Winnie lived in Boston.
What did she do? Why did she always come to New York on Friday nights, and only on Friday nights? Why didn't she ever stay the whole weekend? Well, of course there were jobs where people had different days off. She came by taxi, probably from the train station, just before eight. Always the same time, give or take a few minutes -- that's what made him think she'd arrived by train.
AN ALMOST PERFECT MOMENT  By Binnie Kirshenbaum  Ecco  ($23.95, hardcover)
In Brooklyn, in a part of Brooklyn that was the last stop on the LL train and a million miles away from Manhattan, a part of Brooklyn -- an enclave, almost -- composed of modest homes and two-family houses set on lawns the size of postage stamps, out front the occasional plaster-of-paris saint or a birdbath, a short bus ride away from the new paradise known as the Kings County Mall, a part of Brooklyn where the turbulent 60's never quite touched down, but at this point in time, on the cusp of the great age of disco, when this part of Brooklyn would come into its own, as if during the years before it had been aestivating like a mudfish, lying in wait for the blast, for the glitter, the platform shoes, Gloria Gaynor, for doing the hustle, for its day in the sun, this part of Brooklyn was home to Miriam Kessler and her daughter Valentine, who was fifteen and three-quarter years old, which is to be neither here nor yet there as far as life is concerned.
Therefore, on this Tuesday afternoon, mid-November, it was in a way both figurative and literal that Valentine stood at the threshold between the foyer and the living room, observing Miriam and her three girlfriends -- she, Miriam, called them that, despite their middling years, my girlfriends, or simply, The Girls -- who were seated around the card table, attending closely to their game.
For Miriam and The Girls, mah-jongg was not recreation, but passion. Nonetheless, and in their Brooklyn parlance, a nasal articulation, they were able to play while carrying on a conversation, which was not so much like juggling two oranges, because, for them, talking was as natural as breathing.
BOY MEETS GIRL  By Meg Cabot  Avon Trade Books  ($13.95, paperback)
Chelsea/19th between 9th and 10th. Exp. brk. wall, grt. light, elev. bldg., courtyd. view. $1195, No Fee. Call Ron (718) 555-7757
Yo. It's Ron. Leave a message.
(Tone)
Hi, Ron? It's Kate. Kate Mackenzie, I left a message yesterday? About the studio in the East Thirties? Well, I never heard from you. Does that mean the studio's taken already? Well, even if it is, can you call me back? Because I saw your ad for the place in Chelsea. The one that's eleven ninety-five? Could you call me about that one? Because I'm really interested. Again, it's 212-555-6891 until five, then you can reach me at 212-555-1324. And thanks. Thanks a lot. Call anytime.
NEW YORK BOOKSHELF/FICTION
