IN a speech after his second place showing in New Hampshire, Howard Dean shocked almost no one by sounding his familiar take-back-America themes, then detoured onto some fraught ideological terrain.
''When I was 21 years old, it was the end of the civil rights movement, and American had suffered greatly,'' said Dr. Dean, whose speeches have increasingly alluded to the 1960's. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was killed that year, Dr. Dean said. So, he asserted, were Robert F. Kennedy and four little girls in a Birmingham, Ala., church. With a casual approach to historical accuracy, Dr. Dean clustered into a single watershed year various events , including the Civil Rights Act, the Voting Rights Act, Thurgood Marshall's confirmation to the Supreme Court and the introduction of Medicare.
The year in question was 1968. And while Dr. Dean may have merged his dates, there was much to learn about both campaign strategy and the cultural mood in his nostalgia for a period some see as the last occasion for political optimism and others view as a time when, in Joan Didion's Yeatsian formulation, ''the center refused to hold.''
''We were all in it together,'' that year, Dr. Dean said on Tuesday. But were we?
By now the 1960's have come to resemble a ''Rashomon'' scene in which two actors crouch on a rainy veranda revisiting versions of an imaginary narrative to a third.
On one side is the man who remembers the schisms of the 60's splitting a generation asunder, as David R. Gergen, who worked in the Nixon, Ford, Reagan and Clinton White House, said. On the other is a man who recalls a decade that cleared the cultural stage for dialogue involving women, blacks and gays.
A Republican activist from a Chicago suburb who once derided Bill Clinton as a ''Vietnam protesting, non-inhaling, abortion-protecting, gay-rights-espousing, sexually promiscuous, Elvis-loving baby boomer'' could well have been describing his view of the 1960's. It is no stretch to suggest that, for many, the complex and messy decade was also the moment when a certain simple, valorous American story came to its end.
''From the right's point of view, there was the loss of heroes,'' Mr. Gergen said. Without the 60's, he added, a politician as archetypal as Ronald Reagan would have been harder to cast as presidential.
''Dean's memory of what happened appears to stop at a high moral moment and then lose the thread,'' said Fred Siegel, a senior fellow at the Progressive Policy Institute. ''There are people who I call the '68-ers-to-now,'' he added, referring to a tendency to telescope historical narratives and elide their less salubrious effects. ''Malcolm X followed Martin Luther King,'' Mr. Siegel said. ''The riots turned out not to be temporary. If you consider the crime rates of the 70's, in some sense they never stopped.''
Sentimentality about 1968 may have a certain predictable appeal. ''The mythic 1960's is as much about a younger generation, which has no experience of it except through movies and television,'' said Bruce J. Schulman, a professor of history at Boston University, as it is about activists transported by their own memories.
''Since Iowa, a lot of Dean's attempts to rehabilitate his candidacy turn on 1960's authenticity, portrayed as the antithesis of public relations and spin,'' said Professor Schulman. One indication the portrayal is effective is the reaction of conservative columnists like Andrew Sullivan, who wrote on his Weblog that Dr. Dean's speech was uplifting and genuine.
Why not? ''Every person has a right to interpret 1968 in his own way,'' said Roger Wilkins, a professor of American culture at George Mason University. In Mr. Wilkins's view, 1968 was the year when ''the ice floe of constricted American culture was broken,'' clearing the way for all that was to come. ''People are too harsh,'' on Dr. Dean's burnished recollections, Mr. Wilkins said. ''It's important to keep the ideals alive, to let people know it can all be had again.''
