Despite their comfortable position in the playoff race, the Islanders had noticed their slouch toward mediocrity in January. ''Coming off a 10-4 December, it's definitely been a letdown,'' goaltender Garth Snow said.
The Islanders exited the month on a high note Saturday night with a rare come-from-behind victory, 4-2 over the Florida Panthers, one of the teams chasing them. Jason Blake scored two goals, including one that broke a 2-2 tie. The Islanders finished January with a 6-5-3-1 record -- not exactly a surge to what they hope will be their third straight postseason. They are in the eighth and last playoff position in the Eastern Conference with 57 points, 5 more than ninth-place Buffalo and 1 behind seventh-place Montreal.
The Islanders said they could get better. They said they had to get better. Their performance before a sellout crowd at Nassau Coliseum was a good start. The Islanders (25-20-5-2) had not rallied from a third-period deficit in 19 attempts this season and 35 games dating from last Feb. 8.
One positive pattern persists. The Islanders remain tough at home, where they have not lost in four games and are 18-8-1.
The Islanders trailed by 2-1 in the third period. Blake scored what turned out to be the game-winner on a slap shot with 9 minutes 12 seconds left and cleared in an empty-netter with a minute to go.
Trent Hunter had tied the score at 2-2 by wrestling with an Adrian Aucoin slap shot as if it were an inside fastball before deflecting it in for his team-leading 19th goal.
Hunter said the Islanders needed a better February. ''Coming toward the end of the season, every team is going to get better,'' he said. ''You have to bear down.''
Playoff-worthiness is relative. Of the teams below the Islanders, only Buffalo has made up ground since the start of January. The Panthers (17-22-11-3) are one of the teams trying to get back into the picture but are 9 points behind the Islanders.
For the first two periods, the Panthers looked as if they were about to take a small step up. They held a 2-1 lead that looked impenetrable given the Islanders' 0-17-2 mark when trailing after two periods before Saturday's game.
Although Rick DiPietro had not allowed more than two goals in any of his last six starts, Islanders Coach Steve Stirling started Snow, who made 26 saves and turned into a wall in the third period.
The goal that gave the Panthers a 2-1 lead in the second period was not his fault. The defense allowed Stephen Weiss to streak toward the net unchecked, and he took a center pass from Byron Ritchie and had time to juggle the puck before sliding it in.
Stirling called a timeout and yelled. Something clicked. ''It's always good to hear his voice,'' defenseman Kenny Jonsson said.
Oleg Kvasha upended Weiss in the third period, and Weiss was helped off the ice. Kvasha avoided the penalty box and the Islanders avoided a five-on-three disadvantage.
The Islanders' Radek Martinek scored the first goal by banging in a slap shot 1:20 into the second period. The Panthers tied it when Eric Beaudoin crashed the net on a rebound and stunned Snow by guiding it in as he streaked toward the goal line.
Less than two minutes later, the Panthers struck again. But for a change, a lead on the Islanders did not last. It was a positive end to a so-so January.
''We have to have the mentality of looking forward,'' Jonsson said.
HOCKEY
