Elvin Hayes always felt as if he were playing the wrong sport. He liked basketball, worked hard at it and became one of the greatest power forwards. But his dream was always to play baseball.
Hayes never got the chance while growing up in Rayville, La. (population 4,234), largely because his family could not afford shoes.
''When I was in elementary school, I went out for Little League but I didn't own any shoes,'' he said recently. ''I didn't own shoes from first grade to ninth grade. I went barefoot in the winter and the summer. Whenever I had to go someplace, I would borrow shoes from a cousin. When I first started playing basketball, I wore two left-footed tennis shoes I pulled out of the trash and taped to my feet.''
When Hayes, now 58, reached Eula D. Britton High School and everyone realized he was gifted at basketball, all he could think about was parlaying that skill into an opportunity to play baseball.
''I just wanted a uniform,'' he said, noting that Lou Brock, Vida Blue and J. R. Richard grew up near him. ''The basketball coach was also the baseball coach, so I thought for sure I was going to play then. But when I showed up and said, 'I'm going out for the team,' Coach said, 'Get out of here.' He never let me play.''
But he let him play basketball, and the 6-foot-9 Hayes became a dominant player at the University of Houston and in the N.B.A. Arguably the top power forward to play in the N.B.A., Hayes used an unstoppable turnaround jumper and tenacious rebounding to lead Washington to three finals appearances and an N.B.A. title in 1978. He was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1990.
But after retiring from the Rockets in 1984, Hayes never thought about staying in basketball. He became involved in a car dealership, and he now owns Liberty-Dayton G.M. Autoworld outside Houston.
Basketball is not even a tiny part of Hayes's life. He does not watch games, he cannot name any of Washington's current players except for Jerry Stackhouse, and he said he knows of Houston's Steve Francis only because they use the same bank.
''I never wanted to work in sports,'' said Hayes, who married his college sweetheart, Erna, and has four children. ''There were other things that I wanted to do.''
He added: ''Basketball gave me freedom, which is something I never dreamed I would have. But basketball is not a part of my life anymore. My life is business now.'' When not working, Hayes mainly does three things: he wakes up at 4 a.m. to jog six miles, takes cruises as often as possible and follows his athletic passion, baseball.
''I don't have season tickets, but I go to some Astros games,'' he said. ''That's something I love. If I'm going to put any energy into a sport, it's going to be baseball.''
Then and Now
