It has been three days since Senator Joseph I. Lieberman called his fifth-place finish in New Hampshire a ''three-way split decision for third'' and a mandate to continue his bid for the White House.
But everywhere he goes, even as he talks up his proposals to make the country safer in the world and safer at home, as he likes to say, the question hovers: why is he still in the race?
Outside an Oklahoma drugstore, Maxine Coleman, who described herself as ''retired, housewife, old,'' asked him if he would survive the next week. She said later that she meant physically, not politically, but then added, ''But I think he's so far down on the list, I suppose that would be appropriate also.''
Harry Finney, president of the Golden Age bowling league, said at Bowlerama here on Friday that he liked Mr. Lieberman but added, ''He's going to have a tough road.''
At Spence's Bazaar, an Amish market in Dover, Mr. Lieberman told Wallace Wootten that he was the Democrat who could win the election. Mr. Wootten, who plans to vote for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, looked across the table and said: ''I don't know, Joe. Tough job.''
And as Mr. Lieberman greeted patrons in a half-empty diner, a trio of FedEx workers stood outside wondering how had he done in New Hampshire, and what he was doing here anyway. For Mr. Lieberman and some of his advisers, the answer is simple: voters in 48 states, some more heavily populated by moderate and conservative Democrats, have not yet had their say.
''I always said that Feb. 3 would be a more important day for me and so that's why I go forward with a sense of purpose and optimism and clearly as a different kind of Democrat in the race,'' Mr. Lieberman said in an interview. ''And there's a lot more moderate Democrats in places like Oklahoma than in Iowa and New Hampshire.''
Still, Mr. Lieberman, in what might be called an exercise in fuzzy math, has been laboring to spin his showing, last among the major candidates, as better than expected.
''Obviously, I wish that we had all tied exactly for third and I do think there is something to the fact that the margins separating Clark and Edwards and me was 3,'' said Mr. Lieberman, who won 9 percent of the vote, ''compared to the margin separating Kerry and Dean which was 16 or 17 percent, so to me, if you accept the logic that there were two kinds of contests going there, the one between Clark and Edwards and me was not settled. And in an absolute sense I did better than a lot of people thought.''
And so Mr. Lieberman continues to travel around the country, pressing forward with his campaign. With a press corps of just seven in tow, he has climbed aboard a small private jet and skittered to the West, the South and the Middle Atlantic. He has roamed the near-empty aisles of a drugstore in Oklahoma, and shaken hands with bowlers in Delaware. For days he has brought his message of experience and moderation to small bands of voters with characteristic optimism, even if he has lacked his characteristic gusto.
In recent days, as his battered candidacy has become the butt of late-night jokes and internal doubts and dissension, Mr. Lieberman has been calling his campaign a cause and urging people to ''rise up'' and ''be bold'' and pick their own candidate rather than be ''steamrolled by the media'' into following the choices of Iowa and New Hampshire.
He is not alone in his thinking. He recently won the endorsement of The Arizona Republic, the statewide newspaper, and there have been warm receptions and words of support from voters along the way. On Tuesday, he even got some encouragement from former President Bill Clinton, who told a Lieberman associate to keep in mind that he had not secured the nomination until June.
Senator Thomas R. Carper of Delaware, who is campaigning for him, also said that he had encouraged Mr. Lieberman to continue. On Tuesday, responding to Mr. Lieberman's request for advice, Mr. Carper said, he told him, ''Get on that plane and get down here and head for Oklahoma.''
Still, there are signs that Mr. Lieberman may be losing confidence. He no longer talks about winning some states on Feb. 3, saying only that he needs to ''show strength.'' Aides plan to hold his primary night event in Arlington, Va., close to his headquarters, an indication of the uncertain nature of the campaign.
Asked if he thought he could continue without winning a state, Mr. Lieberman said: ''Well, I'd like to win a state on Feb 3. I intend to win a state on Feb 3. And we'll see.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONNECTICUT SENATOR
