Q: In her will, Joan Kroc, the heir to the McDonald's fortune, left more than $1.5 billion to the Salvation Army, which I believe is the largest gift ever made to one organization in the history of philanthropy.
We were overwhelmingly surprised. I had met Joan Kroc a few years before she died at a reception at her home in San Diego. She was a charming woman who was gracious and down to earth and very warm.
What did she admire about the Salvation Army?
She saw that we are a faith-based organization. We are a Christian organization. The motivation for what we do is a spiritual motivation.
And what are you planning to do with the money?
We will build new community centers in four regions of the United States.
That could be a tremendous boon at a time when the federal government has made so many cuts in aid to the poor and the homeless.
Well, the community centers that will be built as a result of Joan Kroc will not do social services like feeding or housing. Rather, they are for educational and recreational activities, for character building. We provide activities that relate to the holistic person -- body, mind, soul and spirit.
Isn't it pretty hard to think about the salvation of your soul if you are starving?
What we could do, for example, we could be teaching low-income families good nutrition, like food preparation and how to sit down as a family and enjoy the fellowship of just being able to sit together.
But many poor people don't have intact families.
We become their family.
The oddity is that McDonald's maybe has done more to erode family togetherness than any other company in history. So many Americans eat dinner in their cars instead of at the kitchen table.
Well, McDonald's is convenient. I don't frequent McDonald's very much now, but I do stop there once in a while and get a bacon, egg and cheese biscuit and a cup of coffee in the morning.
How did you become head of the Salvation Army?
I am 64. I have been with the organization for 40 years. My parents were Salvation Army officers, and my wife, Carol, is an officer as well. That's the expectation of the Salvation Army. That way, a husband and a wife don't have the pull and dichotomy that come from separate vocations.
Would you care to disclose your salary?
My wife and I are paid about $500 a week for the two of us. That comes out to about $28,000 a year.
Do you feel poor?
Not at all. The Salvation Army also provides our house and a car. My wife and I are very happy.
What, in your estimation, does it take to have a good marriage?
It takes respect and friendship. From the time we were married, we have always shared the responsibilities of the home. I iron all of my own shirts.
Does the Salvation Army have any rules about sexual conduct between consenting adults?
We believe if you are single, you are called to be celibate.
And if you are married?
They expect that you would function as a normal married couple.
What is the biggest sin you ever committed?
When I was a teenager, I was tempted, and I experimented. I had cigarettes and cigars.
Your distrust of sensual experience seems pretty out of touch with contemporary America.
It's too easy to succumb to self-indulgence, and we must try to resist it! We live in a society today where people think that if they want something, they should have it. A personal relationship with a God of grace and mercy can give them the strength they need to live appropriately.
Deborah Solomon
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-1-04: QUESTIONS FOR W. TODD BASSETT
