In North Jersey, where Yogi Berra still lives, it must seem like déjà vu all over again. Suddenly, Democrats in Jim McGreevey's administration are sounding a lot like the Republicans under that distant and haughty horse country Republican, Christie Whitman.
Here's George Zoffinger, president and chief executive of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority -- in the wake of the sale of the Nets to Brooklyn-bound developers -- talking about repackaging the team's home at the Continental arena as a venue for family events and concerts. He emphasizes that the departure of the Nets, and eventually the Devils, will make way for profitable events and rid the state of two money-losing leases.
About 12 miles down the road, Newark officials, despite of the loss of the Nets, are clinging to the hope of building an arena for the Devils.
Officials here are scratching their heads at Mr. Zoffinger's words because both he and they know that two nearby arenas competing for the same nonsporting events could never survive. For this reason, Governor McGreevey, in supporting a Newark arena, had made his backing contingent on providing the Meadowlands with a new money maker before agreeing to demolish that arena.
The city is flush with about $200 million from its leasing of Newark Liberty International Airport to help finance its proposed arena. That and the promise of a marquee tenant in the form of the Devils should amount to more than enough rationale for the McGreevey administration to raze the Continental arena.
''The concept of having a one-team arena makes it very hard to do,'' Mr. Zoffinger said, echoing the Whitman administration about five years ago when it refused to back a Newark arena that Nets owners wanted help to build. Then -- as now with Mr. Zoffinger -- Whitman officials complained about how much money the state was losing on the Devils and Nets and waxed opportunistic at the thought of the profits without them.
''No, Newark is not asking the state to spend any money for them and their arena,'' said Mr. Zoffinger. ''But they are asking us to walk away from a positive cash flow at the Bergen arena.''
With those words there were much more than hints of serious trouble brewing between Mayor Sharpe James and Governor McGreevey. After six years of travail -- through three administrations -- Mayor James thought that with a Democrat in Trenton, his problems were solved. But it seems that that journey may have been a circular one.
Several politicians in Newark fault Mr. McGreevey for ''hubris'' in the declining fortunes of the city's proposed arena. As governor-elect, Mr. McGreevey had in Donald DiFrancesco a governor who wanted to secure a legacy from his brief term as Mrs. Whitman's successor and willing to give the green light to an arena in Newark. But Mr. McGreevey waved him off, saying that he wanted to finalize the deal that he had long criticized Mrs. Whitman for thwarting.
But it might now be occurring to some in Newark that it was less pride than cold political calculation, or what Rick Thigpen, a former state Democratic official, said could be seen as sacrificing the city's interest for suburban political gain. After all, Mr. Thigpen said, several polls have long shown that white suburbanites, in addition to opposing financial assistance for sports arenas, also frequently say they will not travel to predominantly black Newark for sporting events. One Newark City Council member called this the ''pink elephant in the middle of the room that no one talks about.''.
To be sure, Mr. Zoffinger suggests no such political or racial factors surrounding his -- and presumably the governor's -- preference for a retooled and repositioned ''Bergen arena'' over a Newark arena. It is, he said, simply a ''business decision.''
''Newark has the right to spend money any way it wants to,'' Mr. Zoffinger said. ''But I don't think it is fair for the state to ask people in Bergen, Passaic and Hudson to give up the convenience of coming to the Bergen arena for the sake of Newark. Plus, we still don't see where the teams are willing to contribute money to the arena in Newark.''
So far, Governor McGreevey has avoided speaking publicly on the issue, leaving Mr. Zoffinger to float the state's rationale. Mayor James, a canny veteran of political infighting, has also avoided any comment except to insist, as he did in his recent State of the City message, that there ''will'' be an arena in the city.
But there are whispers that the mayor is so angry that he might run for governor as an independent.
As Yogi might say, ''It ain't over till its over.
ON POLITICS Ronald Smothers reports from Newark for The New York Times.
