ELEANOR LAMBERT, the legendary fashion publicist, who put Halston and Calvin Klein on the international fashion map, was known for her uncanny prescience. But when Ms. Lambert, who died at 100 last October, insisted that Lexington Avenue above 60th Street was gathering steam as a fashion destination, it was tempting to think she was joking.
At the time, just over a year ago, that artery on the Upper East Side of Manhattan was steeping in a soupy torpor. Flanked by streets of 19th-century brownstones and lined with four- and five-story walkups, it languished as a resolutely old-fashioned commercial strip, its greengrocers, antiques shops, bespoke tailors and camphor-scented chemists frequented by locals but no one else.
A winter stroll up that thoroughfare suggested, however, that Ms. Lambert might have been on the mark again. In the last months, Lexington Avenue has emerged as an increasingly lively, if still somewhat musty, alternative to Madison Avenue and its high-priced corporate-run emporiums. In the last year alone, more than a half-dozen gem-size boutiques have sprung up between 68th and 76th Streets, in the area known as Lenox Hill. Slow-paced and starchily conservative compared with Madison Avenue, two blocks to the west, that stretch, some say, is the anti-Madison -- its intimate scale, inelegant signs and patent indifference to glamour forming the bedrock of its charm.
''To us, Lexington is the most appealing of all the avenues,'' said Camilla Bradley, the owner of CK Bradley at the corner of Lexington and 74th Street, a boutique painted pink and green and stocked with the totems of preppydom: grosgrain belts in candy-color stripes, handbags patterned in toile de jouy designs, skirts embroidered with pompoms and fitted shirts in pink or navy gingham checks ($75).
Ms. Bradley, who moved to the neighborhood last September, chose it after long deliberation. ''I wanted a store off the beaten path,'' she said, ''on a street with the feeling of small boutiques that were individual and original.'' Lexington's stately pace commended it, she said, but the clincher was ''there are no chains.''
The street is, for the most part, inhospitable to chains, since the newest of its shops -- stores like Peiper &amp; Kojen, a jeweler; Che Che New York, an outpost for hand-embellished bags and accessories; and Jackie Rogers, a boutique for custom and ready-made fashions -- rarely measure more than 500 square feet, barely room to house a pair of racks. To some, however, their postcard proportions are part of their quaint allure.
''Lexington has the Old World flavor that Madison Avenue used to have in the early 1970's, before the European retail boom,'' said Ronald Solomon, a real estate broker, who has leased commercial space in the neighborhood for 40 years. ''The attraction is obvious. It's a matter of economics. Most of the independent retailers can't afford to be on Madison, where they used to be. Lexington gives off the same cachet for less.''
Indeed, the retailers drawn to Lexington Avenue seem to be put off by Madison Avenue's high rents and hauteur. ''Lexington has become very boutique-oriented,'' said Laura Pomerantz, a partner in PBS Realty Advisors. ''As the greengrocers and drugstores move out of the area between 68th and 77th Streets, more and more small fashion and home-furnishings stores are moving in.''
Lexington Avenue has long been home to neighborhood institutions like the Butterfield Market. Other stalwarts include Paul Molé, a barbershop known for its shaves, and Lexington Avenue Bar and Books. Until four years ago, Gloria Vanderbilt could be spied on weekend afternoons tucking into a frugal lunch at Mortimer's.
Today, some of the newer institutions like the restaurants Orsay and Swifty's (where the former Mortimer's crowd congregates) and Payard Pâtisserie, the amber-lighted, Belle Époque-style bistro and bakery, are contributing to Lexington Avenue's draw.
Patrons crowding Ms. Rogers's gallery-style boutique near 73rd Street last Wednesday included Pia Lindstrom, a film and theater critic, and Maria Cooper Janis, who is married to Byron Janis, the concert pianist. Against a backdrop of black-and-white pictures showing Ms. Rogers in her early-60's heyday as a Chanel mannequin, the women tried on identical versions of the designer's signature tie-front blouse in pink organza ($795). Then, as Miss Lilly, Ms. Rogers's dachshund yelped in the background, Ms. Lindstrom ignored ostrich feather chubbies ($1,250), zeroing in instead on a gabardine suit the color of crème fraîche.
At Cantaloup, a year-old addition to Lexington Avenue's budding fashion scene, the scene was funkier and more democratic. The shop, which opened a year ago, is the neighborhood's first purveyor of aggressive, youth-oriented hip. Best sellers include La Cosa racer-back tank tops ($43) in shades of coral, camel and pistachio and an extensive selection of jeans with labels like True Religion, Blue Cult and Ingwa Melero.
''We are trying to bring the whole downtown feeling uptown,'' said Liz Friedrich, who works at Cantaloup. ''There still is some room for that here.''
