THE other day I received a letter from Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, the state's dominant health insurance company. Actually, I received two identical letters, both sent to me at my office address. The second one may have been for emphasis.
The letters said that the contract between Hackensack University Health System and Horizon had ended and that Horizon members might no longer be able to get care at Hackensack Hospital after April 30. They said that Horizon had only the interests of its members in mind and that it was trying its best to control health-care costs.
These letters were similar, but not identical, to letters I received from Horizon four months ago. Those letters said that the St. Barnabas Health Care System was not being cooperative with Horizon's attempts to control health-care costs for members under a new contract.
Both Hackensack and Horizon bought full-page advertisements that were published in the New Jersey Section on Jan. 4. Horizon said it was ''negotiating in good faith'' but that Hackensack had responded by ''walking away and launching a public relations campaign to mislead patients into thinking that their immediate health needs are at risk.'' The Horizon ad also assured its members in the event that the dispute was not solved they would have access to other ''outstanding hospitals in New York City and across New Jersey'' and that ''most doctors have admitting privileges at multiple hospitals, so disruption would be minimal.''
Similarly, in South Jersey, Cooper University Hospital bought a full-page ad in The Philadelphia Inquirer on Jan. 12, saying that Horizon had failed to negotiate with the hospital in good faith on a new contract. The ad said that ''Horizon's actions jeopardize access to quality health care for thousands of South Jersey families, employees and underinsured patients who rely on Cooper for quality care.''
Over the last five years, The Associated Press reported recently, several other hospitals have threatened to end their relationship with Horizon, only to settle eventually. St. Barnabas and Horizon managed to settle their differences well before Horizon actually told its members that they would have to go to other hospitals, and I suspect that Horizon will surrender enough of its profits to allow patients to continue to go to Hackensack after April 30.
But what is really going on? State legislators, for their part, have said they want to investigate the issues underlying the contract disputes.
Horizon, a commercial managed care organization, is quite profitable.
As a physician practicing in New Jersey for more than 30 years, I find many of the company's recent statements and policies duplicitous and misleading. Two years ago, Horizon notified physicians participating in its plan that there would be ''an adjustment of payments.'' With no further explanations, it ''adjusted'' its payments for office care downward by more than 30 percent, discoverable only when payment was eventually made. As Hackensack Medical Center noted in its recent advertisement, ''Horizon's low reimbursement rates have forced many -- if not most -- of our physicians to terminate their contracts with the insurer, long before the hospital reached the same decision.''
As a part-time Veterans Affairs physician, eligible for federal health benefits, I terminated my personal medical-insurance coverage with Blue Shield and switched to a better plan. Many New Jersey teachers and state employees do not have the option to select their plans and their coverage has suffered.
In addition, Horizon seems reluctant to acknowledge the physician drop-outs. In its current book of network providers, my subspecialty, rheumatology, lists 19 participants in Essex County. At least seven of the 19 physicians dropped out of the plan up to two years ago, and one moved to another part of the state last summer. A neurologist who is a friend of mine retired four years ago and is still listed. Also listed is an ophthalmologist in my building who died two years ago. When I called Horizon to question the list, I was told: ''I have the same book you do. Call the doctor's office and ask.'' An administrator told me that Horizon removes names only if the physicians ask to be removed. She was annoyed when I asked if the company expected the dead ones to call.
New Jersey has many other managed-care networks. Initially, managed care made large profits by decreasing payments to doctors and hospitals. Pharmaceutical costs continued to soar despite drug formularies. Hospitals like St. Barnabas have formed statewide hospital networks that are less intimidated by predictable managed-care threats. Bargaining power of physicians is limited by antitrust concerns, but physician drop-outs increase patient dissatisfaction.
Nevertheless, none of the other managed care networks seem quite so willing as Horizon, despite generous profits, to spend their members' health care funds in advertisements boasting of their attempts to control health care costs.
SOAPBOX Dr. Lonnie B. Hanauer has his practice in Millburn.
