THIS tax season, consumers can choose another way to receive their refunds: on plastic.
Instead of waiting for refund checks to arrive, taxpayers can have their refunds loaded onto ''stored value,'' or prepaid, cards. Some tax preparation services are offering the cards to their customers, and some workers who already receive their wages on prepaid cards may be able to have their refunds deposited on them, too.
Jackson Hewitt, the second-largest tax preparation service, is offering refund cards at its 4,500 offices, while H&amp;R Block, the largest tax preparer, is testing them in three cities: Washington, El Paso and Fresno, Calif. Some banks may soon promote similar cards, all of which have the Visa or MasterCard logos and can be used anywhere those brands are accepted.
The cards are aimed at the roughly 25 million workers without bank accounts, including many teenagers and low-income or part-time employees. Because these consumers often have poor or insufficient credit histories, they may have trouble getting traditional credit cards.
''These are the people who have been cut out of the traditional financial institutions,'' said Craig Marshall, president of UniRush Financial Services, a joint venture of the Unifund Corporation and Rush Communications. The company is working with Jackson Hewitt on its card program but also promotes prepaid cards for other uses.
In one way, such cards are electronic versions of the check-cashing services used by millions of people without checking accounts. The card issuers make their money through an upfront fee and, in some cases, a fee for each transaction.
Prepaid cards offer some advantages for people without checking accounts. The cards can be replaced if lost or stolen, and can be used to shop online or to pay bills.
But consumer groups say the cards' fees can add up quickly. Jean Ann Fox, director of consumer protection for the Consumer Federation of America, said that bank accounts remained consumers' least expensive and most secure option. ''That way, you get all of your refund without so many fees,'' she said, ''and you're protected under the banking regulations.''
Prepaid cards already have a variety of uses. Merchants use them as gift cards, or electronic gift certificates. And more and more companies, including McDonald's, Sears and FedEx, are using prepaid cards to pay some of their workers, while a few employers are turning to them to give their workers easier access to flexible-spending accounts. Some states are even using the cards to disburse child-support payments or unemployment benefits.
Tonie Williams, 34, an accountant in New Orleans, filed her tax return two weeks ago but had been unsure about how she would cash her refund check. Ms. Williams, who is recently divorced, said that she closed her credit cards and checking account late last year to get a better handle on her finances, but that she disliked the idea of cashing and carrying around her $3,100 refund.
The amount ''is a lot of money when you don't have a checking or savings account to put it in,'' she said. ''At the same time,'' she added, ''you want the option to use it, and not have to worry about it being stolen.''
Ms. Williams decided to have her refund sent to a prepaid Visa card that she received from UniRush. She has used her card to buy plane tickets and reserve a hotel room, and now has the value of her paycheck added to the card through an electronic transfer, using the card's routing number. ''In more ways than one, it's already served as a bank for me,'' she said.
Mr. Marshall of UniRush says that more than 100 customers have arranged to receive refunds on their cards in the last two weeks. The company's typical customer, he said, is 28 years old, earns $30,000 or less a year, and does not have a checking account.
The tax refund cards can cost such consumers less than traditional check-cashing services, especially if they receive big refunds. Although rules vary by state, check-cashing services, on average, deduct 3 percent from the total amount of a check. The UniRush card, meanwhile, charges a $19.95 activation fee and $1 for each purchase on the card. There is no fee for direct deposit of wages to the cards.
H&amp;R Block charges a $25 initiation fee once a tax refund is received, but there is no fee for purchases or for two cash withdrawals a month from a Bank of America A.T.M. Further withdrawals cost $1.50 each, on top of any fees charged by an A.T.M. H&amp;R Block plans to charge a monthly service fee of $2.50 after the first four months, although it may waive that fee if the card is loaded with enough money; the amount has not been determined.
Many prepaid cards have routing numbers, just as checking accounts do. To send a payment to the card, a cardholder just provides the routing number. To the government or to an employer, making a direct deposit to the card is often indistinguishable from an electronic transfer to a checking account. As a result, many prepaid cards are already coded to receive tax refunds.
Visa says several banks that already issue prepaid cards are considering promoting them for accepting tax refunds.
''It is a big opportunity because the card really is designed to provide a lot of benefits to the consumer as well as to the tax preparation company and the I.R.S.,'' said Nizam Antoo, a product director in Visa's prepaid product group. Consulting firms have estimated that it costs companies and the government $1 to $2 to issue a check, versus less than 40 cents for an electronic transfer.
