IT was late, and spirits were starting to sag. Even the hard-core members, with their careful folders and ''No Blood for Oil'' buttons, were glancing at their watches.
Deborah Jacobs, the intense young executive director of the state affiliate of the American Civil Liberties Union, thought it was time to rally the gathering. She leaned across the table in the Princeton University conference room. Does everyone remember, she asked, when Attorney General John Ashcroft set out on his national speaking tour to respond to challenges to the USA Patriot Act?
''That told me we were really getting somewhere,'' she told the group of six.
Her words helped. There were nods all around as the thought of Mr. Ashcroft on the defensive, scrambling to respond to local protests, seemed to perk everyone up.
For four years, Ms. Jacobs, 36, has led the charge for civil libertarians in New Jersey. Since she took over as executive director in September 1999, membership in the New Jersey affiliate has nearly doubled, increasing to more than 11,000 from 6,500, and its lawyers have argued some of the most important Constitutional cases in the country, from the detention of immigrants to the classification of sex offenders. Moreover, intense fund-raising has increased the annual budget to $750,000 from $339,000, allowing the hiring of a larger staff and more lawsuits defending civil liberties.
''Deborah has been astounding,'' said William Buckman, vice president of the state A.C.L.U. board and the lawyer who exposed the state police practice of racial profiling by challenging certain arrests on the New Jersey Turnpike.
The changes have translated into more legal firepower, said Ronald J. Fleury, editor in chief of The New Jersey Law Journal. Like nearly all A.C.L.U. affiliates, this one relies on lawyers who agree to work without fee, or pro bono, to handle most of its important cases.
''The amount of mention the A.C.L.U. receives in our pages has visibly increased,'' said Mr. Fleury, who has been editor in chief of the law journal for 12 years. ''I have noticed a change in participation in that more firms see the value of getting involved in pro bono cases, and especially pro bono cases that are accorded the limelight that A.C.L.U. cases tend to draw.''
Part of the increase can be attributed, of course, to the Patriot Act, which was enacted shortly after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, and has drawn a host of critics who say its expansion of government surveillance powers violates constitutional free-speech and privacy rights. Actions like the government's detention of immigrants and speech restrictions on protest groups have led to legal challenges nationally, as well as in New Jersey.
Last week, a federal judge in Los Angeles struck down a provision of the law that bans certain types of support for terrorist groups, saying it was so vague that it risked running afoul of the First Amendment. But the Justice Department said in a report last week that it had found no abuse of civil rights or civil liberties as a result of the law. Still, the challenges will continue.
''We are still doing a lot of very important work that stems from 9/11,'' said Ronald K. Chen, the assistant dean of Rutgers University Law School, who often represents the state A.C.L.U. in high-profile cases. ''In a strange way it has provided a focus for the A.C.L.U.''
Still, senior members of the New Jersey affiliate say that its resurgence began before the changes in national policy.
''Frankly, I think they were an aging organization and were desperately in need of an infusion of new blood,'' said Anne McHugh, a private lawyer in Princeton who works on A.C.L.U. cases in New Jersey. ''I think that has occurred on both the national scene and in New Jersey.''
Ms. Jacobs likes to say that her ''passion for civil liberties came before college.''
In fact, it began quite some years before. As a young girl in Ellensburg, Wash., she refused to stand for the Pledge of Allegiance. She says it was in support of a friend who as a Jehovah's Witness had refused to do so on religious grounds. After a brief banishment to the principal's office, the young Ms. Jacobs went to the library, where the school librarian helped her look up the law.
''The law said students must stay, not stand, at a respectful silence,'' she said. The requirement that students stand had recently been changed because of a lawsuit filed by the A.C.L.U.
''That was in the second grade,'' Ms. Jacobs recalled. ''By the time I graduated from the fifth grade, I think they were glad to see me go.''
Armed with a master's degree in liberal studies from Skidmore College, Ms. Jacobs started as a junior staff member in the Seattle office of the A.C.L.U. in 1992. Four years later, she became the organization's youngest executive director when she took over the eastern Missouri affiliate at the age of 27.
''I had no experience doing the job of an executive director,'' said Ms. Jacobs, who tends to ask direct questions and then argue about the answers. ''I did not know how to write a budget, I did not know how to talk to the press.''
Around the same time, board members at the A.C.L.U. affiliate in New Jersey were concluding that their group needed new leadership. Although there had been no complaints about the performance of the director, Ed Martone, some members said they thought the group had not grown quickly enough.
''We had to revitalize the program,'' Mr. Buckman, the vice president of the board, said.
Mr. Martone, who is now education director for the New Jersey Association on Correction, a nonprofit prisoner-advocacy group, shows little evidence of sour grapes, even though he said he was not consulted about the board's concerns until the decision to find a new director had been made.
''I think they felt they were on a plateau and if they were going to get beyond it, they had to get a new staff,'' said Mr. Martone, who had been the affiliate's director for 15 years. ''No hard feelings, I was told, but we want to go in a new direction.''
When Mr. Martone left in early 1990, the group had an annual budget of about $300,000. ''There was a surplus of over $70,000, which at the time was the largest surplus they ever had,'' he said.
After a period with a interim director, the board hired Ms. Jacobs away from Missouri. She left her rather elegant headquarters in a brick house in St. Louis and moved to cramped quarters in an office building in downtown Newark. She said she immediately liked the new atmosphere.
''The pace is much faster here,'' she said. ''Newark is a tougher, dirtier city.'' She also lives in Newark, in a town house.
Luck seemed to follow her. The budget received a rapid infusion as lawyers for the group collected more than $100,000 in outstanding legal fees. Then, in 2001, the group received a windfall in the form of a $4.4 million bequest in the will of Herbert Tonne, a retired educator. As far as anyone knows, Mr. Tonne had never been a member of the affiliate. And little is known about the source of his wealth. His lawyer, Raymond J. Falcon Jr., said he was not sure why Mr. Tonne left it to the civil liberties group.
Ms. Jacobs used part of the money to expand the affiliate staff and beef up its fund-raising operations. She hired someone to reach out more to immigrants and a lobbyist to work the State House in Trenton. She also emphasized the importance of fund-raising to the board.
''You have got to move the board to understand that fund-raising is their role,'' she said.
The changes paid off. The group raised $97,000 in 1999, the year she took over. Last year, it raised more than $210,000.
At the same time, the legal visibility of the New Jersey affiliate increased. Lawyers from the affiliate challenged detention hearings for immigrants and supported the news media's unsuccessful attempts to learn the names of detainees.
A lawsuit by the group that is pending in state Superior Court in Union County seeks to overturn a law that denies people on probation and parole the right to vote. And the group is working on a challenge to the state's policy of committing some sex offenders to psychiatric institutions after they complete prison time.
''The fundamental issues are the same, but a number of cases arose after the response to Sept. 11,'' said Edward Barocas, legal director of the affiliate. ''People are very concerned that with the additional powers that have been granted to the executive branch, we never forget the need to protect our individual rights.''
A larger and more aggressive A.C.L.U. affiliate, of course, is not everyone's idea of a good thing. Over the years, the group's support for abortion rights and gay marriage has stirred the opposition of a number of conservative organizations.
''They have fought against efforts to ban partial birth abortion, they have fought efforts to have parental notification when a minor child has an abortion,'' said Marie Tasy, public and legislative affairs director for New Jersey Right to Life. ''Clearly, in these issues, they are not in synch with the public majority.''
Ms. Tasy said the group can be a powerful force -- but don't take that as praise.
''Unfortunately, they are not working for the good of society,'' Ms. Tasy said. ''The positions they take are in no way substantiated in the Constitution.''
Len Deo, president of the New Jersey Family Policy Council, says the A.C.L.U. has strayed from its original mission of protecting Constitutional rights and now promotes its own social agenda.
''Basically, the A.C.L.U.'s agenda is out of touch with mainstream America,'' he said. It is, he added, ''no longer there to protect Constitutional rights but is there to create special rights.''
Mr. Chen, the Rutgers professor who has argued some of the most disputed A.C.L.U. cases, says being unpopular sometimes comes with the territory. He said he received the most negative feedback for his role in challenging aspects of the New Jersey law that requires sex offenders to register with the local authorities after release from prison.
''Anyone associated with the A.C.L.U. feels they serve a vital role,'' Mr. Chen said. ''You have to protect Constitutional rights. If the A.C.L.U. is not going to do it, then who is?''
In fact, the affiliate often sides with groups that have opposed it in other ways. Kevin J. Hasson, president of the Becket Fund, a religious rights group, said the A.C.L.U. has fought his organization over cases involving public display of religious symbols but has helped stick up for people who say they are discriminated against on religious grounds, like Muslim police officers who sued for the right to wear beards.
''I guess it is neither a good thing nor a bad thing in itself that they have more money,'' Mr. Hasson said with a laugh. ''I just wish they had more consistent judgment.''
Herbert J. Stern, a former United States attorney and federal judge in New Jersey, said people in law enforcement are often frustrated by the A.C.L.U.'s positions.
But the national A.C.L.U. ''has had an enormous impact on the growth and development of law and human rights'' and has made valuable contributions, he said.
''They certainly have been a worthy advocate without whom there would have been less freedom and a less civil society,'' he said.
Ms. Jacobs does not argue when people call her group unpopular. ''That is part of the job,'' she said. But she dismisses assertions that it is out of touch with mainstream America.
''Believing in civil liberties is mainstream, it is a fundamental part of democracy,'' she said. ''What could be more American than freedom?''
