OH say can you see a World Series flag atop Larry Lucchino's house in the Boston suburb of Brookline? No, but Lucchino is eager to see a Super Bowl flag nearby.
''I can see Bob Kraft's house from my window,'' Lucchino said. ''I'm looking forward to him putting up a Super Bowl flag.''
Lucchino, president and chief operating officer of the Boston Red Sox, will be an envious but supportive viewer of today's championship game between the New England Patriots, Kraft's team, and the Carolina Panthers. There but for five outs and maybe a pitching change could have been the Red Sox last October. In the World Series, that is.
''I've got the zeal of a convert when it comes to the Patriots,'' Lucchino said, shrugging off the Red Sox disappointment. ''I'm very supportive. Robert Kraft has been a great friend and neighbor. They've been great to us. John Henry and Tom Werner have a great relationship with the whole Kraft family.''
Henry, the principal owner, and Werner, the chairman, are the other members of the Red Sox ruling triumvirate.
Having been pummeled during their two years of Red Sox ownership about jinxes and curses, the owners believed they were on the brink the night of Oct. 16.
Their team led the Yankees, 5-2, with one out in the Yankees' half of the eighth inning in Game 7 of the American League Championship Series. In five outs and two days, the Red Sox would be playing the Florida Marlins, Henry's former team, in the World Series.
But then a fading Pedro Martínez faltered, and when Aaron Boone led off the 11th inning with a home run against Tim Wakefield, it was the Yankees who had a date with the Marlins. The Red Sox, as usual, were going home with nothing but the taste of ashes in their mouths.
''I was sort of braced,'' Lucchino said, recalling the game. ''I went to the park that day braced for triumph or disaster, as Rudyard Kipling wrote. If you could treat triumph and disaster just the same, I was prepared for it either way. It was a few days later when I stopped trying to put up a stiff upper lip that it hit me more severely.''
Not that it was any consolation, Lucchino added, but the Red Sox helped make baseball's postseason one of the most exciting and intriguing in years.
''It was a great postseason for baseball,'' he said. ''We touched some nerves and awakened some feelings across the country, the Cubs and the Red Sox. Getting to the dance and having that kind of drama, life doesn't have enough poetry in it.''
The Red Sox' experience vis-à-vis the World Series has been anything but poetic unless there's some poetic justice that deservedly works against them. Since they beat the Cubs in the 1918 Series, the Red Sox have played in the Series four times and each time have lost in seven games, to St. Louis in 1946 and 1967, to Cincinnati in 1975 and, most agonizingly, to the Mets in 1986.
The Patriots have played in the Super Bowl three times before this year, losing the first two games before beating St. Louis two years ago on the last play of the game.
What kind of pressure might that put on the Red Sox?
''It's tough to have a dynasty in New England,'' Lucchino said. ''We're not used to it.''
Whatever happens, Lucchino said, the Red Sox would not resent the success of the football team.
''People here are Red Sox fans and Patriots fans,'' he said. ''They're getting a great thrill out of football just as they did in baseball last season.''
Feeling Super in Houston
This wouldn't be the first time, but the Houston Astros have put themselves in position to have the World Series and the Super Bowl played in the same city in the same year. Their surprising acquisitions of Andy Pettitte and Roger Clemens could fuel that development.
''It's been a pretty amazing winter for us,'' said Gerry Hunsicker, the Astros' general manager. ''We usually don't get involved in stuff like that. I thought I was back in New York for a minute.''
Hunsicker, however, never had so much fun when he was the Mets' assistant general manager. In fact, the Astros' off-season seemed somewhat bleak when they traded their closer, Billy Wagner, to create payroll flexibility.
''I wasn't anticipating any major acquisitions,'' Hunsicker said. ''Then Pettitte became a free agent, and it was an obvious match in the sense that he lived here. We let him know we had genuine interest in acquiring him, but we thought there was little chance of that happening.''
Hunsicker knew that the Astros couldn't compete with the Yankees financially and that Pettitte was a career-long member of the Yankees' organization. ''It was a pipe dream,'' Hunsicker said.
When the Astros saw that the Yankees were not making Pettitte a top priority, they did.
''We came in aggressively and let him know how much we would benefit from him being here and I think the momentum shifted,'' Hunsicker said. ''We had also just re-signed Brad Ausmus, which came up in conversation with Andy, which was important. Then the family being able to live at home was important.''
The Astros signed Pettitte for three years and $31.5 million.
''While I don't think we cheated Andy, I don't think he got as much money as he could have got in other markets,'' Hunsicker said. ''We have to credit him and his agents for looking at other factors.''
Then came Clemens, who had said he was retiring.
''From the day we signed Pettitte, talk about Roger started,'' Hunsicker said. ''It became apparent how close these guys were. They're like brothers. I think that's the first time Roger started to seriously rethink the retirement issue. Andy became our chief recruit.''
And a successful recruit at that.
''The strange thing was,'' Hunsicker said, ''this was arguably the most historic acquisition in the history of the franchise, but in a sense it was the easiest because we had no competition.''
Gillick Is Not Interested
Pat Gillick has been general manager of three major league teams and has retired three times. Despite speculation to the contrary, the 66-year-old Gillick said he planned to stick to his latest retirement. He has a three-year contract as a consultant with the Seattle Mariners.
His name surfaced last week as a candidate for the Los Angeles general manager's job, now that the Dodgers have changed ownership.
''He discussed that possibility with me some time ago,'' Chuck Armstrong, the Mariners' president, said. ''I said if that should come about and he was interested, they should follow the commissioner's office protocol, ask for permission to do it, and we'd agree he could talk to them.''
Perhaps it's premature, but Armstrong said the Dodgers had not asked.
''I've been at it a long time,'' said Gillick, who was initially a general manager in the 1970's. ''Right now, I don't have any interest at all. A lot of times guys are consultants and they never hear from their clubs. In this situation, I'll be busy enough. I'm looking forward to it. I'm making real good money and I'm living in Toronto and working out of here.''
On Baseball
