IT is, by many measures, an unlikely time for a populist uprising. The economy is recovering, although job growth is lagging. Democratic voters are more upscale than they used to be. About half of American households own stock, and conservative strategists argue that this new ''investor class'' sees its fate as closely tied to corporate America, not at odds with it. This is not the America of William Jennings Bryan.
So why are the Democratic presidential candidates rousing the grass roots with populist appeals, vowing to defend average people from the special interests, the ''Benedict Arnold corporations'' shipping jobs overseas and a Bush administration in their thrall? And how would it work in a campaign against a president who is no slouch in aligning himself with common folk as a tax-cutting, regular guy who shares their values?
Already, the election is becoming a struggle over who wins and who loses in this economy, whose interests the Bush administration has at heart and how the broad middle class sees its future.
Populism is an enduring theme in the Democratic Party, rooted in the rebellion of small Western and Southern farmers facing economic upheaval in the 1890's, adapted over the years to the interests of wage earners, waxing and waning with the economy. It is a slippery concept, and the agenda has shifted with the times. Some Democrats dislike the word because of its past connections with radicalism and demagogy.Still, the language of economic populism is strikingly similar across a century. When he won the Democratic nomination in 1896, Bryan, quoting a contemporary, said the party could fight on the side of the ''idle holders of idle capital,'' or on the side of ''the struggling masses.''
Democrats on the campaign trail today still divide the nation into the privileged and everyone else, now usually described not as the masses, but as the middle class. Senator John Edwards caught fire in Iowa last month with his portrait of the ''two Americas.''
Democratic strategists say this broad message is particularly suited to this campaign. It allows candidates to speak to the economic anxiety of the middle class, which, despite the recovery, is still portrayed as ''living from paycheck to paycheck, having to borrow money, going into debt, having trouble paying their bills, and in many cases one medical emergency, one layoff, from going into bankruptcy,'' as Mr. Edwards argues.
Exit polling showed that in Iowa and New Hampshire the most important concerns among Democratic voters were the rising cost of medical care, the health of the economy and jobs.
The loss of jobs overseas will only loom larger as the Democratic contests move into the Southern and industrial Midwestern states this week.
This new populism also includes a critique of Mr. Bush as someone who is governing in the interests of big corporations, not average Americans. Even now, at the campaign's start, a recent New York Times/CBS News poll found that 58 percent of Americans said theylieved Mr. Bush was more interested in protecting large corporations than ordinary people. Kevin Phillips, a writer and critic of President Bush, argues: ''If you have the whole corporate, C.E.O. mentality, as Bush has had, on everything from tax policy to immigration, you're in trouble if the Democrats find their voice. And I think they are finding their voice.''
They are certainly getting cheers from Democratic primary voters, as they portray a Washington where big drug companies and health maintenance organizations control health policy, big oil companies shape energy policy, multimillionaires frame tax policy and Halliburton and other corporations close to the Bush administration shape the reconstruction of Iraq. Senator John Kerry has taken to warning ''the special interests who now call the White House their home: We're coming, you're going and don't let the door hit you on the way out!''
Gen. Wesley K. Clark argues, ''We need a leadership that puts the national interest above special interests.'' And Howard Dean has asserted, again and again, ''It's time to take our country back.''
Alluding to the case against special interests, Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster who advises the Kerry campaign, said, ''There's little doubt in my mind that this will be a part of the critique that any Democrat would make of George Bush.''
But there are dangers to this approach, many analysts say, including some analysts in the Democratic Party. Vice President Al Gore sounded similar themes four years ago, painting the choice as ''the people versus the powerful.'' But centrist Democrats -- notably those at the Democratic Leadership Council -- argued that the message was out of sync with the booming New Economy of the late Clinton era.
In general, economic populism can seem too negative in a country where, after all, ''most people think they have a chance to become wealthy, if they win the lottery or go on 'American Idol,''' said Michael Kazin, a Georgetown University historian and author of ''The Populist Persuasion.'' ''That's part of what it means to be American.''
For that reason, many Democrats say any populism must be positive, advancing ''the national interest, as embodied in the values and aspirations of the great American middle class, above special interest,'' as the Democratic Leadership Council put it last week, adding that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards met the test.
Ken Mehlman, head of the Bush re-election campaign, is already asserting that Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry are dividing the country, ''with yesterday's class warfare rhetoric of two Americas.'' And Grover Norquist, an influential conservative strategist, says he relishes the idea of a campaign against populist Democrats, looking forward to a simple message: ''We want you to get rich and the Democrats don't. They want to tax you as if you were rich already.''
Moreover, some Republicans suggest that the Democrats are not immune to the charge of coddling their own special interests -- like trial lawyers and unions.
Finally, Mr. Bush is quite skilled at playing the Republican version of populism. Harry C. Boyte, senior fellow at the Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs at the University of Minnesota, notes that there is a cultural populism with a strong Republican tradition -- a defense of the average American against ''the professional elites that look down their noses at ordinary people,'' particularly government elites.
Mr. Bush, in the 2000 campaign, argued: ''We trust the people'' while Mr. Gore ''believes in government.'' He has long defended the tax cuts as simply restoring to the American people ''your money.''
He stood beside a Fidelity Investments worker at Manchester, N.H., last week and declared: ''She saved $1,100 on tax relief last year. Now, that may not sound like a lot to some of the people who are rolling in cash.'' He added: ''That's a lot. It made a difference.''
Moreover, Mr. Bush's top political adviser, Karl Rove, has studied the fortunes of President William McKinley, who helped forge an enduring Republican majority -- and who beat William Jennings Bryan.
Rallying Cry
