At every timeout, the cameras scanned for celebrities, settling on P. Diddy and Adam Sandler, Jeff Gordon and Serena Williams.
For some reason, they never found Nets Coach Lawrence Frank.
The Frank phenomenon swept through this year's Super Bowl host city on Saturday, gathering believers and picking up speed. A week ago, Frank was an anonymous assistant who was often confused for the ball boy. By nightfall Saturday, he was the N.B.A.'s it coach, beating the Houston Rockets, 88-77, for the Nets' third straight victory since his unexpected promotion last Monday.
The glitterati had their first glimpse of basketball's newest sensation, who happens to be 5 feet 8 inches. Those in attendance may have been surprised that Frank looked nothing like Rockets Coach Jeff Van Gundy. He looked more like Van Gundy's son.
Giving up an inch, 15 pounds and 8 years of head-coaching experience in his matchup with Van Gundy, Frank outmaneuvered the coach he is always compared to and will most likely be judged against. Frank ran on to the court to argue a call for the first time in his tenure and enthusiastically applauded away the final seconds of his most significant performance.
The Nets played one of their worst games last season in Houston and one of their best this season. The largest crowd in the one-year history of the Toyota Center, 18,332, saw the Nets (25-20) stop Houston (26-20) and crash this pregame Super Bowl party.
After the Nets fell behind by 12 points in the first half, Frank charged into the locker room, apologized for calling too many plays that resulted in perimeter jumpers and instructed his team to pound the ball inside.
''It was my fault,'' he said. ''I should have done a better job with my play selection.''
Frank started calling every play for Kenyon Martin, who thundered through Yao Ming and scored 15 of his game-high 27 points in the third quarter. Martin grabbed 11 rebounds and he also shored up the weakest part of his game, sinking all seven of his free throws.
''They threw the ball down to me and I had to know what to do with it,'' Martin said. ''I just started being Kenyon, facing guys up. If you got the hot hand, you've got to feed it. It makes you feel appreciated, I guess.''
When asked who gave the orders to give him the ball, Martin said, ''Lawrence Frank; you know, our coach.'' The Nets are starting to stick up for him, the first sign they are invested in his regime. Martin said of Frank, ''He knows what every player in this league will do, so he prepares you for it.''
Jason Kidd, who had 21 points, 11 assists and 7 rebounds, said, ''For Coach to see everything and make those changes, he gets the credit.''
Frank was not 30 seconds into his postgame news conference before he started deflecting that credit. He hailed the defensive stand by Jason Collins, the starting center; Frank said he ''did as good a job as we've ever seen on Yao.''
The Nets held the 7-6 Yao to four field goals when the teams met on Nov. 4, and they improved on that effort Saturday. Pushing and bothering Yao every time downcourt, Collins held him without a field goal for the first two and a half quarters. Yao was 2 of 9 for the game. Van Gundy criticized his team, saying the Rockets ''lost a lot of heart'' and ''don't have a fight to us right now.''
Meanwhile, Collins sprawled on his seat in the locker room, exhausted but exhilarated by his finest head-to-head battle with Yao.
''I took the challenge,'' Collins said. ''You've got to meet him early, when he's running, keep him away from the basket, then get in front of him. You have to get low, not pushing him up top, but using your legs.''
The Nets took turns congratulating Collins, but Yao sounded unimpressed. ''I don't think he did anything particularly effective,'' he said.
That may be the secret to Frank's Nets. They do not seem that daunting, not with their baby-faced coach and their slow start this season.
But as the cameras roll, they finally seem to be finding their place.
REBOUNDS
RUSTY HARDIN, the lawyer for EDDIE GRIFFIN, attended the game Saturday and said that Griffin hoped to return to the Nets after at least six weeks of inpatient treatment for alcohol abuse at the Betty Ford Center in Rancho Mirage, Calif. Hardin will try to postpone Griffin's Feb. 13 court hearings until he is finished with his rehabilitation. . . . Houston Rockets Coach JEFF VAN GUNDY has endorsed LAWRENCE FRANK but also stood up for BYRON SCOTT on Saturday. ''Byron did an unbelievable job and I think that's gotten lost,'' Van Gundy said. ''He wasn't taking over the Lakers there. I don't think you can diminish what he accomplished. It's there in black and white.''
PRO BASKETBALL
