WATCHING Paula Vogel's ''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' is somewhat like gazing at stars: We feel its inspiration, as well as its sad distance from earth.
The Pulitzer-winning playwright's latest work uses live Japanese music, black-clad Noh figures, cleverly rendered puppets and poetic narration to stretch its familiar tale of a dysfunctional family during holiday season. The play's reach is admirable, and it is getting a respectful production at the Long Wharf Theater, a replay, with variations, of its world premiere production last year in Providence, R.I., at Trinity Repertory Company, which is co-producer of the New Haven show. In between, the piece had a run at New York City's Vineyard Theater, where it received justified praise.
Ms. Vogel's approach is a revelation; ''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' is as pure as mathematics in its translation of the prosaic into the abstract. At its most touching, the play collapses time and space into moments of disarming, and affecting, beauty. It has earned its comparisons to the grace of Thornton Wilder's drama, like ''Our Town'' and short works like ''The Happy Journey to Trenton and Camden.''
But the achievements of this production come with sacrifices. ''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' lacks gripping momentum, with long descriptive speeches that let action lag in the last half of the play. More significantly, the Long Wharf production is constantly chilly, seldom finding the heat of anything visceral or immediate.
That remoteness is no doubt purposeful; cool lighting and a spare set in blue and white reinforce the effect. But for me, the effort dilutes rather than enhances the theatrical appeal of the story's humanity.
The play begins with a family -- the Man, the Woman and the puppets that stand in for their three children -- traveling by car to a Christmas church service. The parents narrate the journey as puppeteers animate the characters of the children. The audience is quickly told that the family is troubled; the father is having an affair, the mother feels taken for granted, the children absorb the fallout.
Just at a moment of crisis, this storyline jumps several years, and adult actors take on the roles of the children.
Claire (Angela Brazil), the onetime golden girl of her father's eye, sees her girlfriend (one puppet) making love to another woman (another puppet). She turns suicidal.
Rebecca (Chelsea Altman), who swore she would never have children, is pregnant and locked out of her home by her puppet lover. She lies down in the snow to die.
Stephen (Stephen Thorne), the effeminate son who felt no love from his father, is rejected by a lover and contracts AIDS from a stranger (portrayed by a life-size puppet). He returns as a ghost of sorts, inspired by the Japanese culture he learned as a child, to offer a breath of life to his sisters.
Stephen (a character who Ms. Vogel says was inspired by her departed brother, who also inspired her ''Baltimore Waltz'') offers that breath of life to the audience as well. But as executed, the appeal reaches the mind, not the heart.
Puppetry has become an increasingly popular theatrical device in shows from ''The Lion King'' to ''Avenue Q.'' Here the creatures, which are designed by Basil Twist, are remarkably expressive. Their use, like the first-act Victoria doll in Caryl Churchill's ''Cloud 9,'' goes beyond gimmickry; the children gain their humanity, and are finally played by human beings, after their critical emotional injuries, and their push into adulthood. It is a fascinating conceit, made better by the affecting manner in which the superb Timothy Crowe and Anne Scurria, as the Man and the Woman, interact with the puppets.
For a moment late in the play, when the family members face physical as well as emotional danger, there is a sense that ''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' is on the brink of transcendence. The director Oskar Eustis and his design team externalize the moment well, with actors and set spinning into chaos. But the aftermath is controlled, muted and short on feeling.
''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' aims high. But audiences might appreciate more flesh-and-blood emotion.
''The Long Christmas Ride Home'' is at the Long Wharf Theater, 222 Sargent Drive, New Haven, through Feb. 15. Information: (203)787-4282 or www.longwharf.org.
THEATER REVIEW
