I did not have an upbringing that was remotely oriented toward football. I don't think I ever saw my father watch a game on TV. (Though I know he used to bet on them -- everybody did. Until he was busted, the owner of a popular cafe downtown was also a bookie.) When I left home, it was to go to an all-girls boarding school (where I saw a hockey stick for the first time but not, obviously, a football) and then to Georgetown, where basketball was the thing. (Patrick Ewing arrived my sophomore year.) I did give a Super Bowl party once, but even that was accidental -- I invited people over for dinner one Sunday, and they all pointed out that the game would be on. Deflated, I bought a bucket of Popeye's fried chicken, made a pot of gumbo and perked up only during the commercials.
But all that changed in October, when I watched Ole Miss stomp Alabama. I am a person of easy enthusiasms, and this conversion was especially easy for several reasons. One, the game was so good that I could follow what was going on despite my extreme lack of knowledge. Ole Miss scored 24 points in the first quarter, and the quarterback, Eli Manning, threw a particularly dazzling pass midstride. Two, Eli is adorable and by all accounts a really good guy, as are his father, Archie, former Ole Miss and New Orleans Saints quarterback, and his brother, Peyton, former Tennessee and current Indianapolis Colts quarterback. Peyton, who sadly will not be competing in the Super Bowl, watched his brother from the sidelines surrounded by a virtual platoon of state troopers (who looked as if they just wanted to be there rather than as if they were actually needed to protect him). I watched him through binoculars and don't think I've ever seen someone concentrate on the action before him with such laserlike intensity. Thoroughly smitten, I have now decided that my first pro-football allegiances will be entirely determined by the Manning brothers. (Eli may well be the first quarterback chosen in the N.F.L. draft in April.)
I have to admit, however, that the most likely reason for my newfound love of the game was the extremely plush surroundings in which I watched it. Two years ago, Ole Miss made some improvements to its stadium, including 30 swanky new boxes that were made available to its loyal alums and other assorted high rollers, for $250,000 for a 13-year lease. My good friend the artist Bill Dunlap got me invited to one owned by a very gracious couple from Jackson, and it boasted a huge powder room, delicious hors d'oeuvres, maid service and an enormous (and stunning, of course) Dunlap landscape hanging on the wall. There was a full bar featuring excellent Bloody Marys and a long buffet, where I ate some delicious barbecue and someone's yummy birthday cake. It was a gorgeous, barely crisp fall day, and everybody was really, really happy, and I decided that life was grand and that America was a wonderful country.
With this in mind, I have decided to nurture my fledgling fanhood by creating festive, slightly high-toned environments whenever a big game is on TV, starting, naturally, with the Super Bowl. There is no reason that Super Bowl parties have to take place in rooms littered with crushed Fritos and bad bean dip. For example, in ''Alfred Portale's 12 Seasons Cookbook,'' the fine chef-owner of the Gotham Bar and Grill offers up two Super Bowl menus. One includes a black bean soup with tomato-avocado salsa, slow-cooked lamb shoulder (a recipe that alone is worth the price of the cookbook ) and a decadent-sounding peanut butter coupe made from chocolate sorbet, chocolate sauce, praline ice cream, peanuts and peanut butter.
I must say that I was surprised to run across any mention of the Super Bowl in Portale's book, where the other menus include one for New Year's featuring foie gras with cherry chutney and a French one with salmon rillettes, but he's from Buffalo, he roots for the Bills and every year he gives a Super Bowl party for his staff at the restaurant, complete with wide-screen TV's. He explains that they are so busy during the holidays there is no time for a Christmas bash, so the game is ''our way of sneaking in one last holiday gathering long after the official season has come and gone.'' They even put on their own halftime show -- one year a waiter dressed in drag and serenaded Portale's hometown team.
Portale's entertainment has further encouraged my devotion to the game. I may not have grown up with rabid football fans, but I do come from a long line of people who like to put on pageants and plays and generally entertain one another. This year I kept up with L.S.U.'s score during the Sugar Bowl by listening to my husband's cheers -- I was in the next room glue-gunning a tiara to wear to a masked ball we were attending two days later. The ball is the kind of event I have historically been more partial to. But thanks to Portale's inspiration, I can combine my old passion with my new -- next year I am going to give a big bash complete with an elaborate halftime show.
Since I don't quite have my act together this year, I'll be content with enjoying some upscale football fare with a handful of friends. The recipe for the black-bean-and-pork stew is a nod to the inevitable salsa-and-chips theme of most Super Bowl parties (it should be served with homemade salsa cruda and warm flour tortillas), and its spiciness should introduce some zip into what I'm told are usually rather bland championship games. The Carbonnade Flamande, a Belgian stew made with beef and onions, is a nod to the fact that the Super Bowl is traditionally a big beer night. I make and serve the carbonnade with the Czech Pilsner Urquell or the Belgian Duvel, which, with 8.5 percent alcohol, packs quite a punch. With the pork stew, I'd recommend a Mexican lager like Bohemia or the dark Negra Modelo. You might also serve Young's Double Chocolate Stout, made by the oldest brewery in England, which has a taste that goes surprisingly well with both dishes.
Pork Stew With  Black Beans  (Adapted from ''The Feast of Santa Fe,'' by Huntley Dent)  2 cups dried black beans  1 teaspoon salt, or more to taste  2 bay leaves  1 teaspoon dried oregano  1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper  1 teaspoon whole cumin seed  6 jalapeño peppers, seeded and deveined  4 cloves garlic, peeled  2 onions, cut into rough chunks  2 tablespoons cayenne pepper  4 tablespoons sweet paprika, preferably Spanish or Hungarian  4 tablespoons cornmeal  4 tablespoons vegetable oil  3 pounds boneless pork shoulder, trimmed and cut into  1/2-inch cubes  4 tablespoons honey  2 teaspoons ground cumin  2 teaspoons cinnamon  Cooked rice for serving.
1. Wash and drain the beans several times. Place in a large pot with 8 cups water, 1 teaspoon salt and the bay leaves, oregano, pepper and cumin seed. Cover, but keep the lid slightly ajar, and boil until tender, about 2 hours, stirring occasionally and adding more water if needed to keep the beans covered. Drain beans and reserve cooking liquid.
2. Pulse the jalapeños and garlic in a food processor, add the onions and pulse again. Remove and set aside.
3. Add the cayenne, paprika and cornmeal to the food processor. While processing, pour in about 1 cup cooking liquid from the beans to make a smooth paste.
4. Heat the oil in a heavy 6-quart pot. Brown the pork cubes in 4 to 5 batches over medium-high heat, removing them as they brown. When the last batch is browned, add the other pork cubes and their juices and the honey, cumin and cinnamon. Stir to scrape up brown bits from the bottom of the pan.
5. Lower the heat and add the onion mixture. Cook, stirring, until heated through, then add the cornmeal paste and 4 cups bean cooking liquid (if there is not enough, add some water) and stir. Bring to a simmer, cover and simmer for 30 minutes, stirring frequently to keep the mixture from sticking. Add the beans and salt to taste, stir and simmer another 30 minutes. Serve over rice.
Yield: 8 servings
Carbonnade à la Flamande  3 pounds rump or chuck roast, cut into 2-inch cubes  3 tablespoons bacon fat, or a mixture of butter and olive oil, or more if necessary  Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste  6 cups sliced yellow onions (about 1 1/2 pounds)  4 cloves garlic, pressed  1 cup beef stock  2 to 3 cups beer  2 tablespoons brown sugar  1 herb bouquet (6 parsley sprigs, 4 thyme branches, 1 bay leaf tied together)  1 1/2 tablespoons arrowroot or cornstarch  2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar, plus more to taste  Buttered noodles for serving.
1. Place a rack in the lower third of the oven. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees. Dry the beef and heat the fat in a 9- to 10-inch ovenproof casserole or pot until almost smoking. Brown the beef quickly on all sides, a few pieces at a time, removing them as they brown. Sprinkle with salt and pepper, toss to coat and set aside.
2. Reduce heat. Stir in onions, adding more fat if necessary. Brown lightly about 10 minutes, stirring frequently. Season with salt and pepper. Stir in garlic. Set aside. Add stock to the pan and scrape up the brown bits and coagulated juices.
3. Arrange half the beef in the pan and spread with half the onions. Repeat with the remaining beef and onions. Add enough beer to cover the meat. Stir in the brown sugar and bury the herb bouquet in the meat. Bring to a simmer, cover and place in the oven. Cook at a slow simmer (check occasionally) for 2 1/2 hours, until meat is tender.
4. Remove from the oven and discard the herb bouquet. Remove beef and skim off the fat. Blend the arrowroot with 2 tablespoons vinegar and stir into the liquid. Simmer for 3 to 4 minutes, until thickened. Adjust seasonings. Return meat to the pan, stir and heat through. Serve with noodles.
Yield: 6 servings
STYLE
