STEFFI DeCASAS says she does not feel like a school bureaucracy.
Yes, Ms. DeCasas is the business administrator for the Glen Gardner School District in Hunterdon County. She works with Diane Laudenbach, the district treasurer, who also happens to be the borough's tax collector.
For this, she and Ms. Laudenbach -- to name two -- have come into Governor McGreevey's cross hairs.
''I think it's outrageous that we have 23 school bureaucracies that don't have a single school'' the governor said in his State of the State address last month, adding that he planned to eliminate them because they ''oversee nothing but their own existence.''
True enough, Glen Gardner -- a village of 1,900 residents who live on a 1.6-square-mile slice of suburbia -- has no school of its own and sends more than 200 students to nearby Clinton. On a part-time basis, Ms. DeCasas keeps track of the tuition of her district's 230 students, an average of $8,500 per student a year, and performs other duties.
So although she thinks the governor's intentions are noble, she is convinced that his aim is a little off.
''I do budget development; I handle the transportation, which includes developing routes and dealing with contractors,'' she said. ''I interface with the receiving district regarding discipline problems and parent complaints and just generally work with the receiving district on keeping up to date on our enrollments because we have students who move in and out.''
For this, she gets $15,500 a year, which, according to the New Jersey School Boards Association, is about average for officials in districts without schools, known as nonoperating districts. In addition, Ms. Laudenbach, the part-time school treasurer, as required by state law, makes $750 a year.
''To term them bureaucracies is terribly misleading,'' said Frank Belluscio, a spokesman for the New Jersey School Boards Association. ''And to consider this property tax relief falls terribly short of the goal of genuine tax reform.''
Most administrators like Ms. DeCasas are part-time employees and there are few administrative costs, Mr. Belluscio said. Ms. DeCasas says only 1.5 percent of Glen Gardner's $2.6 million budget goes for administrative costs, which include the salary for her and the treasurer; minimum benefits for her consisting of workers' compensation and unemployment insurance; Board of Education liability insurance; and such operating costs as attorney fees, telephone and postage and the cost of the annual election to approve or disapprove the budget. About 10 percent of the budget goes toward transportation, and the rest to tuition. Her salary also covers her title of secretary to the five-member, unsalaried school board that meets in the borough hall. And she works from an office in her home.
''We don't have overhead,'' she said.
Nonetheless, Mr. McGreevey, facing a possible $5 billion budget deficit, is including cutting school costs as a way of curbing property taxes, which last year increased an average 6.3 percent statewide. He has directed the state Education Commissioner, William Librera, to eliminate the nonoperating districts as well as devise a plan to require 172 one-school school districts to find ways to consolidate services.
Even if Ms. DeCasas' job and those of officials in the 22 other districts were to be eliminated tomorrow, state officials acknowledge the savings would be only about $750,000 a year. That's beside the point, said Commissioner Librera.
''In the grand scheme of things, it's not a lot of money, but if you're spending it and don't have to, that's a policy direction that the governor is correct in having me pursue,'' Mr. Librera said. ''The overriding requirement is, should it be spent at all or is there a way it can be better spent?''
As for one-school districts sharing services, James H. Murphy, executive director of the New Jersey Association of School Administrators, said that most small districts already do, and he noted that median pupil cost in these districts is $10,645 compared with a statewide figure of $10,652 per pupil.
''The small districts are leaders in efficiency,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''They're sharing cafeteria agreements, sharing bus contracts between school districts, sharing financial services in some way. There's a whole litany of agreements that they've very quietly been doing.''
Both Mr. Murphy and Mr. Belluscio said the real answer was to reinstate state aid to schools that Mr. McGreevey has cut in the past because of the budget crisis, especially programs that gave schools incentive to find the best ways to consolidate services.
Mr. Librera said his department was aware that some school districts that save money through shared services can serve as models. Rewards and sanctions that the governor called for in his address would prompt districts to keep administrative and noninstructional costs low, he added.
''This is not an issue about bigger is always better,'' he said. ''This is an issue about effectiveness and efficiency.''
Ernest C. Reock Jr., former director of the Center for Government Services at Rutgers and an expert in school financing, is applauding the governor's plans. In 1995, Dr. Reock proposed a plan to pare the state's 606 school districts to 287 for a projected savings of $32 million a year in administrative costs and up to $200 million overall.
''There is no reason why those districts should exist because they do spend money,'' he said of the nonoperating districts. ''They could be accommodated by the other district where the kids are going with practically no additional cost.''
He added: ''It doesn't matter whether it is a part-time salary, it's a salary. It's a salary that wouldn't have to be paid in the future if you didn't have them.''
Mr. Librera said in a telephone interview that it would take about 45 days perhaps to come up with a ''sensible alternative'' plan that would offer a ''clear direction'' for nonoperating districts to be eliminated.
Like many school officials, Frank Chilson, who has been part-time administrator for the Rocky Hill School District in Somerset County for 16 years, questioned whether real savings would result.
Mr. Chilson, who gets a salary of $13,000, recalled that about eight years ago Rocky Hill and the receiving school district, Montgomery, explored the idea of creating a regionalized district. Montgomery is now building a $70 million high school, and Rocky Hill, with its 62 students, is responsible for a small part of the interest payments, he said.
''If we were regionalized, we would be responsible for part of the principal payment of that which would be a sizable amount,'' he said.
Mr. Chilson, like some part-time school administrators, has a full-time job in a school district. He is full-time business administrator of the Demarest School District in Bergen County. In addition to his post in Rocky Hill, he has also been part-time business administrator for 26 years of the Millstone School District in Somerset County, which sends 52 students to school in Hillsborough.
''The governor's making it appear as if we're not efficient,'' Mr. Chilson said. ''And in reality, he's going to put a burden on the taxpayers of these two small communities if he forces them to regionalize.''
Dr. Reock agreed that the taxes in the sending district would go up but added that the school region in greneral would benefit.
''A number of those districts are tax havens where people are paying very little for the schools in general,'' he said. ''It would lower taxes in the entire school region. There would be an equalization of the tax base.''
Some officials worry that being absorbed into a larger district will lessen the influence of the sending districts, a consideration that goes to the heart of home rule. Randie Zimmerman, the school board president in Rocky Hill, which has about 600 residents, said, ''People in our town like the fact they know who the school board members are. We are very approachable.''
EDUCATION
