It was the last time the New England Patriots trailed in a game, and for much of that time, it was the last time Tom Brady looked rattled.
Brady is known for his poise, but until the climactic moments of the Patriots' 23-20 overtime victory over the Houston Texans on Nov. 23, he was anything but cool. He was sacked four times, threw two interceptions and fumbled once when he was sacked.
Brady's erratic performance -- and a blocked field goal -- kept the Texans in the game even though the Patriots had a commanding statistical edge, gaining 472 yards on the Texans' porous defense. So, if anyone has the blueprint for taking Brady out of his considerable comfort zone, it should be the Texans.
The key is to get Brady out of his rhythm. Brady likes to throw the ball quickly, especially when the Patriots are in a spread formation. But according to the Texans' defensive coordinator, Vic Fangio, Brady will also hold the ball a second or two -- Fangio calls him courageous in the pocket -- to let his receivers get open.
Texans Coach Dom Capers said: ''I think one of the keys is going to be, can Carolina get pressure on Brady out of a four-man rush? If they have to commit to a five- or six-man rush, there will be a much greater chance of a big play.''
The Texans had to use more than four to get pressure on Brady most of the game, but two of their sacks, incredibly, came when only three were rushing. And one interception came on a three-man rush, which lured Brady into holding the ball a little longer than usual. But the rush got to him and forced a rare error.
That, though, occurred when the Patriots' offensive line -- beset by personnel shuffling caused by injuries -- was in flux. It has not allowed a sack of Brady in the playoffs. Still, the Carolina Panthers have a far more powerful defensive line. The Panthers' line had 32 1/2 of the team's 40 sacks, second most in the league by a line this season, so they may be able to save their extra men to drop into coverage.
''They did it against the Eagles,'' Capers said.
But Brady's ability to deliver the ball quickly, particularly on short passes to the outside that the Patriots use as the equivalent of a run, may negate some of the strong pass rush.
''Sometimes as a defensive lineman, you beat the offensive lineman and as soon as you get to the quarterback he is throwing the ball,'' Panthers defensive end Julius Peppers said. ''That is frustrating. You have to keep at it. Sooner or later, you will get to him.''
Defensive tackle Brentson Buckner said: ''If you can't get there, get your hands up. Those short, quick passing games aren't meant to go deep. The ball is going to come out eye level, shoulder level. If you get your hands up, you can affect that.''
Fangio expects that the Panthers will have to play a lot of Cover 2 zone defense -- where two safeties stay deep and are responsible for controlling their half of the field -- to take away the big play. Fangio said he did not think the Panthers' cornerbacks would be able to cover the New England wide receivers with the same success they had against Philadelphia.
The Panthers like to press with their cornerbacks -- lining up just 3 to 5 yards off them -- to try to throw receivers off their routes. Carolina manhandled the Eagles' receivers, who caught only five passes. James Thrash was belted after one catch, causing one of Ricky Manning Jr.'s interceptions. The Panthers have so much confidence in their corners that it allows them to blitz, too.
But the Panthers may have to play off the New England receivers -- lining up about 8 to 10 yards away -- because they have more respect for them than they had for the Eagles' receivers. Fangio said he expected the Panthers to mix up their defense in an attempt to confuse Brady, who is adept at managing a game. The Texans occasionally caught Brady off guard.
''They had some stuff called when they were looking for man defense and we were in zone and stuff when they were looking for zone and we were in man,'' Fangio said. ''We mixed in some three-man rush, some pressure. It threw them off.''
But Brady was without David Givens and Troy Brown -- his favorite receiver in a critical situation. Against the Texans, Brady still completed 29 passes for 368 yards.
How effective can jamming receivers at the line be? Think of the what the Patriots did to the Indianapolis Colts' receivers in the American Football Conference championship game. The danger in playing aggressively on receivers when in man coverage is that if the receiver slips by, he will be open for a big play.
''Cover 2 allows them to be physical,'' Fangio said. ''If they try to play man or three deep, they you don't have the availability of jamming guys. I don't think they'll press their receivers in man coverage. They can, but I think they're running a risk, because New England has good receivers. He doesn't have marquee players, but they have no weaknesses.''
The Patriots will surely try to use a spread offense to get the Panthers to show their defensive hand, giving Brady an easier read of the defense before the snap. Then, the Patriots will use a check-with-me system in which Brady can change the call, depending on the defense he sees.
''Ricky Manning is always up in the receiver's face, jamming him, trying to push him out of bounds, trying to reroute him,'' Brady said. ''Most of the time, receivers are going to be fishing through some press technique, and they have to be able to get open whether it's man coverage or zone coverage. If they try to aggressively jam and miss, you have a chance to run down the field and hit the throw.''
Exactly what the Cover 2 is intended to prevent.
PRO FOOTBALL
