I AM a woman of middle age and then some and have recently undergone hip replacement surgery. I entered the hospital in rather good physical condition and have always had a positive mental attitude. Thirty-five years as a student of yoga, the last 15 years spent teaching, and 25 years of weight training and aerobic conditioning have contributed to my rapid recovery.
Walking around town on one crutch for the last few weeks, though, has heightened my consciousness with regard to accommodations for the infirm, disabled and handicapped. I do not for a moment compare my condition to that of anyone who has a permanent disability or is experiencing a more difficult and lengthier recovery from major surgery, but these last few weeks have afforded me a glimpse of life from a different perspective.
During my travels around Great Neck, most people have been very kind to me. Drivers stopped their cars in the middle of the street so that I could pass. Men and women have rushed to open doors and cautioned me to watch my step, not to rush and so on. The kindness of people is very therapeutic, heartwarming and embracing.
But some well-intentioned help can actually be a hindrance. After a hip replacement operation one is warned not to bend past 90 degrees. This means that dressing, bathing and picking up objects that have fallen, including crutches, present obstacles hitherto unconsidered. Fortunately I have a helpful husband, but the issue did not begin to involve the general public until two weeks into my recovery, when the doctor permitted me to drive. The most difficult part of driving is maneuvering in and out of the car. The seat must be pushed all the way back and then lowered as far down as possible. I would lie down as far as possible then slowly swing my legs out of the car one at a time. Once in a while a good samaritan would offer to help me by holding my arm or hand and pulling me out of the car. A nice gesture and well meaning but a potentially harmful one.
By and large the greatest impediment to a pleasant day out of the house was the use of the public restrooms. At home I used an apparatus that fit over the toilet so that I was sitting about seven inches above the commode and my knees were safely below my hips. It would have been cumbersome and impractical to carry this item around with me so one has to make do. How many times had I walked into the ladies' room oblivious to the thick metal bars running along the wall adjacent to the toilet? I quickly found out what they were used for. Had I not had good upper body strength I might have been subjected to another week or two at home, but this situation certainly made me aware of another obstacle to having a normal life. I have come to realize that there are many conditions and routines that we take for granted in the course of our daily lives that may one day become obstacles. With an aging populace there will be more and more individuals facing challenging daily routines. I must admit I was disinterested and felt removed from the continuing accommodations that were proposed and implemented to serve the needs of the less physically fortunate. No longer will I think of myself as separated from life's challenges that may one day be a part of so many of our lives.
SOAPBOX Irma Marcus lives in Great Neck.
