Everyone here has buns of steel and rock-hard abs laced across the zero-fat body of a vegan marathon runner. Everyone hikes and bikes and has climbed Pikes Peak.
That is not really true, of course. But as a stereotype, it resonates and lingers -- like the absurd idea that New Yorkers are rude or Californians are flaky -- because it has always been easy to find an example that makes it seem true.
For years, Colorado has worn the crown as the least obese state in the nation, according to federal studies, and Denver has been the jewel in that crown, invariably ranked among the leanest metropolitan areas by the Centers of Disease Control and Prevention. There was a powerful demographic engine at work: People were more fit partly because fitter people moved here, drawn by the active lifestyle and abundant sunshine that encouraged more time outdoors.
Healthy living became part of the culture, and things cruised along for years on a self-sustaining autopilot of svelte.
But here's the skinny: Colorado's obesity rate surged to nearly 17 percent of the adult population in 2002 and has more than doubled over the last decade. Though still the thinnest state, its lead is slipping, according to the most recent federal figures. Only 10 states did worse in 2002 in holding down or reducing the number of severely overweight residents.
And Colorado can no longer count on a cavalry of buff rock-climbers moving in to hold down the average. Population growth in the future, demographers say, will be increasingly driven by ''natural increase'' -- the children of people already here, many of whom are more apt to reach for a soda than a snowboard, as national health studies show.
''Our population demographics aren't going to work in our favor in the future,'' said James O. Hill, a professor of pediatrics and director of the Center for Human Nutrition at the University of Colorado in Denver. ''We're going to look more like the other states.''
But Dr. Hill and other experts say Colorado may still have a secret weapon against fat. The culture of fitness has been woven into the state's fabric, they say, backed by a deep pool of scholarly capital in Colorado's colleges and medical schools about nutrition and exercise. Those forces, many medical experts say, are now coming into play as never before, partly in response to the alarm over obesity.
''Colorado is doing a lot of the right things, and I think some of it can be copied elsewhere,'' said Dr. Andrew L. Dannenberg, an obesity researcher at the disease centers.
This year, for example, a fitness walking program called Colorado on the Move, founded in 2002 by Dr. Hill and others at the University of Colorado, will go national with its first 12 state affiliates. The new organization, America on the Move, working through partnerships with companies, government and schools, aims at getting people to walk more, literally step by step. By using stride-counting devices, organizers say, people can set modest goals of a few added steps a day, with big health dividends over time.
Farther south, Denver's suburban counties have incorporated fat-fighting goals into building and zoning decisions, Dr. Dannenberg and other experts say, creating a hybrid formula of land-use planning and fitness.
''We'll say, 'We'd like to have the opportunity for people to take regular physical exercise during the day -- can you incorporate that?' '' said Carol Maclennan, the environmental health policy coordinator at the Tri-County Health Department, which covers Douglas, Arapahoe and Adams Counties.
Even the Denver International Airport is healthy. It was ranked first in the nation last year in the percentage of restaurants offering a healthy entree choice, according to a group called the Physicians' Committee for Responsible Medicine.
But researchers say the real main course in Colorado's fight against fat is a supersize planned community under construction on Denver's east side, at the site of the old Stapleton International Airport, which closed in 1995 when the new airport opened.
Stapleton, which will be a mixed-income city-within-a-city of 30,000 people when completed over the next decade, is being designed and marketed by the developer Forest City Enterprises around the concept of an active lifestyle. Parks and trails lace through the property, connecting to grocery stores, banks and restaurants. The first residents began moving in last year, and exercise groups like the ''Stapleton Strollers,'' a confab of parents who gather to run or walk behind their baby carriages, have become part of the social whirl.
It is a fat-researcher's dream, and at 4,700 acres by far the biggest test case of its kind in the nation.
''It's the grand experiment,'' said Dr. Ned Colange, the chief medical officer at the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
Doctors at the University of Colorado School of Medicine say they hope to reinvent the idea of neighborhood medicine at Stapleton with a flagship clinic aimed less at treating sickness than at keeping people healthy, through things like nutrition counseling and exercise programs.
Issues of race, ethnicity and class will come into play. Blacks, Hispanics and people with lower incomes tend to have higher obesity rates than whites, and Stapleton sits in the middle of a racially and economically diverse section of the city. A major goal of the School of Medicine team is to see how much the culture of fitness inside Stapleton can change the patterns outside it.
''If I were to put one pin on the planet, it goes on Stapleton,'' said Dr. Frank V. deGruy III, chairman of the Department of Family Medicine at the School of Medicine. ''This is a real opportunity to rethink some of things we do. The place is being designed with a lot of green zones and walking trails -- we're going to use the built environment and piggyback on that.''
Some medical experts say the Stapleton experiment is rigged, because even a somewhat fatter Colorado is healthier and thinner than the nation as a whole. That means many of the people attracted to the new community will already be living a healthier lifestyle. Other obesity researchers say Colorado's history makes it the perfect proving ground.
''Because Colorado is one of the better states, this is where we start in the intervention efforts -- you start in a place where you've got a chance of it actually working,'' said Dr. Hill at the University of Colorado.
Some health experts and urban planners say the real national impact of Stapleton could be its sales pitch: that ''quality of life'' equals ''quality of health.''
For years, advocates of so-called smart growth have urged politicians and developers, usually without success, to build neighborhoods that get away from dependence on the automobile, by creating opportunities to walk and take mass transit. The usual argument is that better-planned communities will help the environment by improving air and water quality.
At places like Stapleton, fitness and fat consciousness are redefining that debate.
''Smart growth and new urbanism are very politicized issues,'' said Rich Killingsworth, the director of Active Living by Design, a program of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, which issued a $200,000 grant to Stapleton last year as part of its national anti-obesity campaign. ''But most people can relate to the idea that 'Hey, maybe where I live and work does relate to physical activity, to my family, and maybe my weight.' ''
Todd Pfeufer does not think his physique has changed much since moving into Stapleton last year from another neighborhood in Denver. He has always been a regular at the gym. But Mr. Pfeufer, 37, says he has been walking more with his three miniature schnauzers, and he is seeing a difference in them, at least.
''Our dogs definitely are losing weight,'' he said.
