MARTIN and Lewis. Belushi and Aykroyd. Corman and Conway. But Drake and Josh? You bet, said Dan Schneider, the creator and executive producer of ''Drake &amp; Josh,'' comparing Drake Bell (top right) and Josh Peck, the stars of his new comedy series, to Harvey Corman and Tim Conway, who parlayed cross-dressing and pratfalls on ''The Carol Burnett Show'' into widespread popularity in the 1970's.
Spun off from ''The Amanda Show,'' now in reruns, ''Drake &amp; Josh,'' shown Sundays at
7:30 p.m. on Nickelodeon and repeated at various times during the week, pits the sensitive, keen-witted Josh against the coolly calculating Drake after their parents marry and the mismatched teenagers find themselves living under the same roof. The thing is, the boys actually grow to like each other as they get sucked into disparate worlds -- leaving plenty of room for the physical comedy they played to the hilt as sidekicks to the effervescent Amanda Bynes.
''I often read the message boards of 'The Amanda Show' to get feedback, and I was finding that kids were really responding to them as a team,'' Mr. Schneider recalled of his decision to move Drake and Josh into the limelight.
''Of all the shows I've done for Nickelodeon, this is the most family oriented,'' said Mr. Schneider, whose credits include ''All That,'' ''Kenan and Kel'' the feature film ''Big Fat Liar'' and the WB series ''What I Like About You.'' ''The boys love the comedic duo. The girls are really going for Drake, who is an extremely handsome kid. And the parents really like watching.''
The numbers prove Mr. Schneider's point. The show's premiere, on Jan. 11, produced Nickelodeon's highest ratings for a live-action series in almost 10 years.
Perhaps it's their Everyboy appeal, Drake and Josh surmised during a telephone interview from the show's set in Los Angeles.
''I don't think I'm as cool as I am in the show,'' said Drake, a 17-year-old Southern Californian who lives on his own, has his own band, Drake 24/7, and wrote and performed the show's theme song.
Josh, a 17-year-old New Yorker who is ''still shacked up with Mom,'' says, ''I'm a lot like my character, though I like to think I'm not as dorky.''
''I like to do things that aren't exactly the stereotypically cool thing -- play chess, go to the movies a lot,'' he said, adding ''I do play a really mean air-guitar.''
And like their characters, the young actors find common ground through their differences. ''We're just great friends when we get on set, even though we don't hang out together off set,'' Josh went on. Still, ''we can call each other up after a few days, a few months or a few years, and we know the other will always be there like it was yesterday.''
Kathryn Shattuck
Field Day for Slimeballs and Tailgaters
The football field won't be the only green on the screen today. ''Nickelodeon Takes Over the Super Bowl,'' shown at 11 a.m. on CBS and taped at the network's sports studio in Houston, will feature player profiles, celebrity interviews by Cow and stadium-size quantities of the show's ubiquitous, chartreuse slime. Brent Popolizio and Candace Bailey (front), of ''U-Pick Live,'' are the hosts of the hourlong special. And the rest of the ''U-Pick'' cast -- Pickboy, a superhero with supernatural selection powers; Antonio, the show's jack-of-all-trades; and Garbagio, a masked wrestler whose most formidable opponents are cookies and milk -- get in on the action, which includes a ''how to tailgate'' segment with Drake Bell and Josh Peck and N.F.L. Experience games with Jamie Lynn Spears and Giovanni Samuels of ''All That.'' The power players Phil Simms, Dan Marino, Mike Ditka, Warren Sapp and Michael Stahan will weigh in on the adult side.
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
