A ''FOR SALE'' sign sits in the window of the building on one side of Turco Botanicas and Flowers, Jovino Borrero's religious-goods shop; in the building on the other side is a ''for rent'' sign. But Mr. Borrero, who for 33 years has run his small shop on Westchester Avenue in Soundview, the Bronx, is not leaving just yet. His work is not done.
While customers no longer come to buy items from Mr. Borrero's collection -- statues from India, candles from Cuba, pottery from Spain, trinkets from Africa -- local residents do come to him seeking advice.
That may be partly because of Mr. Borrero's reaction to the most wrenching event to take place in Soundview in recent memory, the fatal shooting of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed 22-year-old immigrant from West Africa, five years ago Wednesday. The shooting, by four police officers, took place at his apartment building, a few doors down from Mr. Borrero's shop.
Until the shooting, Mr. B, as he is known locally, was mostly an observer in his adopted neighborhood. Over the years, he had watched Soundview change from a place where one could find an affordable home and raise a family to one infested with crime and drugs, both of which endure. In response to the crime, Mr. Borrero, 77, commissioned an artist from Harlem named Hulbert Waldroup to paint a mural in remembrance of Mr. Diallo. The work, ''The American Dream,'' is on the side of Mr. Borrero's shop.
When the work was completed in 2001, city officials tried to have it removed, citing the depiction of four officers in white hoods and the Statue of Liberty holding a gun beside a portrait of Mr. Diallo. Residents united and asked that it remain. Mr. Borrero's response? ''This isn't political,'' he said one day recently. ''It's a lesson in history.''
Upon hearing about the shooting of Timothy Stansbury Jr., 19, by a police officer on a rooftop in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, a week ago, Mr. Borrero said that he was deeply saddened, especially since the shooting came so close to the anniversary of Mr. Diallo's death. ''This was another child,'' Mr. Borrero said. ''I can understand that the police were protecting themselves in the dark, but the shooting was out of line, unnecessary. They didn't even tell him to stop or lay down first.''
Because of these tragic lessons, Mr. Borrero is even more determined to help people change their lives before it is too late. Especially on Sunday afternoons, Mr. Borrero adorns himself with exotic necklaces and rings similar to those in his shop and takes his seat by the front door.
There is plenty of activity on Westchester Avenue on Sundays -- people run errands on their only day off, and families prowl the streets in search of sweets -- but Mr. Borrero stays put, ready for his one-on-one advice sessions. When his throat becomes dry from talking to visitors, he sips from a bottle of water, and he takes only a short break for lunch, usually a cup of soup.
Some people make appointments days in advance to talk to Mr. Borrero about personal and family problems, everything from marital differences to worries about children getting caught up in drugs and crime. The sessions, some as short as a few minutes, are always private, and they take place in the back room of the shop while Mr. Borrero's wife of more than 50 years tends to browsers in front. After their consultations, advice seekers often emerge with beaming smiles and gracious thank-yous.
All his life, Mr. Borrero said, his goal has been to live by his own sweat. Now, through what he calls his ''school to the new generation,'' he is helping others do the same. ''People are looking for a better life, and some will make it -- the honest, hard-working people,'' he said. ''Like in 'Hamlet' -- 'to be or not to be?' -- they want to be.''
In this neighborhood, where people like Zoila Brito, who has owned the bakery down the block for more than a decade, remembers Mr. Diallo as a nice young man who bought coffee and pastries, the shooting and its aftermath endure.
Farther down Westchester Avenue, Louis Plevritis remembers the day in August 2000 when Hillary Rodham Clinton visited the neighborhood and had a cheese omelet, the house special, at New Ranch restaurant, which he owns with his brother. And in a symbolic change that meant a great deal to local residents, one block of Wheeler Avenue, just outside Mr. Borrero's shop, was renamed Amadou Diallo Place. In the opinion of Mr. Borrero, it is only one or two wayward individuals who corrupt others. ''If you have a sack of potatoes, and one is rotten, the others will become rotten as well,'' he said. These days, Mr. Borrero sees his job as removing those rotten potatoes through his actions and advice.
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: SOUNDVIEW
