EVERY now and then a television series so perfectly captures the mood of a culture that it becomes more than a just a hit: it becomes a sociological event -- something to be studied in terms of historic patterns, analyzed in the spirit of the decade, maybe even incorporated into a college lecture or two. HBO's ''Sex and the City'' is one of those series. And as it enters its final month, theories about why it has been so popular have become as diverse as predictions of which guy, if any, its heroine will end up with.
The end may be near for Carrie the columnist (Sarah Jessica Parker), Miranda the working mother (Cynthia Nixon), Samantha the sexual dilettante (Kim Cattrall) and Charlotte the traditionalist (Kristin Davis), but their urban legends will live on, not only in syndication but as part of a long tradition of stories about women working and dating in big cities like New York. In the early pulp fiction and working-girl narratives, the city is often depicted as a sexual danger zone into which girls, unencumbered by parental supervision, stray at their peril. In many of the novels and films, they are punished, by caddish lovers and social disgrace. ''Sex and the City,'' of course, is different; its characters have multiple partners, and for the most part a good time.
But maybe not that different.
''Sex and the City'' shows women being ''articulate about their own sexual needs,'' says Camille Paglia, author of ''Sexual Personae:Art and Decadence From Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson.'' But, she cautions, ''it still has archaic themes.'' Ms. Paglia points out the similarities between the show and ''The Best of Everything,'' Rona Jaffe's 1958 novel about three career women who work in the typing pool of a big publishing company. One is seduced by a heartless playboy; another is rejected by her Broadway producer and breaks her neck; the third ends up in Las Vegas with a lounge lizard. As in the Jaffe novel, the characters in ''Sex and the City'' are still ''very much at the mercy of cads,'' Ms. Paglia says. Mr. Big, for instance, comes in and out of Carrie's life, loving her and leaving her. And, Ms. Paglia notes, Carrie must break away from Mr. Big -- just as the character Anne in Jacqueline Susann's 1966 novel, ''Valley of the Dolls,'' must break away from the handsome and elusive Lyon Burke to achieve her own identity.
Still, Ms. Paglia says, the success of ''Sex and the City'' marks a defeat for the ''1980's anti-porn, anti-sex wing of feminists'' and a victory for ''the huge wing of us pro-sex feminists who came back with a vengeance in 1990, thanks to Madonna.''
With victory comes the power of choice. L. S. Kim, an assistant professor of film and digital media at the University of California at Santa Cruz who uses ''Sex and the City'' in some of her classes, says that women today have more options than ever and take pleasure in watching the characters of ''Sex and the City'' in the process of debating questions of love and sex, marriage and career. ''There is an historical shift in having all these questions,'' she said. ''Now women realize they can have both career and family. But it's difficult weighing how much you are going to have of a career or a family at a certain time.''
''What attracts women viewers is that the characters are conflicted and complicated,'' she says. ''We want to see women in the process of working through these questions.''
Samantha, who is determined to separate sex and love, finds herself, in spite of herself, emotionally involved with the gorgeous Smith, her much younger lover. ''She has now seen that love and sex do not have to be so vehemently separated,'' Ms. Kim says. Miranda, after fretting that baby Brady loves his baby sitter more than he loves her, ''in the end works out a schedule to be in the office less.''
One reason that Carrie is so popular with viewers, Ms. Kim says, is that ''Carrie has the most clarity.'' In nearly every show, Carrie articulates her quandary in voice-over as she types her sex column on her computer, enabling the audience to follow her thought processes.
''The pleasure comes from the process,'' Ms. Kim says, ''not the answers.''
If not answers, then a glimmer of self-awareness is what Laura Kipnis, author of ''Against Love: A Polemic,'' believes to be part of the show's appeal. A generation of women, she says, see in ''Sex and the City'' their own awkwardness -- an awkwardness that comes from sex with relative strangers. ''There are frequent moments of painful recognition,'' she says, recalling the episode in which Miranda starts looking through her new boyfriend's stuff and then, to her embarrassment, is discovered. ''The show is all about independence,'' Ms. Kipnis says, ''but independence is disappointing also.''
One of the more unusual views of the show's appeal is held by Elaine Showalter, author of ''Inventing Herself: Claiming a Feminist Intellectual Heritage.'' ''This show is a total fantasy space in which you ward off danger with clothes,'' she says, theorizing that the characters' Prada handbags and Manolo Blahnik and Jimmy Choo shoes are really fetishes to guard against the dangerous consequences of sexuality. She cites Freud's essay ''The Medusa's Head,'' in which he uses the term ''apotropaic'' -- from the Greek, meaning safeguarding against evil.
''In my view, the world has not changed all that much,'' she says. Female sexuality is still punished. ''If you look at the newspapers it doesn't seem to have changed -- this female body found, that one raped,'' she says. ''I do think the cultural message of the show is about what feminists used to call 'pleasure and danger.' It's about sexual adventurousness and its risks.''
The ''Sex and the City'' syndrome seems not quite so dangerous -- or symbolic -- for Constance Penley, a professor of film studies at the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the author of ''NASA/Trek, Popular Science and Sex in America,'' a study of erotic fantasies about the ''Star Trek'' series. Like traditional romance novels, she says, ''Sex and the City'' is all about women trying to understand men, or ''the semiotics of masculinity.''
Carrie, for instance, is always trying to understand Big's behavior. ''It's about why his jerky behavior is only jerky behavior on the surface,'' she says. ''It all has to do with the fact that 'He still wants me, and I'll end up with him.'''
In the end, Ms. Penley makes it all sound pretty simple: ''Women still feel they have to figure men out.''
COVER STORY
