WHEN a Simsbury woman could not afford to pay the more than $200,000 in legal fees associated with the prolonged custody battles initiated by her former husband, who she said was emotionally abusive to her and her children, two legal professionals assigned to protect her children's interest started foreclosure proceedings on her house.
''This house was home to the children whose best interests the attorneys at one time represented,'' she said. ''No one considered how the children might react to the threat of homelessness.''
A Hartford woman filed for divorce in 1997, after she said her husband tried to choke her. Initially, the court determined that her former husband should have supervised visits with the couple's three young children, she said. When the children complained about their father's treatment of them during the visits, however, she protested the arrangement. She eventually lost custody.
''The lawyer claimed my daughter was lying about the abuse,'' the Hartford woman said. ''How can you force your kids to see someone who is cruel?''
Although the courts have provisions to protect children's interests in divorce and custody cases, the two women, and others who have been through the system, say that Connecticut's family court system is biased against verbally or physically abused spouses and their children.
In October, a group of six women joined forces with therapists, social workers, academics and legal professionals to form Connecticut Justice for Children, an advocacy group that aims to shepherd abused women and children through the legal system and work for changes in Connecticut law.
''It's like everyone is playing a game that no one gave you the rules to,'' the Simsbury woman said of her court experience. ''I have no idea what made them totally ignore the pleas and letters from my children.''
These experiences are not anomalies, those who work with abused women and their children said.
''Judges discount allegations,'' Lundy Bancroft of Massachusetts, an abuse counselor and author of two books on domestic violence, said. ''They refuse to look at evidence of abuse. They are determined to maintain the father's connection.''
Judith Hyde of Coventry, a retired child and family therapist, said she had seen many custody battles won by the spouse with the financial means to keep the issue before the courts, regardless of evidence of physical or emotional abuse. Because abusive spouses have controlling personalities, they often prolong custody battles to wear out and financially ruin abused spouses, she said.
A 2002 study by the Wellesley Centers for Women found that abusive partners often gain custody of their children, if they seek it. Titled ''Battered Mothers Speak Out,'' the study said that evidence in Massachusetts showed that fathers who actively sought custody of their children gained it 70 percent to 90 percent of the time, regardless of whether they had a history of abuse.
Evan Stark, a Rutgers University sociologist who has served as an expert witness in many abuse cases, said he thinks the statistics are duplicated in many states, including Connecticut.
Connecticut is one of only four states in which state law fails to direct the courts in any manner when abuse is an issue in a custody case. That leaves it up to individual judges to decide whether or not to consider abuse allegations. Many do not because they believe women are likely to make allegations only to secure custody, Mr. Stark said.
''There is a very big misunderstanding of what domestic violence is,'' he said.
If a woman appears too strong and emotionally unscathed in court, judges often don't believe she was abused, he said. If the emotional scars of domestic violence are readily evident in court, however, judges might rule that the mother is in no shape to adequately care for her children, he said.
''Often mothers are emotional basket cases by the time they get to court,'' he said. ''A woman loses either way. If she is too strong, we say she can't be battered. If she's too weak, we say she's unfit.''
Mr. Stark and others who work in the area of domestic violence said they have high hopes that Connecticut Justice for Children will achieve some changes because it is a grassroots movement whose members have been through the system and know its vagaries firsthand.
''I think the courts need to listen to the experiences of the people who are going through them,'' Penni Micca, an advocate for domestic violence victims who works for Hartford's Interval House but is stationed at the Manchester Police Department said.
''It's not every judge in every court room, but we're at a point now that many victims of domestic violence are more terrified to go to court than to face their abusers. Some go back to their abusers because they feel it is the lesser of two evils.''
Barbara Janik of Vernon and K. Joy Banach of Avon, co-directors of the group, said one of its goals was to ensure that all professionals who work on divorce and custody cases are trained in domestic violence issues and child development.
They said that often the professionals assigned by the courts to represent and assess children in divorce and custody cases have no child development training, are not familiar with children's special needs and cannot point out the developmental and emotional differences between a young child and a teen-ager.
The group also wants to work for changes in Connecticut law and has set up a buddy system in which those who have already been through a divorce and custody case are paired with someone who is currently going through the system. The buddy attends court hearings and provides moral and emotional support, they said.
''They make you believe that you are alone, a bad mother,'' Ms. Janik said. ''If you heard these stories on the street, you wouldn't believe them. You would say, 'what's wrong with her?' But now we see there are many others in the same situation all over the state.''
Ms. Janik said she spent nine years in the court system and ultimately lost custody of her daughter, although she had initially been granted it.
''He wanted custody,'' she said of her former husband, who she said was abusive. ''He hired a powerful lawyer. He wore me down financially.''
She spent nearly $200,000 throughout the court battles and declared personal bankruptcy before losing custody, she said.
''They find the ultimate way of controlling you is through your kids,'' she said of abusive spouses.
The Hartford woman said she lost custody of her three children after trying to prevent them from being forced to visit her former husband, who she said had been abusive to her.
''My children were begging to not go on visits,'' she said. ''How can you have to force your kids to be abused?''
The Simsbury woman said that only the ability to refinance her home staved off foreclosure. Her money was drained when her former husband repeatedly brought her to court for delivering the children minutes late for court-ordered visits or when one of her children refused to visit after saying the father was being abusive.
''He admitted to $2 million in assets,'' she said. ''I had nothing. But payment was still 50-50.''
A 19-year-old woman who made abuse allegations against her father during her parents' divorce trial when she was 4 said that she suffered emotional and psychological problems because she was forced to live with him.
''I wish that someone would have listened, preferably the judge,'' said the woman, who asked that her name not be used. ''If a child says they are being abused, they should not be sent to live with their abuser.''
