JERRY RICHARDSON is the Carolina Panthers' owner and founder, but anybody with a few zillion disposable dollars can buy those titles. He's different because he's the only owner of a National Football League franchise to have also been a player in the league since George Halas, who played for the Chicago Bears in a leather helmet more than 80 years ago.
Long before Richardson, now 67, made the money with Hardee's fast-food restaurants that helped pay the $170 million expansion fee for the Panthers, he was a rookie wide receiver for the 1959 Baltimore Colts who caught a 12-yard touchdown pass from Johnny Unitas in a 31-16 victory over the Giants in the N.F.L. championship game.
''When we left the huddle, John told me, 'Be alert,' '' he recalled Friday. ''Raymond Berry was split wide to the left, I was lined up to the left in what is now called the slot. Whenever we practiced that play, John always threw the ball to Raymond on a slant pattern, but this time, when I went out to the left on a little flare pattern, he threw the ball to me.''
During that season the 6-foot-3, 185-pound Richardson, who had been drafted in the 13th round out of Wofford College in Spartanburg, S.C., caught only 7 passes for 81 yards, but 3 were for touchdowns. In a game against the Bears in Wrigley Field, he also caught the eye of Halas, the growling coach and N.F.L. founder known as Papa Bear.
''I never met George formally,'' Richardson recalled. ''But whenever I was near the Bears' sideline that day, he said things to me because I was a rookie. I said things back to him. We won the game. And since I've owned the Panthers, whenever I see George's daughter, Virginia McCaskey, at league meetings, we laugh about the discussion I had with her father.''
As a rookie, Richardson's salary was $7,500 and a $750 signing bonus. With a raise to $8,750 in 1960, he caught 15 passes for 171 yards and a touchdown. But when Weeb Ewbank, then the Colts' coach, offered him only $9,750 in 1961, he balked.
''I thought I deserved $10,000,'' he said. ''I went to training camp anyway, but when I saw that Weeb wasn't going to come up any higher, I told my wife Rosalind that it was time I decided to do something else. It was the luckiest thing I ever did. If I hadn't left the Colts, I never would have made the money to own the Panthers.''
Richardson and Charles Bradshaw, who had been his quarterback at Fayetteville (N.C.) High School, purchased a Hardee's franchise in Spartanburg for $3,000 and worked it, selling 15-cent hamburgers, French fries and soft drinks.
''One by one, we added more Hardee's franchises,'' Richardson said. ''When we eventually went public, our goal was to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange by the time I was 40, which would be July 1976. And in June of 1976, we were.''
Before the Panthers' first season, Richardson set another goal: to get to the Super Bowl within 10 years. They advanced to the 1996 National Football Conference championship game before losing in Green Bay and deteriorating into also-rans. But at the end of their ninth season, they're in Super Bowl XXXVIII tonight against the New England Patriots.
''I think I have an appreciation for this game unlike any other current owner,'' he said. ''I was in the huddle in the fourth quarter of that 1959 championship game when the Giants were beating us, 9-7. I was in the game when we were ahead, 14-9, and then 21-9 on the touchdown I scored. There's not a current owner with a memory like that. It's been a blessing for me.''
It has also been a blessing for the Panthers players who know that their owner and founder played the game. ''You want to come through for a great owner like Jerry Richardson,'' linebacker Dan Morgan said. ''When you talk to him, you know he means business.''
But for all his involvement, Richardson doesn't remind his coaches and players that he played the game.
''I try real hard,'' he said, ''not to be all over our players and coaches as they try to get their work done. I'm never tempted to get involved in second-guesses. I can count only five times in our history when I addressed a coach over something that miffed me. I do get involved in conduct issues, but I don't do that at the stadium. They do get to come to my house.''
His home is also where Richardson conducted most of the interviews when he, his son Mark (the Panthers' president) and Marty Hurney (the Panthers' general manager) were searching for a head coach after a dismal 1-15 record in 2001.
''We interviewed Tony Dungy, Ted Cottrell, Marvin Lewis and John Fox,'' he said. ''John impressed us right away with his enthusiasm, his confidence in himself and his plan that was compatible with how we wanted the team to be built.''
And unlike some nouveau riche N.F.L. owners, Richardson has been compatible with the ''32 teams but one league'' philosophy of the older owners. He occasionally confides in Wellington Mara, the Giants' 87-year-old co-owner.
''Jerry's solid,'' Mara said here Friday. ''He knows where he came from and how he got here. Unlike some other owners I won't name who changed their values, he sees the league first. As an owner in a league with 31 other owners, you have to do things differently than you would as an entrepreneur.''
Jerry Richardson has always done things differently.
As a 13th-round choice, he talked back to George Halas, the only other N.F.L. owner who also played. He caught a touchdown pass from Johnny Unitas that helped deprive the Giants of a championship. And after walking out on the Colts, he built the Hardee's empire that enabled him to own the Panthers.
Sports of The Times
