THE LIBERATED BRIDE
By A. B. Yehoshua.
Translated by Hillel Halkin.
568 pp. New York:
Harcourt. $27.
YOCHANAN RIVLIN, a professor at Haifa University, is an unquiet man who even in repose keeps others from sleeping -- particularly his wife, Hagit, a senior judge in Israel's courts and a woman of steely mind and fragile spirit. Rivlin functions in a state of inspiration and excess. His moral synapses are stuck in firing mode. His sense of intellectual direction is unfailing; unfailingly he follows it too far. He would not know a boundary if he saw one. In this, as in much else, the great Israeli writer A. B. Yehoshua makes his winning and troublesome protagonist a very symbol of his country.
''The Liberated Bride'' is a magnificent, often comic, and humanely inexorable journey among Israel's Jews and their secret and denied sharers: its Arabs. (The novel was written several years ago, when things were actively desperate but in some ways short of today's despairing stasis.) What launches and propels the book, though, is Rivlin's personal obsession.
The marriage of his beloved son, Ofer, to Galya, daughter of a rich hotelkeeper, had ended five years earlier. He alone seems unable to accept the breakup or, more exactly, the unexplained cause that led to it. As he searches obstinately for reasons, Hagit, whose love and lucid knowledge of her husband is at once his bulwark and his confinement -- so wise, Yehoshua is, about old marriages -- all but forbids him to go on inquiring. He goes on, nonetheless.
His search, with its complexities, its host of vivid encounters and the tension of its unraveling mystery, would be a novel in itself and a brilliant one. Yehoshua does more than portray characters. He feints at them, sidles around them, circles behind to engage them -and steps aside so that it is the reader, breathing close, who gets knocked down.
Rivlin, sublimely inappropriate, interrogates Galya at the mourners' gathering for her father, who has just died. She tells him nothing; neither does Ofer, who has moved to France but returns. In the wrenching correspondence between these two we read the secret that has divided them; a secret that Rivlin, despite his seeking, never does learn. He is both absurd and sympathetic and yet, by the end, his importunate persistence will turn out to be paradoxically healing.
The story splendidly branches and exfoliates. The secrecy with which Rivlin pursues his quest, fearing Hagit's disapproval, leads to an explosion between them. It is Homeric and comic, followed by silent anger and avoidance, and imperceptibly returning to the steady state of marital need. There are a couple of near-erotic passages with other women -- one of them Galya's older sister -- yet Rivlin, infinitely susceptible, is helplessly faithful.
There is much more. Yehoshua has written a darkly scintillant comedy, centered around Rivlin's obsessive pilgrimage; a comedy that occasionally gestures at tragedy without trying to summon it. At the same time, the author involves him in a different journey, equally brilliant and more astonishing.
Yehoshua seeks to present two worlds, those of Israel's Jewish majority and its Arab minority. He has done it rather as Tolstoy wrote of war and peace: two novels, in a sense, yet intimately joined. Paradoxically -- and paradox, the juxtaposing of opposites, is the book's engendering force -- the war is mainly reflected in the zestfully intricate quarrels in the Jewish part of the novel. The peace largely flowers when Rivlin finds himself breaking through the looking glass into the Arab story.
As ''Bride'' begins, Rivlin and Hagit are in an Israeli Arab village attending the wedding of Samaher, a prize student in Haifa's mainly Arab student body. Rivlin is what today is often called an Orientalist, a pejorative term for one who studies Arab history and culture from an external position of power: originally Western colonial and now, from the subject's point of view, the Israeli equivalent. From such a position, insight and even genuine goodwill can be a species of oppression. He knows us better than we know ourselves, an Arab remarks, not admiringly, of one of Rivlin's cruder colleagues. (Like any large artist, Yehoshua creates a world where judgment is only one more faculty, and not really empowered. It is irony that commands: for Rivlin; the stubbornly perceptive Hagit is his own Orientalist.)
And yet -- with fine Talmudic doubleness it is always ''and yet,'' not ''and,'' that is the conjunction of choice here -- Rivlin's prickly dedication has earned his students' tentative affection. At the wedding he and Hagit are treated with solicitous care. She blossoms and charms; he broods on his son's broken marriage and eats far too much of the lavishly proffered meal. His stomach, reluctant to depart from the subjects it persists in churning over, aches from displacement as well as from lamb. Pain and his inability to find answers have driven the unstably incandescent protagonist, a man of excessive answers, into near breakdown. It makes him open to a kind of visionary fugue state.
The most glittering of the novel's many golden threads emerges here in a tangle of complication. (Yehoshua does complications as so many inciting layers of clarity.) Through a variety of circumstances -- Hagit will be away on a judicial mission, Samaher will go into a decline and require a home visit from her professor -- Rivlin is drawn out of his domestic obsessions and into the world of the Other.
Worn out by his own turbulent thoughts, he finds himself not just welcomed but soothed in the quiet order and grace of an Arab household. Samaher's mother invites him to bathe and rest; that evening, joining in the feast that follows the daytime Ramadan fast, he senses in his hosts something deeper than a prescribed hospitality.
A Jew has trusted them enough to sleep like a baby through a whole afternoon's nap. Here and in other encounters, Yehoshua plants a startling notion. The rarity in Israel, perhaps salvific, is not instances of Jewish help to the Arabs but, among a people of expansively crowded prowess, the willingness to be helped. No doubt today's headlines make the notion quaint; but Yehoshua writes less about pain's present than about its past and perhaps even its future.
The quiet moments are followed by a dreamlike progression; call it Rivlin in Nighttown. Rashid, Samaher's cousin, undertakes to drive Rivlin home. His offer is wholehearted -- he is one of several profoundly depicted Arab figures -- but his run has as many curlicues as a Mozarabic frieze. Various errands must be done on the way; some of them mean crossing from Israel proper into the West Bank.
There is a stop to visit Rashid's sister, who has forfeited her right to live in Israel by moving across the line to be with an invalid husband. Later, her efforts to return to her family on the Israeli side lead to a tragedy whose random banality stands for the true cost of occupation.
There is a visit to a Greek Orthodox church to deliver a gift to its priest. It is Easter, and Rivlin hears a Lebanese nun sing with transfiguring beauty. There is unquestioning hospitality and the evidences of a culture that, up to then, Rivlin knew intellectually without experiencing it. There is, as well, the shadow of violence, a whisper of Islamic Jihad. Nervous for Rivlin's safety, his hosts put him up for the night. The stranger is God in the Arab tradition, but he is also, because this novel plays for no cheap stakes, the stranger.
Such details may overbalance my terser summary of the sinewy, far longer and more explosively pleasurable ''daytime'' portions of ''The Liberated Bride.'' If so, it is because it's much rarer for an Israeli novelist to portray the Arabs with such powerfully chastened vision than to write splendidly about the Jews. (The author goes so far as to set down much of the dialogue with the Arab characters, along with long excerpts from classical poetry, in Arabic. These passages are followed in the original by a Hebrew translation. Here Hillel Halkin has translated everything so skillfully into English that ''impersonated'' is more accurate.)
But Yehoshua essentially is writing of his own people. Rivlin's journey is intended to provide a more spacious vision for his obsessive situation, and perhaps for theirs. At one point his brother-in-law, on leave from his travels as an international agricultural expert, deplores the provincialism that has replaced Israel's ecumenical idealism of a generation ago. Yehoshua, who is near 70 and a dove, has written a novel that incarnates the message to extraordinary literary effect.
Richard Eder writes book reviews and articles for The Times.
