LEHMAN COLLEGE doesn't have an art collection in the usual sense. But Susan Hoeltzel, the director of the school's gallery, has created a Web site that makes an exhaustive survey of public art in the Bronx from several angles. What has emerged might be the 21st-century equivalent of a collection.
''Public Art in the Bronx'' was started in late 2002 and more than 100 works are documented on it so far. Ms Hoeltzel and her staff are always on the alert for more both old and new. The site -- bronxart.lehman.cuny.edu/pa -- includes maps and biographies, as well as a section called ''Walking Tours'' and another called ''Ideas for Teachers.'' Ms Hoeltzel has been invited to meetings around the country to talk about the site as a model for educators and to demonstrate the possibilities of using a Web site as a teaching tool.
The idea for the Web site grew out of an exhibition at the Lehman College Art Gallery in 1993 that included works by contemporary artists who had public art work in the Bronx.
''CD-ROM's were the way to go in those days,'' said Ms. Hoeltzel, sounding as if she was referring to the dark ages. ''I was considering making a CD-ROM of Bronx public art but I'm glad I waited. A Web site is much more flexible. You can keep adding things -- and you can correct mistakes.''
Not the least of the benefits coming from ''Public Art in the Bronx'' is the burnishing of the negative image that, though diminishing, still attaches itself to the Bronx. That aspect of the project, as well as the quality of the public art itself, has helped bring in a number of important grants including money from the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Endowment for the Arts, and a number of local sources.
''We've had over 48,000 visitors so far,'' Ms. Hoeltzel said. ''There is a link for people to e-mail me. I've been asked a range of things: somebody saw his old high school listed and asked if I could help get a copy of his grades. But mostly people write to correct errors or suggest new works for inclusion.''
Even though there is still disagreement what qualifies as public art, Ms. Hoeltzel is guided by the idea that it should be free and easily accessible.
By almost any definition proposed, the Bronx is especially rich in public art.. The Bronx Zoo turns out to be stocked with art from the early 20th century, and it has the oldest piece, the Rockefeller Fountain, dating from 1872. The newest work, not yet on the Web site, is an elaborate sculptural installation in bronze, ''Suspended Mind,'' made by Tom Otterness for the Carl Sagan Discovery Center in the new Montefiore Children's Hospital.
Some have suggested that graffiti should be included but that runs counter to another one of Ms. Hoeltzel's rules: Anything designated a piece of public art should have a life span of at least 10 years.
Setting out on a mini tour of the borough's public art, Ms. Hoeltzel began with a work on a new walkway outside the Fine Arts Building of Lehman College. ''Intersections'' by Wopo Holup is very subtle, featuring symbols and short texts, contributed by six college departments, embedded in the cement. ''This is my contribution,'' Ms. Hoeltzel said, pointing to the scrawled outline of a turtle on the pavement. ''It's a symbol of Time and is copied from a petroglyph in the Bronx zoo. That's really the oldest piece of public art.'' A sculpture of an owl, personifying Wisdom, is perched on a nearby fence.
The Grand Concourse has a rich diversity of public art that Ms. Hoeltzel was eager to point out. The Criminal and Family Courts building has tapestries from the 1970's made by several major artists. The sleek new Housing Court Building has work by Jorge Tacla and two Russian émigrés, Vitaly Komar and Alexander Melamid.
The Works Progress Administration is well represented by the 13 murals celebrating the nobility of the American worker painted in the lobby of the Bronx General Post Office in 1939 by Ben Shahn and his wife, Bernarda Bryson Shahn. These powerful murals have, sadly, been neglected since the Depression years. A different sort of tribute, at Hostos Community College, is Faith Ringgold's painted quilt, done in 1994, dedicated to the 19th-century educator advocate of Puerto Rican independence, Eugenio Maria de Hostos.
The new station for the No. 4 subway at Yankee Stadium is itself a study in contrasts. Vito Acconci has seemingly dislocated the walls of the station in a way that is both playful and ominous, while, perhaps as a corrective, Helene Brandt has created a trompe l'oeil mosaic titled ''Room of Tranquillity.''
Reflecting on what remains undocumented, Ms. Hoeltzel said: ''I haven't included the newer gravestones in Woodlawn Cemetery. And then I might do Bronx architecture.''
ART REVIEW
