WHEN I started engineering school I had no idea I would leave India. I grew up in Bombay and Delhi, but pretty much everyone graduating with me in the early 1980's was going to the United States. I thought, ''Maybe I should do this, too.''
I took the GMAT and scored in the highest percentile. I was accepted to many of the big-name schools, and they all said ''come here,'' but being short on finances, I found that this was something I could not do.
I got assistantship offers from a couple of universities so I could work and pay my way through school. I chose the University of Massachusetts at Amherst because one of my classmates was there. It was my first time outside of India and away from the cocoon of my family.
During my first semester I got only half the assistantship, so I could afford to eat only one meal a day. I remember going to the cafeteria for dinner on my first day. My eyes popped open when I saw the unlimited Pepsi. I thought, ''This is the land of milk and honey.''
There were two things that shaped me during my years at business school. One was reading ''Walden'' by Henry David Thoreau. Amherst was close to Walden Pond and I was able to go there, so I decided to read the book. Here's a guy who says, ''I am willing to give up what is traditional to pursue my beliefs, and if you let me do what I want to do the way I want to do it, it probably will be better than having someone looking over my shoulder.''
Another thing that shaped me was my trip to the John F. Kennedy library. I remember being in awe. There is a recording of Kennedy and the governor of Mississippi in a discussion about letting a black student into the university. Here was Kennedy, willing to face down the leader of one of his own states for a principle important to him, and never coming across as hard or pushy. You always look at America with rose-colored eyes, but this added to that.
When I graduated from business school, I went to work at Pepsi. It was a wonderful place, because you got a lot of responsibility early in life. At that time, a unit, a trucking company, had $35 million in annual losses. Pepsi was happy to sell it for nothing. I was involved in the discussions and we found this one buyer.
Through some creative structuring I was able to get $35 million for the division. It was an amazing deal. I was feeling good; everyone was feeling good.
But the new owner overestimated how easy it would be to stem the losses and started running out of cash. This company went bankrupt and filed suit against Pepsi, saying the sale was not legitimate. We won, but I learned a lesson: Never take every last penny from a deal.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
