WHEN Keith Robinson was a cello student at Curtis Institute of Music in Philadelphia in the 1980's, he took a class taught by Norman Carol, the former concertmaster of the Philadelphia Orchestra. Seeing that the young musicians were not practicing their orchestra parts with the same commitment they had as they worked on their solos in Brahms and Beethoven sonatas, Mr. Carol would start his classes with a tongue-in-cheek disclaimer, ''I know you are all going to be soloists, but ....''
Mr. Robinson is cellist with the Miami String Quartet, which became the quartet-in-residence at the University of Hartford's Hartt School of Music last September. There, Mr. Robinson and other members of the group perform and teach master classes to undergraduate and graduate students. But as a teacher, he finds many students who acknowledge that solo work is not the only way to build a career.
''I can't tell you how many times I have had a student say, 'I want to be in a quartet, or I'm planning on being in an orchestra, or perhaps a teacher,''' he said.
''I think Hartt was on the cutting edge 20 years ago when they started a quartet program,'' Mr. Robinson added. ''Now many universities do the same thing, realizing that a large number of their students will end up with a chamber music career.''
Formed in 1989, the Miami Quartet includes Mr. Robinson and his wife, Cathy Meng Robinson, who is the second violinist; Ivan Chan, the first violinist; and Chauncey Patterson, a violist. The musicians are young; their ages range from the mid-30's to the early-40's.
The Robinsons, both graduates of the Curtis Institute, are original members of the group. It was formed when they were teaching at the New World School of the Arts in Miami, the city that gave the ensemble its name.
The group attracted early notice in the early 1990's after winning a series of international competitions. It soon began recording for BMG Conifer.
Today the quartet presents an average of 100 concerts annually, including frequent appearances at the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center in New York City. It also holds residencies at Florida International University and Kent State University.
These days the group appears regularly at the Hartt School. In addition to their teaching responsibilities in the quartet program, the musicians are in the midst of performing a series of four concerts at the university's Lincoln Theater. Their next performance is on Thursday, with a program of music by Beethoven, Brahms and the contemporary Latvian composer Peteris Vasks.
The musicians also plan to mentor a graduate student quartet, whose members are to be chosen by audition.
For nearly 22 years, the Hartt School's quartet program was led by the Emerson String Quartet, the multi-Grammy-winning ensemble that almost single-handedly attracted a new audience to the genre in the 1980's. When the group announced in 2000 that it would be leaving the university to be closer to its New York home base, a yearlong search for a replacement was conducted. Finalists included the Miro Quartet, Lark Quartet and the Colorado Quartet.
For Hartt School officials, luring a major quartet to the campus is a crucial means of attracting high-caliber students and financial support.
''It speaks to a kind of musicianship for the school itself,'' said Malcolm Morrison, the school's dean. ''I think that people see that expression of quality and it encourages them to support us. There is no doubt that certain of our donations every year are dedicated towards the support of that program.''
The Miami String Quartet will perform at the Lincoln Theater at the University of Hartford, 200 Bloomfield Avenue, on Thursday night at 8. Information: (860)768-4228 or (800)274-8587.
