HARDLY a year goes by without another modern-day adaptation of Anton Chekhov's ''Seagull,'' ''The Three Sisters'' or ''Uncle Vanya.'' Over the last decade, these classics, which were originally set in the Russian countryside, have been relocated to places as diverse as the beaches of the Hamptons, starlet-filled California, rural West Virginia, a dingy Moscow apartment and a hipped-out Manhattan nightclub. Rewriting Chekhov is becoming even more trendy than rewriting Shakespeare.
The latest (and most high-profile) touch-up is Regina Taylor's ''Drowning Crow,'' a slang-filled and succinctly written African-American version of ''The Seagull'' that is in previews at the Biltmore Theater, where it opens on Feb. 19.
This update, which had its world premiere at the Goodman Theater in Chicago in 2002, takes place on the Gullah Islands off the coast of South Carolina. The stand-ins for Chekhov's aging diva, Madame Irina Arkadina, and her symbolist playwright son, Constantine Treplev, are Josephine Nicholas Ark (played by Alfre Woodard), a former member of the Negro Ensemble Company, and C-Trip (Anthony Mackie), a conceptual performance artist whose play within a play resembles something you might hear at an arty poetry slam deep in the Lower East Side.
While references to Leo Tolstoy and Eleanora Duse have been replaced with ones to Spike Lee and Angela Bassett, ''Drowning Crow'' is actually more faithful than most Chekhov adaptations. It retains the structure, themes and, in many cases, the actual lines of the original ''Seagull.'' Ms. Taylor, who worked off an unpublished translation by Curt Columbus, said: ''I liberally sampled from Chekhov. Other times, I just riffed.''
Ms. Taylor, who is currently working on the book to the musical version of ''The Color Purple,'' which is aiming for a Broadway opening in 2005, said that Chekhov's family background was one of the reasons she wanted to set ''The Seagull'' in an African-American community. ''His family is descended from serfs, which is like the Russian version of slavery,'' Ms. Taylor said. ''His plays lend themselves to translation through black people because of his particular perspective.''
In the first excerpt below, taken from the beginning of ''The Seagull,'' in Mr. Columbus's translation, Treplev complains to his uncle about the state of the Russian theater, which he describes as moralistic, self-important and conservative. One century later and a continent away, Ms. Taylor's C-Trip offers up basically the same critique in ''Drowning Crow.''
Treplev's declaration, ''We need new forms,'' is one of the most famous lines from all of Chekhov, and while it is often understood as a rallying cry against the staid and moralistic 19th-century theater, Chekhov was satirizing the naïve young playwright as much as he was identifying with him. ''Ultimately, writing is about writing from the heart, not finding the new form,'' Ms. Taylor said. ''There's much to be gained from looking to the past.''
JASON ZINOMAN
THE SEAGULL
TREPLEV: All I see is that the contemporary theater is nothing but the same old thing, the same old conventions. The curtain goes up, those bright lights come on, and you have a room with three walls! And those great talents, the high priests of that sacred art, will demonstrate for you how people eat, drink, love, walk, wear their coats! From those sad little pictures and words, they try to squeeze a moral -- of course, only little, palatable morals, please, something we can take home with us! When they've smothered me for the thousandth time with the same thing over and over and over, then I run and I run. Like Maupassant ran from the Eiffel Tower, its ugliness crushing his brain.
SORIN: We can't do without the theater.
TREPLEV: But we need new forms! New forms are necessary, otherwise it's better to have nothing at all.
DROWNING CROW
C-TRIP: All I see in her theater is the same o' same o'. The lights come up on the same old room and the same old three walls and the holy actors of the holy art demonstrate how people eat, drink, love, walk, wear their coats. Like holy communion -- they serve us little scenes -- words -- an easily digestible moral -- we can smack our lips and rub our bellies on the way home. Society is healed!
When they've crammed the same old thing down my throat for the thousandth time -- The same old ''Raisin in the Sun'' over and over again then see this Black boy run. I run like the villager from Godzilla -- I run like Fred Sanford from Aunt Ester -- Afraid of her ugliness crushing his brain.
PETER: You prefer TV, movies----
C-TRIP: Mind numbing manna for the masses----
PETER: Your mother brings life to the stage----
C-TRIP: The Great White Way
Where nobody remembers
What's said by the end of the play
Her theater can't change the way we see
Her theater has impact
Of zero velocity
On today's society --
Bury them rattling bones --
Burn down the old school --
Tear down them walls --
We need new rules --
Or nothing at all
THEATER: EXCERPT
