However he fares in the coming primaries, Howard Dean has already touched more than a few young lives. Around the country -- campus by campus, computer by computer -- thousands of teenagers and 20-somethings have fallen hard for his campaign. They're lucky. It's a wonderful experience to lose one's political heart for the first time, as did the college students who sacrificed long hair and beards to be ''clean for Gene'' -- Eugene McCarthy -- in 1968, or the young men who stood bare-chested waving placards for Bill Bradley in the New Hampshire snow or followed the banner of Senator John McCain in 2000. The newly enchanted of 2004 bring a rush of young blood into the nation's old campaign arteries.
Unfortunately, the nearly inevitable conclusion of these first heady forays into presidential campaigning is political heartbreak. ''Don't you lose some essence of life when you really can't give your heart?'' asked Kate DeBolt, an 18-year-old Floridian who says she could ''go to the ends of the earth'' for Dr. Dean.
Her candidate is still very much in the race, and his campaign's pioneer work with the Internet is going to transform grass-roots politics. But ever since the Iowa returns, his more innocent followers have been grappling with the shock of discovering that it is possible to be pure of heart, fired with dedication, and still lose overwhelmingly. Many of the young people who heeded Senator McCarthy's antiwar message in 1968 spiraled away from politics forever when Hubert Humphrey won the Democratic nomination. The young Deaniacs could easily add to the near majority of eligible voters in America who find politics a waste of effort. One of the most important missions of the Democratic nominee this year is to help keep young people interested when the campaign boils down to the deeply pragmatic politics of the summer and fall.
Already, after losing in Iowa and New Hampshire, some of the Deaniacs are beginning to adjust, slightly. Chris Zychowski says whatever happens, this campaign has ''changed the course of my life.'' Mr. Zychowski, a software expert from San Francisco, says he's going to law school, a better route to fighting for the issues. As for politics, ''I'll vote for anyone but Bush, but I'll only devote my life like this to Howard Dean.''
If the product of the Dean movement is thousands of young people who are slightly hardened to the lure of a charismatic candidate, but determined to keep on fighting for a better world, it will have been a success no matter what happens to the former governor of Vermont. That is the way politics, at its best, works. First you discover that your paragon of a candidate is all too deeply human. Then you realize that the real heroics come from you and your friends with the pamphlets, stolidly going door to door.
