IF anybody could ask the city to keep the temperature turned down so that he could serve a warm cocktail, it might be Daniel Boulud, the French restaurateur who has become something of a force of nature himself in New York since arriving in 1982.
Mr. Boulud's winter cocktail menu, introduced on Monday at his signature restaurant, Daniel, on East 65th Street, includes Juniper and Berries, a warm apple-ciderlike drink with gin, crème de cassis and maple syrup.
When the temperature takes an icy dive, my brain puts in a nonnegotiable request for the toddy effect. I basically want to mull my body with heated spirits.
Daniel's winter cocktails, which were developed by Francesco Lafranconi, a bartender in Las Vegas, were unveiled at a party on Jan. 12. It was reassurance of a kind that Mr. Boulud's elegant lounge and bar, inside and to the right of the revolving-door entrance with its discreet opaque glass, can get as lively as Live Bait, a loud and rowdy student union of a restaurant and bar on East 23rd Street. People stacked up three deep to get Mr. Lafranconi's attention, and the elbows were out -- they were just really richly covered elbows.
On Wednesday, the night after a big snow, things were slower. Daniel's lounge-bar has the look of the interior of an executive jet -- waxed wood paneling, real art, plush velvet seating -- except it's the size of a 747.
The bar is gold-topped and has a black-and-white piano-key edge. Behind it, an arrangement of white amarylis rose toward the coffered ceiling like a pipe organ. There were a lot of neatly suited employees milling around without much to do, and the general hush, reinforced by the low light of the pleated-silk lampshades, felt like a casino off-season -- Monte Carlo in March.
A table of young Americans and Europeans discussed money in various accents. French movie jazz played in the background. At the bar alone, a woman in a black sleeveless cocktail dress sipped a glass of wine while reading a book. Was her name Amélie? Central casting!
I nursed my haute toddy and ate tiny olives. The Juniper and Berries is a true recipe: an inevitable blend of its ingredients. You taste everything, the lemon, the clove, and yet nothing but the cocktail itself. Savory and sweet, it has the good cook's sense of a traditional winter dish. Game with cherries, or bollito misto and mostarda. There's nothing wrong with the heat at Daniel, but the drink is also pleasantly warm -- ''tiède,'' in the vocabulary of presentation of French restaurants.
Half a cocktail later, you might find yourself praying for (more) snow.
JUNIPER AND BERRIES  Adapted from Daniel
1 ounce gin  1 ounce crème de cassis  2 ounces apple juice
3/4 ounce fresh lemon juice  1 tablespoon maple syrup  Lemon peel and 3 cloves  Fresh red currants.
1. Put liquid ingredients in a saucepan. Add lemon peel, pierced with the cloves. Warm for about two minutes over medium flame, but do not boil. Strain. Serve in a tempered-glass mug. Garnish with currants.
SHAKEN AND STIRRED
