Here at the Op-Ed page, there are certain questions that are as constant as the seasons. How does one get published? Who chooses the articles? Does The Times have an agenda? And, of course, why was my submission rejected? Now that I've been Op-Ed editor for a year, let me try to offer a few answers. But a little history first.
The inaugural Op-Ed page appeared on Sept. 21, 1970. It was named for its geography -- opposite the editorial page -- not because opinions would be expressed in its columns. A page of clashing opinions, however, was the aim from the beginning. According to an editorial introducing the page, Op-Ed was created to provide a forum for writers with ''no institutional connection with The Times'' -- writers whose views would ''very frequently be completely divergent from our own.''
To understand Op-Ed, it helps to understand how the page fits into The Times. The paper is divided into two worlds: news and editorial. News is big. With the exception of advertising, it is responsible for just about everything you read in The Times: the national, foreign and metropolitan reports, the Book Review, the magazine and so on. Editorial is tiny. Everything it produces appears on the page you're reading now and the one to its left.
In addition to Op-Ed, these two pages are home to editorials, letters and the columns. Each plays a different role. The editorials are the responsibility of the publisher and the editorial board -- they speak for the editorial page and not, under any circumstances, for the news side of the paper. The letters office publishes readers' responses to news articles, editorials and essays that have appeared in The Times. The seven regular staff columnists represent themselves.
And Op-Ed? It's sometimes easiest to define it in the negative. Op-Ed is different from the editorial page in that it does not represent the views of anyone in the editorial division, even its own editors. It is different from letters in that it is not a venue to debate articles that have appeared in The Times. It is different from the columnists in that, well, the columnists do their own thing. (They are the responsibility of the publisher and editorial page editor. Our involvement with them is pretty much limited to filling the extra space when they go on vacation.)
These differences are important because Op-Ed, in some measure, is shaped by its neighbors. The Op-Ed editors tend to look for articles that cover subjects and make arguments that have not been articulated elsewhere in the editorial space. If the editorial page, for example, has a forceful, long-held view on a certain topic, we are more inclined to publish an Op-Ed that disagrees with that view. If you open the newspaper and find the editorial page and Op-Ed in lock step agreement or consistently writing on the same subject day after day, then we aren't doing our job.
Our decisions about which essays to publish aren't governed by a need for editorial variety alone. Among other things, we look for timeliness, ingenuity, strength of argument, freshness of opinion, clear writing and newsworthiness. Personal experiences and first-person narrative can be great, particularly when they're in service to a larger idea. So is humor, when it's funny. Does it help to be famous? Not really. In fact, the bar of acceptance gets nudged a little higher for people who have the means to get their message out in other ways -- elected officials, heads of state, corporate titans. It's incumbent on them to say something forthright and unexpected. Op-Ed real estate is too valuable to be taken up with press releases.
After all, we don't have a lot of space. On a day with two columnists and an advertisement, Op-Ed has room for about 1,200 words of type. That's it. (Speaking of those advertisements: we have nothing to do with them. They're sold, placed and scheduled by The Times' advertising department.) These unyielding boundaries mean that Op-Ed cannot harbor any aspirations about being encyclopedic. (''All the views that are fit to print?'' Not a chance, alas.) For this reason, important subjects, issues and ideas will go uncovered. Op-Ed will inevitably be subjective and idiosyncratic.
These space considerations can be frustrating for editors and contributors alike. Roughly 1,200 unsolicited submissions come to our office every week via e-mail, fax and the United States Postal Service. Many of these submissions are first-rate -- and most get turned down simply because we don't have enough room to publish everything we like. How do we know they're good? Because all submissions are read; many are reviewed by the entire staff; some are hotly debated before a decision is made.
Three more things to know about the process: First, no article is guaranteed publication. Everything is written on spec. This applies to all articles, even those we commission. (Op-Ed is not a one-way street. We frequently call up people and invite them to write for us.) Second, what comes to Op-Ed stays in Op-Ed. Your ideas are not passed on to our Times colleagues for their use. Third, because we receive so many submissions, we cannot respond to everyone who sends us an article. If you haven't heard from us within two weeks, you should assume that we are not going to be able to use your submission.
Are there guidelines for submitting an article? You bet. Shoot for about 750 words -- though it's worth remembering that some terrific and influential Op-Ed pieces have been as short as 300 words. Move quickly, the news does. Eschew, um, I mean, stay away from Olympian language and bureaucratic jargon (infrastructure, inputs, outlays). Write the article the way you'd like to write it -- not the way you think The Times wants you to write it. Make one argument thoroughly, point by point; the more detail the better. If you try to do too much, you can wind up with an article that, in striving to say everything, ends up saying nothing.
Also, you shouldn't feel that you have to rely on the written word alone. Maybe your point is expressed best in a chart, a graphic, an annotated illustration or a series of photographs. We're open to just about anything, so long as it's acceptable in a family newspaper. (Open letters to the president don't have a great history of success.)
A few other guidelines. Submissions must be exclusive. If you want us to consider your work, please send it here first. We don't publish articles that have appeared in other American publications, and we rarely publish reprints of any kind. Contributors generally must let several months go by between appearances on the page. For more information on the submissions process, please see the box at the end of this article.
What happens once an article is accepted? It will start with a phone call or an e-mail message from an editor at Op-Ed. You'll be asked to sign a contract giving The Times the right, among other things, to distribute the article online and via other newspapers. Once the article has been scheduled for publication -- it could be days or even months after acceptance -- we'll edit and fact-check your work. Then we'll send you a copy for review. Nothing appears in the paper until the writer has signed off on the edited version.
There are, however, two zones of editorial privilege. We choose the illustrations, which are created by artists to complement specific articles and are overseen by our art director. And we write the headlines. Contributors have no say in these matters. (You're in good company -- Times reporters don't write their headlines, either.) At the end of the day, you'll receive $450.
All of our writers are obviously opinionated about their subjects, but we try very hard to make sure our readers know if they have a financial or professional interest. Contributors are asked a lot of specific questions toward that end. In addition, we try to give readers enough information -- the dateline and identification line, for example -- so they can find out more about writers if they wish. Sadly, mistakes happen. When they do, we do our utmost to correct them quickly. (Op-Ed corrections appear on the Op-Ed page.)
One last thought. There have been seven other Op-Ed editors, starting with Harrison E. Salisbury back in 1970. Every editor -- and every staff -- has done the job a little bit differently. While the Op-Ed guidelines have remained generally consistent, they have been known to shift -- if not by miles, then at least by feet or inches. What I've told you applies to Op-Ed today, not Op-Ed forever.
Still, this is how things will work for a while, at least. Now that you know, it's time to sit down and write up that idea that's been gnawing at you for weeks.
-- DAVID SHIPLEY
