The major Democratic presidential candidates made a series of critical last-minute decisions on Saturday about where to compete in Tuesday's far-flung day of primaries and caucuses, with many writing off states in a concession to dwindling time and depleted bank accounts.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts is now the only candidate battling in all seven states, taking advantage of the high visibility he gained with big victories over Howard Dean in New Hampshire and Iowa and the flood of contributions his aides reported receiving the moment Democratic donors sensed he might be the horse to bet on.
By contrast, Gen. Wesley K. Clark spent the day campaigning in the West, and his advisers said he had no plans to return before Tuesday to South Carolina, a state he had once made a bulwark of his candidacy. His advisers said he was not quite giving up here -- his advertisements were running through the weekend and his wife, Gertrude, was campaigning here -- but South Carolina Democrats said his candidacy appeared to be flailing, a characterization General Clark's aides did not dispute.
''We're realistic about South Carolina,'' said General Clark's communications director, Matt Bennett. Mr. Bennett added that the campaign would continue its efforts there.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina flew off Saturday for Oklahoma, New Mexico and Missouri, but intended to return here Sunday morning and spend the rest of his time in the state, which he has said he must win to stay viable. Mr. Edwards rejected an invitation to appear at a debate that Missouri Democrats tried to set up in St. Louis for Monday night, saying he needed to spend the final hours in South Carolina, including a visit Monday morning to Seneca, the town where he was born.
Mr. Edwards, who made his 14th visit to New Mexico on Saturday, has written off any hope of winning in Arizona, North Dakota and Delaware, his advisers said.
This has hardly been an easy week for the candidates, as they have sought to adjust to the demands of a geographically sprawling contest, from South Carolina to Arizona, and from New Mexico to North Dakota. A senior aide to one candidate, who asked not to be identified, said the campaign had decided to forget Oklahoma and its 40 delegates because it took too long to fly there.
State directors for General Clark complained in interviews that their candidate was not spending enough time in their state. It was a refrain heard in all the state headquarters as senior national campaign aides made quick and blunt decisions about where to spend their candidate's time and money.
Several Democrats said the stakes could hardly be higher in this contest. If Mr. Kerry wins a series of these states, as now appears possible, it could be difficult to stop him.
''I think it's possible that the seven primaries and caucuses on Tuesday will be decisive,'' said Governor Bill Richardson of New Mexico, a Democrat who has not endorsed anyone. ''I think there will be a clear front-runner after Tuesday.''
Given the importance Mr. Edwards has attached to winning South Carolina, he took a bit of a risk in leaving the state for 24 hours to go West, some Democrats here said. But aides said he was trying to win at least some delegates outside of the South to rebut the suggestion that he was merely a regional candidate. That perception could easily undercut a victory for him in South Carolina.
''You have to go out and compete in these other states,'' a senior Edwards adviser said. ''We spent yesterday in South Carolina, and we'll be in South Carolina Sunday, Monday and Tuesday. We are keeping our eye on the ball.''
A poll of South Carolina voters by CBS News released this weekend found Mr. Edwards running ahead of Mr. Kerry, 30 percent to 18 percent. General Clark was tied with the Rev. Al Sharpton at 11 percent, while Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, had 10 percent. A poll by The Los Angeles Times and CNN released Saturday evening found Mr. Edwards ahead of Mr. Kerry by a similar margin.
Mr. Kerry is advertising in all seven states and will have made stops in all of them by Tuesday, an aide said Saturday. If all goes to plan, by the end of the weekend he will have touched down in Missouri -- where he was receiving the endorsement on Sunday of the editorial board of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, which called him the ''the best prepared Democratic candidate for president'' -- as well as in Oklahoma, North Dakota and New Mexico.
Even though Mr. Kerry was not planning to return here, he ratcheted up his advertising in South Carolina in an effort to beat Mr. Edwards and effectively end the candidacy of the man who Mr. Kerry's aides see as the greatest threat. And he is spending heavily in Oklahoma, trying to prevent General Clark from winning there and thus having a reason to stay in the race.
In a sign of how the terms of this campaign have shifted since the votes in Iowa and New Hampshire, Dr. Dean is not putting his limited financial resources into advertising in the seven states. But he is making visits to some in hopes of building on support he developed before his losses in Iowa and New Hampshire.
He appeared to be in competitive positions in New Mexico and Arizona, because each state permits voting before primary and caucus day, and Dr. Dean's organization had encouraged supporters to take advantage of that. Many Democrats may have cast ballots for Dr. Dean there before he lost in Iowa and New Hampshire. Until nearly running out of money, he spent almost $1 million in advertising in Arizona and more than $400,000 in New Mexico.
Dr. Dean's new campaign chief, Roy Neel, posted a notice on the campaign's Web log saying that in skipping a round of primaries and caucuses, Dr. Dean was now looking to compete in Washington, Michigan and Maine, where contests are scheduled over the next two weeks. But several strategists said that Dr. Dean risked becoming marginalized.
''What a horrible combination: no momentum, they lost the first two contests, and they're not even on the air,'' said Bill Carrick, who was the media strategist for the presidential campaign of Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
Mr. Sharpton has campaigned extensively in South Carolina. As the only African-American running in a contest where the black turnout could be 50 percent, he said he was in a position to win here, a statement that some other Democrats called an exaggeration.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut is advertising relatively lightly in Arizona, Oklahoma and Delaware, and planned campaign visits to Delaware and Oklahoma. He long ago gave up any hope of wining in South Carolina, a state where he once considered himself competitive, and many Democrats expect that Mr. Lieberman, barring an unexpected victory on Tuesday, will be the next candidate to get out of the race.
General Clark had once looked to break out in this race on Feb. 3, saying the states in contention played to his strength as a Southerner and a general. But his campaign has moved to scale back expectations, saying he was only competing seriously in New Mexico, Arizona and Oklahoma. His aides are already talking about Feb. 10, when Tennessee and Virginia hold primaries.
General Clark will mark the returns on Feb. 3 not in any of the states which are actually voting, but in Memphis.
Mr. Clark's campaign said it was spending $336,000 on advertising in Virginia this week, almost as much as it is spending in Arizona. It is also spending $275,000 for advertisements in Tennessee and $118,000 for advertisements in Wisconsin, where the battle could be joined by Dr. Dean. The Wisconsin contest is Feb. 17.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
