In the 60's, a smiling fellow on television urged northerners to ''come on down'' and visit South Florida. They did, and many of them moved there, and soon paradise was paved.
After spending a few days as a vacationing angler in this coastal metropolis down there, I was primed for a more natural environment. Heading west on Alligator Alley through horizon-to-horizon sawgrass expanses, I hoped to find good fishing -- maybe even my first tarpon -- and a glimpse of what Florida used to be.
I also hoped to see an alligator, I told my children, Laura and Steve, as we sped toward the heart of the Everglades in Collier County. Alligator Alley is just that: we saw one, then another, and by the end of the drive maybe 200 gators in its roadside canal. But despite its name, Alligator Alley is antiseptic, like an extension of Fort Lauderdale, a fast, modern thoroughfare with the wildlife behind high chain-link fences.
Collier County is old Florida. There, the only other cross-Everglades avenue -- the Tamiami Trail -- is a charming two-lane highway. And, because it lacks fences, alligators can cross it if they wish.
In nearby Everglades City and Chokoloskee are the Florida Rod and Gun Club -- Hemingway's hangout -- and, overlooking the bay at the end of the road, Ted Smallwood's general store. This trading post, established in 1906 and now a museum, was the only local source of supplies for the few Seminoles and white settlers in Collier County for much of the 1900's.
Today, the area is home to classic Florida tourist traps -- airboat rides and souvenir shops endearing in their cheesiness, relics with homemade signs that long predate the monotony of today's franchised era.
We drove to the far end of a recommended tarpon spot, a deep canal behind campgrounds. Its clear waters and shores were a haven for life: largemouth bass swam through the shallows, an alligator glided past and disappeared into the overhanging vegetation, a tough old turtle whose shell appeared to have been crushed by a car skidded along a beach, and a long snake whipped through some boulders. But no tarpon struck.
Steve wanted to try another canal, but I insisted on making a few casts up the road at the next opening in the bushes. On the first toss, I missed a strike, in keeping with my history of not hooking or immediately losing the few tarpon I had encountered over the years.
Many believe that the allure of tarpon fishing is the 30 seconds of aerial mayhem that occurs when a fish is first hooked, and that what happens after that doesn't much matter. On the next cast my barb finally held in a tarpon's bony jaws and the fish blasted high out of the water with a head-shaking leap, followed by another Olympian hurdle.
The first act of the show was, indeed, worth the long wait, and not long after I proudly cradled my first tarpon. Its Latin name, Megalops, means big-eyed, and my catch glared at me like a silver-armored gladiator before I released it.
This sudden success energized my children, and we rigged an impromptu ''tarpon mobile,'' Laura in the car's open trunk, Steve on a window ledge, where they rode, rods in hand, from hole to hole in the brush. The obligatory alligators, now as familiar to us as squirrels, cruised by like destroyers. And tarpon, which slurp air, rose from time to time, giving their locations away, and we landed and lost several more that were no less entertaining than my first.
With the sun almost down, we traveled on the Tamiami Trail toward a restaurant we know, but while crossing a bridge, Steve noticed a big swirl in the creek below. If there is one inviolate rule in angling it is that you do not drive past surfacing fish. Peering down, we saw dozens of black shapes: great gar, bass and panfish. Above, egrets adorned tall trees draped in Spanish moss and silhouetted by the blue evening glow and a sliver of the moon, while late-coming ibis dropped to their roosts one by one like ghosts from the sky.
It was too dazzling a scene to fish seriously, so we savored this crescendo of Everglades life in the few moments of light left. Then, fully satisfied with the day, we left to enjoy the local cuisine.
We smelled the burning oak and broiled meat of the barbecue joint before we saw it, tucked off the road where it has sat for 25 years. Cats rubbed against the screen window near our faces, beseeching a meal as we tore into charred pork.
Afterward, heading east on the Tamiami Trail, we quickly re-entered new Florida, Miami's sprawl now nearly reaching an eatery that once required a day trip into the wilderness. From then on, fast-food restaurants, pawn shops and convenience stores lined the road, and Smallwood's little trading post and old Florida seemed worlds away.
OUTDOORS
