WHEN Jen Rogers became engaged last May, she and her fiancé knew they wanted a winter wedding. ''He's Canadian, and we thought we'd get a better turnout if we pulled his friends and family out of the inclement weather up north,'' said Ms. Rogers, a sales manager in Austin, Tex., for a flooring company. The couple learned quickly that their favorite venue was booked for most of January and February. The two available Saturdays were Jan. 31, a k a Super Bowl eve, and Valentine's Day.
The choice was easy. ''I'm getting married on Valentine's Day,'' Ms. Rogers, 31, said. ''When they mentioned Super Bowl weekend, I told them: 'No way. I'm not even going to tempt the evil that would come with that.' ''
It's an ''evil'' most women know and dread, which is why those in the wedding business think of the Super Bowl as a major blackout date. Today, in Houston it's the Carolina Panthers vs. the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XXXVIII.
''According to our membership data, for four out of the last five years the Super Bowl weekend has had the fewest number of weddings than any other week of the year -- except 2002, when the Super Bowl was moved from Jan. 27 to Feb. 3,'' said Rosanna McCollough, the editor in chief of WeddingChannel.com, a Web site based in Los Angeles. Many couples were caught by surprise when the date was changed because of the National Football League's need to reschedule games postponed by the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks.
''Most couples plan their weddings more than six months in advance, so they couldn't change their dates,'' Ms. McCollough added.
''We tell couples to steer clear of the Final Four, the World Series and the Super Bowl, because if you're American, and 50 percent of your crowd is male, they'll be distracted,'' said Jennifer Brisman, a New York wedding planner.
Andrew Taylor, a 38-year-old investment banker in Manhattan, steered clear of Super Bowl weekend when arranging his wedding in the Berkshires next weekend, out of concern for guests' plans for the game.
''I'm a big football fan, and I love Super Bowl weekend,'' he said. ''It's become such a social event for both men and women and an all-day event if you're cooking a big dinner. If we'd done it this weekend, our guests wouldn't have had a chance to get home to attend their parties.''
Mr. Taylor theorized that men felt particularly strong ties to the Super Bowl because ''it's the culmination of the whole football season in one single game.''
Some of those who did marry on that fateful Sunday immediately experienced its downside.
Marcy Blum, a New York wedding planner, recalled one wedding gone wrong at the New York Palace Hotel. Minutes after the ceremony ended ''every man was downstairs at the bar watching the game, and I could not seduce them back,'' she said. ''Since then, I won't do a Super Bowl wedding -- not even the night before.''
Jim Loehr, a sports psychologist, observed, ''If the groom and the groomsmen are fired up about whose winning and losing, they won't be fully engaged in the wedding,'' making for a far less memorable event.
This unwritten regulation has found its way into popular culture. Followers of the ''Seinfeld'' show might recall an episode in which Jerry gives away game tickets because he has to attend a wedding. ''Who schedules his wedding on Super Bowl Sunday?'' George (Jason Alexander) asks. Later, the couple realizes their error, argues about it and cancels the whole thing.
Of course, sometimes the bride refuses to miss the game, too. Karen Fernandez Ball, a 25-year-old human resources assistant in Pasadena, Calif., planned her recent wedding with the precision of a star quarterback. ''Not only did we avoid Super Bowl Sunday, but we're also U.S.C. Trojans fans, so we had to consider any and all bowl game possibilities,'' she said. ''We settled on Jan. 10 so we'd be back from our honeymoon before the big game.''
Some couples stumble into the choice. ''I'm not a football fan and neither is my husband, so we picked the last Saturday in January without even thinking about it,'' said Elise Mac Adam, a screenwriter in New York who married Stephen Kramarsky, a lawyer, the day before last year's game. ''I'd mention the date to someone I didn't know very well, and there would be this stricken look on their face. They'd say, 'How can you do this to people?' ''
Their wedding date also coincided with the annual worldwide celebrations of the birthday of the Scottish poet Robert Burns. In addition to fielding tactless Super Bowl comments, Ms. Mac Adam said, ''We also got threats of people bringing haggis to our wedding.''
On the flip side, people indifferent to football can take advantage of the weekend to snag a coveted location and to book popular vendors at cut-rate prices, said Elizabeth K. Allen, a New York wedding planner. ''Everyone is more flexible with their pricing on that day because they're not very busy. You'll have great availability in terms of locations, bands and photographers. And if you're having a smaller wedding, with 50 or 60 people, there are a lot of really nice restaurants that do private events. You can shoot a cannon through most restaurants on Super Bowl Sunday.''
When there's no alternative, wedding planners try to ease the pain. To mollify one bridegroom who was missing the big game to get married, Laura J. Bauer of Simply Elegant Events served a football-shaped tiramisù cake at the rehearsal dinner (but no hot wings or guacamole). ''He was extremely good-natured,'' said Ms. Bauer, who plans weddings in New York and Boca Raton, Fla. ''Sometimes it's not only the groom but the family members who complain. They're afraid guests won't come.''
Ms. Rogers faced the same fear when picking her date. ''Men prepare for the game for days -- it's a whole ritual,'' she said. ''Maybe for them it's like Valentine's Day.''
FIELD NOTES
