THE woman, a guest at my wedding, stopped chewing and fixed me through dark Gucci frames. ''Camping?'' she asked incredulously. ''I don't think so, dear.''
For months, through all the ecstasy and misery of our wedding planning, my fiancé and I had been looking forward to what we imagined would be a truly romantic and adventurous honeymoon. We didn't need the luxury of some fantasy resort to feel the love. Oh no. Cloying concierges and knocking maids would only interrupt our focus. Our goal was togetherness.
We would fly to California, rent a camper van and follow the setting sun, or the wind, or whatever. We would sing along to AM stations as we cruised along the coast by day, pitch our little tent and cuddle up next to a roaring campfire by night. We would fall asleep under a canopy of stars and, the next morning, make each other heart-shaped pancakes over the embers.
Enthusiastic but infrequent campers, we would be superbly outfitted. Instead of requesting porcelain plates and fine silver, we had registered for a full complement of camping equipment, including a new tent and a queen-size air mattress. Harry, my better-mousetrap-obsessed fiancé, even put a collapsible saw and miniature emergency tool kit on the list.
It's all too perfect, thought I, as we pulled out of the van-rental garage south of San Francisco on that June day, and immediately became caught in California gridlock.
Hours later, having crept just 50 miles, we finally crossed the Golden Gate Bridge into the knobby-hilled scenery of Marin County. Our journey into the backroads of America was under way! The first stop was Point Reyes National Seashore, the triangle-shaped wedge of land that juts into the Pacific. We chose a primitive campsite just a few hundred yards from the roaring ocean. There was nothing there but a pit toilet, a picnic table and a safelike metal box to hold food. In the parking lot we prepared the gear for the two-mile hike in to the site.
''This is going to take two trips,'' said Harry cheerfully, as he pulled out the army-sized kitchen tent and the folding lounge chair/backpack combos he'd also sneaked onto the registry. In our first load we managed to haul in the clothing and shelter. The second was all food.
Merrily we set about constructing our settlement. By the time we were ready to start dinner, the sun was low in the sky and a chilly wind gusted through the campground. I took out a liter bottle of olive oil to fry up the onions in one pan while I boiled black beans on a second burner.
Maybe we could have done without all this glass, I thought as I uncorked a bottle of Napa Valley merlot we'd picked up at a cute little farmers market along the way.
One hundred yards downslope, another couple arrived. They were older, trim, tan and wore the unmistakable accouterments of the Bay Area elite. Within minutes they had thrown up a tent and whipped out miniature tripod stools.
''I saw those at the store,'' said Harry, dumping two cords of firewood at my feet. ''They weigh less than a pound and can be folded up to the size of a pack of cigarettes.''
As I added cumin and a dash of paprika to the beans, I watched out of the corner of my eye as our neighbors prepared a one-pot dish on a teeny-weeny burner.
I fretted over my two-burner stainless-steel stove. Had we overpacked?
I banished the thought as, moments later, my honey and I squeezed closer to each other at the picnic table and raised our glasses for our first toast. Just then we heard something scrounging about in the food safe.
Harry grabbed a flashlight and turned it on the intruder: a raccoon turned nonchalantly to look at us as it nimbly plucked a graham cracker from its wrapper.
''Ah!'' I cried.
''Hssssshhh. Hsssshhhh!'' urged Harry, grabbing a down pillow and his jacket.
The raccoon -- I swear -- rolled its eyes and turned back to our breakfast.
I howled in imitation of a coyote, Harry stamped and flailed. Calmly the mangy little beast stuffed a few more crackers into its cheeks before sauntering off into the high grass.
That night, comfortably tucked into our zipped-together sleeping bags, we listened to the raspy breathing of the raccoons -- there must have been hundreds -- as they circled our tent and ranged over our campsite.
We held out against them for a second night, but before the third could fall we hauled our wedding loot back to the van and headed north.
''Why don't we find a campsite where we don't have to schlep the stuff so far?'' I suggested.
That night we car-camped in Van Damme State Park, just south of Mendocino, pitching our tent among Winnebagos with satellite dishes and dishwashers. The night was starry and as we tucked ourselves in we could smell the pine needles over which we had made our bed. The next morning, Harry was humming and stirring the oatmeal when our neighbor, a bald man with an enormous belly, appeared at our campfire. Several large dogs wearing bite guards paced behind him. In his hand he carried a walkie-talkie; more electronic gadgets and a knife were hooked to his belt.
''Did you hear those pistol shots last night?'' he barked at Harry and me. ''We got some yahoos in the park right now. And they got out-of-state plates on their vehicles.''
Harry glanced at me.
''Thank God our van has California plates,'' we said to each other via transcendental communication.
His last words to us were: ''You folks watch yourselves.''
AFTER breakfast we hightailed it out of there, heading north for the Oregon border, which we made by midday, and found a Bureau of Land Management campsite stunningly situated above the Sixes River. We were just staking down the kitchen tent when it began to sprinkle. By the time Harry got to roasting the marshmallows for the s'mores, his favorite dessert, water was streaming into the tent horizontally. Our fire was doused, the wood soaked. There was nothing to do but go to bed. All night long the rain came down. And the next day and night. And the next. And the next. By this time the tent was drenched and we had holed up in the back of the van.
''Did you know that during the winter of 1805, when Lewis and Clark were camped on the Oregon coast, there were only 12 days without rain?'' I said to Harry on the afternoon of the fourth day.
The next morning we hit the road again.
''Forget the backroads, let's take the highway,'' Harry announced, barreling toward the six-lane Interstate.
Our excitement mounted as we saw that we were nearing Eugene, Oregon's second largest city. We exited as soon as the concentration of chain establishments along the road had reached critical density and pulled into the first motel we saw.
After a long, hot bath I piled up the pillows on the headboard and climbed between the scratchy sheets. Harry arrived with a large pepperoni pizza, a liter of root beer and a half-bottle of Asti Spumante, the only bubbly available at the nearby gas station. We switched on the TV and spent the next three days camped in the room, ordering takeout and flicking between Wimbledon and MTV.
It was heavenly. Which somehow, in a kind of indirect way, confirmed our belief that we didn't need much to make our honeymoon sweet.
Essay BRENDA FOWLER contributes to The Times from Chicago.
