REAL estate investment trusts surged while stocks fell during the bear market. Over the last year or so, stocks have been rising -- but real estate investments have done even better.
That has some real estate mutual fund managers scratching their heads. Many managers warn investors not to count on such favorable results.
''Over the next five years, we see total returns for real estate funds in the more traditional range of 10 to 12 percent a year,'' said Kenneth D. Statz, a manager of the Security Capital U.S. Real Estate fund, which has $220 million in assets. Over the last five years, the average real estate mutual fund has generated a total return of 15 percent, annualized, compared with 3 percent for domestic stock mutual funds.
Real estate mutual funds generally invest in real estate investment trusts, or REIT's, which are publicly traded companies that hold portfolios of real estate and are required to pay out most of their income each year in the form of dividends. Over the last 12 months, the Morgan Stanley REIT index has gained 49 percent, compared with 34 percent for the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index.
Historically, slightly more than half the total return of REIT's comes from the sizable dividends generated by rental income from commercial properties. But last year, real estate funds like Mr. Statz's that invested in REIT's benefited from capital gains in a broad variety of commercial real estate subsectors, including shopping centers, apartments and office buildings. Some REIT's that hold portfolios of malls and smaller shopping centers had gains of more than 40 percent last year, buoyed by strong earnings growth as consumers continued to defy the skeptics who once said that the Internet would undermine traditional bricks-and-mortar shopping.
While companies that own office buildings are still suffering from low occupancy rates and weak rental prices, investors bid up these stocks by 36.2 percent last year, according to Bloomberg Financial Markets. Stocks tied to apartment properties rose 26.5 percent, on average, as investors bet that an emerging economic upturn could fuel a recovery in apartment rentals. Companies that specialize in hotel properties rose 33 percent, on average.
For real estate fund managers who held not only REIT's but also loaded up on the stocks of home builders, the rewards were greater. Last year, Ken Heebner, the manager of the CGM Realty fund, said that more than three-quarters of the assets of his $658 million portfolio were invested in these stocks, which have benefited from industry consolidation and the low interest rates that have fueled home buying in recent years. His fund, which pays out a small dividend, had a 90 percent return for the year.
By contrast, Steven Buller, manager of the Fidelity Real Estate Investment fund, with $2.7 billion in assets, runs a more traditional real estate fund, focusing mostly on stocks that deliver dividend income along with capital appreciation. He says he thinks that the disparity in performance among the various traditional real estate sectors will narrow in 2004. As a result, he said, picking the right stocks will become more important than making sector bets.
Adhering to Fidelity policy, Mr. Buller, whose fund gained 34 percent last year, would not discuss which stocks he had been buying. As of Sept. 30, his three biggest holdings were Apartment Investment and Management, Equity Office Properties Trust and CenterPoint Properties, a holder of industrial warehouses.
Though Mr. Statz is not bullish about the office real estate market over all for 2004, he is always looking for niche players that have added pricing power and value to their properties through specialization. One example is Corporate Office Properties Trust, which rents office building space in the Washington suburbs to tenants that need high-level security, principally military contractors; it pays a dividend of 4.3 percent.
''It's the safety of environment that dominates the leasing decision, rather than pure supply-demand economics,'' Mr. Statz said. ''As a result, they are managing to grow earnings in an office environment characterized by declining earnings.''
Mr. Statz said that security was so tight at this company's office buildings ''that we aren't even allowed to visit.''
In the apartment sector, Mr. Statz likes Avalon Bay Communities. This real estate investment trust manages a portfolio of garden apartments and high-rise buildings on both coasts. Currently, the stock is trading at 36 times earnings, a slight premium over the average stock in the Morgan Stanley REIT index, which trades at 34.9 times earnings. Mr. Statz said that because Avalon Bay traditionally has had steady earnings and strong management, its stock has often traded at a much higher valuation than the average REIT. At the moment, he said, that valuation has been depressed by overall weakness in the apartment market. ''Over the next few years, we expect the stock to rebound as the apartment market recovers,'' Mr. Statz said.
While Mr. Heebner is still betting heavily on home builders, he is also bullish on companies that have portfolios of hotels, which he says are due for a share-price comeback this year. About a fifth of his portfolio is in hotel property stocks.
''Hotel REIT's are poised for the best pickup in 2004 and beyond,'' he said. ''I believe that with rising corporate profits and a stronger economy, we will see rising room rates and rising occupancy.''
Currently, his favorite hotel REIT is LaSalle Hotel Properties, which focuses on buying stakes in full-service luxury hotels in urban, resort and convention markets. LaSalle has invested in leading hotel operators like Marriott International, Radisson Hotels International and Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide. ''But all the hotels will benefit in this environment,'' Mr. Heebner said. He also likes Host Marriott and Felcor Lodging Trust.
FOR fund investors who prefer investing in a real estate index, there are several options. One is the Vanguard REIT Index fund, a no-load, $3.6 billion portfolio that tracks the Morgan Stanley REIT index and charges an annual management fee of 0.27 percent, much less than the 1 percent or more charged by actively managed funds.
Several exchange-traded index funds hold real estate properties. They include State Street's Wilshire REIT Index fund and Barclays Global Investors' iShares Cohen &amp; Steers Realty Majors.
Dan McNeela, a real estate fund analyst at Morningstar Inc., pointed out that active managers generally outpaced their index-oriented rivals in real estate investment in recent years. Over the last seven years, he said, Morningstar has tracked the performance of the Vanguard REIT Index fund versus that of active real estate fund managers. The index fund, he said, has outperformed in only one of those years.
''With the real estate stocks being primarily in small-and midcap space, there is room to gain an edge through research,'' he said. ''In this space, we give an edge to active management.''
