ONE recent raw evening, warmly dressed men and women hurried into the newly refurbished Ezra and Cecile Zilkha Gallery at Wesleyan University for the opening of an installation, ''The Five Outer Planets,'' by Robert Taplin, a New Haven artist. They hung up their coats, gloves and hats, nibbled on appetizers, sipped punch and stared. ''Awesome,'' said one. ''Frightening,'' said another. ''Amazing,'' said yet another.
A few blocks away, teenagers in hooded sweatshirts conducted business in a car parked alongside the ramshackle three-family houses that line Green Street in Middletown's North End. An older man, hatless in the bitter cold, stood in the shadow of an abandoned schoolhouse's steps.
Although geographically close, Green Street, dark and grim, is a world away from the lights and warmth of Wesleyan, long a fortress on a hill overlooking one of Middletown's neediest neighborhoods. But university officials and local civic groups hope the area will be transformed as Wesleyan itself transforms both its on-campus Center for Fine Arts -- a complex of 11 buildings that includes the Zilkha Gallery -- and its role in the North End, the Middletown neighborhood that borders the campus to the north.
This year, Wesleyan's arts center, home to the art, film, music, theater and dance departments, celebrates its 30th anniversary. To mark the event, the already modernist Zilkha Gallery was modernized in a renovation completed last fall. The formerly chilly space is now warmed by radiant heat from beneath new cork floors; temporary walls have been constructed for flexibility of display; and the lighting was updated.
The university has also invested $22 million into the center's Memorial Chapel and '92 Theater, including purchasing a glittering new Holtkamp organ and adding a pavilion that links the two structures.
And in an unusual move by an institution of higher learning, the center commissioned a dance by the choreographer Ronald K. Brown and his Brooklyn-based company, Evidence. The work was performed in Middletown in early October before it had its premiere in New York City at the Joyce Theater. It will be performed this weekend in Middletown again.
The ultimate goal is that the university become a major cultural resource for the region, said Pamela Tatge, director of the arts center. But first, Wesleyan has been making moves in its own neighborhood.
In 2002, the university inaugurated arts programs for local children at sites throughout the city. These programs are coordinated by Ricardo Morris, who is the director of the Green Street Arts Center, a university-sponsored organization that will be housed in the abandoned schoolhouse on Green Street when renovations are completed early next year. The programs include festivals and events held throughout the year, along with student and faculty performances and exhibitions.
Wesleyan officials say they have a renewed focus on the North End; local advocates say it has a new one. But no one is complaining as cultural stars like Mr. Brown show up to teach dance seminars at the university and hold court at community dance classes sponsored by Wesleyan.
''It's a complete change,'' said Lydia Brewster, an organizer for the North End Action Team, a community group involved in creating the Green Street center. ''This is the first time that Wesleyan has undertaken anything downtown, and it's a very dramatic departure from its typical relationship with the community.''
If anyone knows the difference between adequate and inadequate habitats for artistic creation, it is Mr. Brown, 37. A resident of Brooklyn, he has long struggled for a warm rehearsal space large enough to fit his troupe, which he founded in 1985 when he was 19.
''We're used to cutting corners,'' Mr. Brown said. ''We were rehearsing for a while in a dance studio that was a nightclub on the weekends. Cigarettes on the floor, no heat, we're rehearsing in hats and gloves. It's wonderful to be able to travel and encounter a place where artists' habitats are considered.'' Mr. Brown's piece, ''Come Ye,'' was the first a university had commissioned from him. His troupe had performed at Wesleyan before he received the commission, and he had observed arts classes at the university and held seminars with dance students. He was impressed with what he saw, he said.
''Sometimes you visit a university and you go through the master class and there's a couple of people interested,'' he said. ''At Wesleyan, there are students who sought us out at different festivals, different performances. They were always seeking us out.''
''Come Ye'' is Mr. Brown's tribute to the singer Nina Simone, who died last year. Ms. Simone's own song of the same name inspired Mr. Brown's work.
''It became a piece about revolutionaries, about the creative process, about folks like Nina Simone and Bob Marley talking about the change needed to happen on a global level,'' Mr. Brown said. When Wesleyan let him know it wanted to pay for the creation of the work, ''it kind of blew my mind,'' he added. ''I didn't know what reason they would have for coming forward and supporting the work in such a committed way.''
Wesleyan officials say they hope Mr. Brown will feel comfortable enough at the university to make it a home away from home, or at least a rehearsal space away from rehearsal space. They are so proud of Mr. Brown's hip artistry and new connection to the university that a photograph of the dancer graces this year's arts center calendar of events.
Mr. Brown has his own plans, though. He wants to found a cultural arts center in his neighborhood in Brooklyn, a space where local students can study creative writing and dance and percussion.
Meanwhile, in Middletown, Mr. Morris, a native of Chattanooga, Tenn., is busy working with Wesleyan's neighbors. His lack of excitement about the chill weather has been balanced by his enthusiasm for his latest project.
''Art can transform individuals as well as neighborhoods and communities,'' said Mr. Morris, who formerly headed the Alabama Jazz Hall of Fame in Birmingham. ''That is the vision of the Green Street, to give residents in the North End something to be proud of, to use the center as a way to transform the kids.''
Mr. Morris was one of many Wesleyan arts administrators in attendance at the ''Five Outer Planets'' opening at the Zilkha Gallery. Well into the evening, the gallery was still warm and hopping with people, despite the increasing cold outside. Mr. Taplin, the artist, was listening intently in a corner as the bassist Mark Dresser performed a work that Wesleyan had commissioned for the opening. A buzz filled the air as the bassist finished, while patrons lined up to congratulate both men.
Over on Green Street, in the dark, three little boys fired snowballs at each other. The man stood in the corner of the school stairway, watching.
Ronald K. Brown and Evidence will perform ''Come Ye'' on Friday and Saturday night at 8 at the Center for the Arts Theater on the Wesleyan University campus. Box office: (860)685-3355.
