A YEAR after East Asia suffered through an outbreak of SARS, another and potentially far more deadly disease is sweeping the region: the A(H5N1) strain of avian influenza.
No warnings had been issued against visiting any country when this article went to press, but influenza experts have been advising travelers to take precautions.
South Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand and Indonesia had confirmed cases of the disease in chickens, while Taiwan and Pakistan reported what their officials said were cases of what they described as less dangerous strains of avian influenza. There were also unconfirmed reports of mysterious large-scale deaths of fowl in southern China, Laos, Myanmar, Bangladesh and Saudi Arabia.
Thailand and Vietnam have each confirmed handfuls of cases in people, with more cases under investigation, while Cambodia has asked a Thai lab for help in studying samples from two children suspected of having the disease. The World Health Organization says that so far, all of the cases appear to have involved people who were infected by live chickens or their waste.
Dr. Bjorn Melgaard, the W.H.O.'s chief representative in Thailand, said the disease had not yet been shown capable of passing from person to person. The real fear is that if a person becomes infected with avian influenza and human influenza at the same time, the two viruses could swap genetic material in a process known as recombination, producing a lethal virus that could pass as quickly from person to person around the world as other human flu viruses do.
''The concern for humans is recombination,'' Dr. Melgaard said. ''That is the real threat to public health.''
The most important precaution for travelers is to avoid going near live birds, either wild or domesticated, in any country in which the disease has been identified or is being investigated. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the United States is advising Americans to avoid poultry farms and markets for live poultry and to avoid touching surfaces that may have been in contact with bird droppings.
Infected birds produce high concentrations of the virus in their droppings, which can dry up, turn to dust and then be inhaled by other birds or people. While chickens have received the most attention, there have been reports of ducks and even urban pigeons dying of a mysterious disease in Southeast Asia that Thai scientists suspect may be bird flu.
Epidemiologists have thoroughly studied the best-known outbreak of A(H5N1) virus, in which 18 people fell ill with the disease in Hong Kong in 1997 and 6 died. One of those cases was a poultry farm worker; the rest were people who had visited markets where live chickens were sold. Many influenza experts credit Hong Kong with having stopped a global pandemic by killing every chicken in the territory within three days.
Markets for live poultry are very popular in China and elsewhere in Asia, where many consumers still like to inspect an animal for health before buying it to eat. The markets' persistence poses a continuing threat to human health, said Hans Wagner, a livestock expert with the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization.
Yet even Hong Kong officials, especially aware of health issues after the SARS outbreak last spring, have been unable to shut down the live markets there -- although they have publicly expressed a desire to do so -- because of opposition from the poultry industry.
Hong Kong announced on Jan. 21 that agricultural officials had found a dead peregrine falcon near the mainland border that had been infected with the disease. China has denied having any cases, despite evidence that the disease may have started there; two people from Hong Kong fell sick with the disease early last year, and one died after visiting a town in Fujian province in southern China.
Although no cases have yet been linked to food, the W.H.O. has encouraged people to be particularly careful in their handling of raw chicken meat and eggs. They should be thoroughly cooked until their temperature exceeds 70 degrees Celsius (158 degrees Fahrenheit). Cooks should wash their hands carefully with soap, and surfaces used in the preparation of the meat should be thoroughly disinfected.
According to the United States Agriculture Department, this country did not allow the import of chickens or their meat from Asia even before the current outbreak because of concerns that the exotic Newcastle disease, another threat to birds, might start to infect American chicken farms.
Travelers who fall ill upon returning from overseas should always tell their doctor where they have been.
TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT  Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  The Correspondent's Report article on Page 3 of the Travel section today, about avian influenza, includes an outdated reference to China's position on the disease. On Tuesday, after the section had gone to press, the Chinese said that fowl had indeed been infected in their country.
