Over the years, the actor Robert DeNiro has had a hand in transforming an old warehouse into the TriBeCa Film Center and TriBeCa Grill and opening the restaurant Nobu. Now, across Hudson Street from Nobu, the actor, working with AFC Realty Capital of Manhattan, is developing a $14 million residential project that will join an 1887 apartment building with a newly constructed one to create five loft condominiums, including a duplex penthouse.
Mr. DeNiro's financial adviser, Ira Yohalem, confirmed the actor's participation in the project, which is between North Moore and Franklin Streets in the TriBeCa West Historic District. Work began last month, with completion expected by November.
For the last decade, the actor has owned the empty five-story 19th-century brick building at 116 Hudson Street, which will gain another floor, and the adjacent lot at No. 114, which will house the new seven-story glass structure.
Since he also owns the ground floor storefront at No. 112, the three buildings will be linked at their base levels, which will have 4,000 square feet of retail space. The upper floors of No. 112 house four condominium apartments that are not part of the project.
''This is the epicenter of TriBeCa,'' Arthur Fefferman, AFC's president, said. AFC has developed, among other projects, Fischer Mills, 35 condominium lofts carved from five interconnecting warehouses on Greenwich and North Moore Streets, next to the film center and grill.
Robert B. Tierney, chairman of the Landmarks Preservation Commission, called the design, by BKSK Architects of Manhattan, ''bold and imaginative.'' Yet, ''it is harmonious with the neighborhood in terms of its scale and how it continues the streetscape,'' Mr. Tierney said.
Mr. Fefferman said the apartments are to have 2,000 square feet and cost $2 million, while the penthouse is to have 3,000 feet and to be priced at $3.5 million.
Sales, to be handled by Stribling &amp; Associates, are to begin in March.
As for amenities, Mr. Fefferman said owners would be able to use the health club at the boutique hotel, not yet named, that Mr. DeNiro is developing with other partners on what is now a parking lot at the corner of Greenwich and North Moore Streets next to his film center. Another draw, he added, is the development's link with Mr. DeNiro.
RACHELLE GARBARINE
Postings
