THE EROTIC HISTORY OF ADVERTISING  By Tom Reichert  Prometheus Books, 394 pp., $24.
UNTIL the mid-19th century, tobacco was a commodity like flour or sugar. It became a branded product when growers began burning their names into the wooden crates holding their crops. Within a decade or two, they had figured out how to mass produce rolled cigarettes, which quickly trumped the popularity of loose pipe tobacco, cigars and chewing tobacco. With this branding came a conundrum: how to distinguish the indistinguishable?
Babes was the answer, and advertising has never looked back, writes Tom Reichert, an advertising professor at the University of Alabama. The savviest marketer was James Buchanan Duke, scion of a large tobacco company, W. Duke &amp; Sons (and father of Doris Duke), who slipped photographs of louche-looking actresses showing a lot of skin into his company's packages. His father, Washington Duke, was horrified and urged an alternate path:
''My Dear Son. Outside of the fact that we owe Christianity all the assistance we can lend it in any form, which is paramount to any other consideration, I am fully convinced that this mode of advertising will be used and greatly strengthen the arguments against cigarettes in the legislative halls of the States.''
The younger Duke was unmoved, and went on to sell more cigarettes than any other producer, paving the way for the advertising successes of Calvin Klein, Victoria's Secret and Abercrombie &amp; Fitch. Which brings us to advertising in the third millennium. In March 2001, during the Academy Awards, Pepsi broadcast its much-hyped Britney Spears ad in which, in a particularly stomach-turning moment, Bob Dole, a spokesman for Viagra, sits in a dark room watching a Britney Spears video with a dog. ''Easy boy,'' Mr. Dole says.
Ouch!
''This after the Viagra people went to excruciating lengths to make him seem dignified,'' Barbara Lippert wrote in Adweek magazine that April, suggesting that Pepsi had thrown gravitas out the window by casting a dog as a stand-in for a crucial part of Mr. Dole's anatomy.
In the first quarter of 2001, Mr. Reichert reports, Pepsi's sales rose, too.
Today, how much is too much? Pornography research, as Mr. Reichert points out, has shown that viewers experience wear-out: the more they see scintillating sex, the more scintillating it needs to be to evoke the same effect.
BOOKS OF STYLE
