MELVIN EGGLESTON says his wife drove away with his seven children one night so long ago that he can't even remember the reason she left him. But he doesn't hold a grudge. He has lived with another woman for years and now he considers her to be his wife, though they are not legally married. They have a 12-year-old son.
Mr. Eggleston, 64, who retired from the Larchmont sanitation department two years ago, stopped by a storefront soup kitchen in this northwestern corner of Westchester on a frigid afternoon for lunch. Over a plate of sliced hot dogs, beans and coleslaw, he discussed President Bush's $1.5 billion proposal to promote healthy marriage.
''I think it's a good idea,'' said Mr. Eggleston, who is planning to visit Atlanta in the spring to attend the wedding of a son he hasn't seen since 1987, and to meet his 26 grandchildren and 12 great-grandchildren. ''If they had something like that back then, some counseling, it might have helped.''
It is people like Mr. Eggleston who might have been logical subjects for the Bush administration's move to try to make marriage a healthier and stronger institution. While the administration's proposal to spend $1.5 million to promote ''healthy'' marriage, especially in lower income brackets, hasn't generated the attention-getting headlines of his remarks on gay marriage, it is still a focus of administration policy.
(The House of Representatives approved a bill in February 2003 that would tie marriage counseling to the reauthorization of the 1996 welfare law, so the administration decided to go ahead without waiting for Congress. It has already begun formulating plans to help state and local governments promote marriage among the poor.)
At the English/Spanish Tabernacle of Christ Assembly of God Church on Main Street in Peekskill, where free lunch is served five days a week, people talk openly about the hopes and difficulties of marriage.
DeAngelo Johnson, 39, has five children and is separated from his wife, he said.
''I'm separated, but I'm holding on,'' said Mr. Johnson, who hasn't worked in a while, but said he was hoping to get a job cooking. ''I want to be there for my kids.''
Mr. Johnson said he thought the government could help families by providing money, job training or housing. But marriage counseling? ''It's a waste of time for the government to do that,'' he said. ''It's up to the individual. If they don't want to stay married they won't stay married. My parents were common-law married, but they stayed together for a long time.'' Then they split up, he said. James McNair, the manager of the soup kitchen, which was organized by AmeriCorps volunteers and relies on donations from 30 different area churches, said he thought money to promote marriage would take away from other services. ''It seems to me that there are more pressing things,'' Mr. McNair said.
Peekskill, with its downtrodden Main Street, seems to have more in common with Rust Belt cities than with gilded Westchester. Where else in this real-estate-crazed county do Victorian homes with views of the Hudson and its highlands sit boarded up? Peekskill's churches, library, housing projects, and the roster of its community action program are filled with low-income families that the ''healthy marriage'' plan would aim to help.
Some people at the soup kitchen agreed that strengthening marriage was a worthy goal. ''People need help when they have problems they can't work out,'' said Linda Lopez, 46, a widow who is raising a granddaughter who has cerebral palsy. ''I think it's important to help marriage. My father left me when I was young. It's too hard out there to have just one parent.''
While few thought giving marriage a boost was a bad idea, most seemed to have more immediate concerns. ''Please don't say I live in a shelter,'' one man said.
Susan Torres, of Cortlandt, said: ''Can anybody do something about affordable housing? I pay $900 a month for a one bedroom for me and my son. I have nothing left to eat with.'' Aldo Duarte, 35, gestured to the group of 50 or so men, and a handful of women who sat at tables, waiting their turn to line up for lunch. ''All these people need jobs. Better to spend money on getting jobs for all the people out of work.''
COUNTY LINES  Correction:  February 8, 2004, Sunday  The County Lines column last Sunday misstated the name of a soup kitchen in Peekskill and described its sponsorship incorrectly. The soup kitchen, which is at the English-Spanish Tabernacle of Christ Assembly of God Church in Peekskill, is known as the Peekskill Area Lunchtime Feeding Program. It is financed by St. Peter's Episcopal Church in Peekskill, with donated food and volunteer labor from 18 other organizations and churches. Its building was refurbished by AmeriCares, a Stamford-based charity, with the help of community volunteers. It was not organized by AmeriCorps volunteers with donations from 30 different area churches.
