You have to lament what's become of the pay phone. For decades, it was a trusted friend to New Yorkers in a pinch, but in this cellphone and BlackBerry era it is viewed by most as a quarter-sucking fossil. And that makes Dennis Novick, who is wildly excited about pay phones, something of an anomaly.
Mr. Novick is president of TCC Teleplex, a company that operates about 1,500 phones around the city. And in a bold, 21st-century move, he has affixed 27 of those phones with Internet portals.
''We noticed a trend in Europe of embracing public Internet access,'' Mr. Novick said. ''British Telecom has installed them in airports, for example. It's the evolution of the public phone.''
The phones, which are fitted with a color monitor, keyboard and track ball, went online in November, mainly in Midtown. Since then, TCC has branched out and installed them on the Upper East Side and in SoHo, Chinatown and the East Village, where there are several.
The service costs $1 for four minutes, while New York City informational Web sites are free. Also, the phones have wireless capability so anyone within 300 feet can get access to high-speed Internet on a laptop. So far, Mr. Novick said, the response has been positive and he plans to have 100 Internet phones installed around the city by year's end.
''The phones have a Webcam, so a lot of tourists send pictures back home,'' he said. ''And some guy staying at the Days Inn in Midtown called to say he could access the Internet for free from his room using the signal from one of our phones.''
Asked how the phones were holding up in the cold, Alan Roth, the director of project management, said they were working just fine. ''Aside from some vandals inking the screens, which we can wipe right off, everything has progressed without a hiccup,'' he said.
On a recent chilly afternoon, one of the phones, at Third Avenue and 11th Street, seemed to be holding up well, aside from the snow on the keyboard. No one stopped to use the phones, but two pedestrians, John Hedigan and Amanda Schuster, were asked their thoughts about them.
''I've seen them in airports,'' Mr. Hedigan said. ''But I'm just coming to terms with the abacus. I don't need information that fast.''
Ms. Schuster had other concerns. ''I wouldn't want somebody watching over my shoulder as I surfed the Internet,'' she said.
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: EAST VILLAGE
