EZRA POUND
Poems and Translations.
1,363 pp. New York:
The Library of America. $45.
His distant relative Longfellow beat him by four years, but at last Old Ez has gotten his Library of America moment: the black dust jacket with the red-white-and-blue stripe, the little ribbon thingie, the whole deal. ''Ezra Pound: Poems and Translations'' officially puts him in the company of Whitman (with whom he cheekily made a ''A Pact'' in the 1910's, having ''detested'' him long enough), Poe, Emerson, Frost and Stevens, and of course this is where he belongs. Except those for whom his anti-Semitism will always be a deal breaker, nobody these days would think to question either Pound's place in the canon or his posthumous conscription into American uniform. If he never quite became the colossus he sometimes persuaded himself he was, he came close for a while. And despite his lifelong exile, he's as American as any of them: from the James Whitcomb Riley-meets-Joel Chandler Harris dialect he affected when he was doing his Old Ez number to his autodidactic ambition to swallow up the whole world of literature and make it new.
Before his economic and political crankery turned his career into a sideshow in the 1930's, Pound was the central instigator and publicist of literary modernism, and one of its central practitioners. He hounded editors to publish Joyce and Eliot, did a heavy, masterly edit on ''The Waste Land,'' helped the middle-aged Yeats liven himself up and championed Frost, Hemingway and William Carlos Williams. His ''Cantos,'' the epic ''rag-bag'' that he spent half a century stuffing with everything from Homer to Confucius to John Adams, is still up there on the Mount Rushmore of High Modernism, next to ''The Waste Land,'' ''Ulysses'' and ''Finnegans Wake.'' (It's the oddball Teddy Roosevelt, perhaps, but still.) He experimented restlessly with the tricky verse forms of Provençal poets, the accentual cadences of the Anglo-Saxons and the foursquare quatrains of Théophile Gautier, before he settled on a catchall vers libre for most of the ''Cantos.'' His immersion in Chinese and Japanese literature -- oddly like Longfellow's immersion in Dante and the Finnish national epic poem, the ''Kalevala'' -- helped rescue English-language poetry from Anglo-American provincialism. In 1912, he coined the term ''imagism'' to describe the clean, visual, minimalist poetry he championed, and had the sense to jump ship when the movement got precious. His tart pronouncements -- ''Use no superfluous word,'' ''Go in fear of abstractions,'' ''Don't be descriptive,'' ''Every literaryism, every book word, fritters away a scrap of the reader's patience,'' ''Only emotion endures'' -- still belong on index cards above every writer's desk.
But here comes the ''and yet'': there was always something deeply bogus about Pound. He resolved at 15 that when he was 30 he ''would know more about poetry than any man living.'' He was 28 when he wrote about that early resolution, and still had two years of wiggle room, but his learning remained scattershot and superficial. Those contrarian recommendations in ''The ABC of Reading,'' which omit the major Romantics and boost such figures as the Earl of Dorset and Walter Savage Landor, illustrate his dodgy belief that ''a man can learn more about poetry by really knowing and examining a few of the best poems than by meandering about among a great many.'' Yet scholars exposed the howlers in his translations and quotations from his personal sacred texts, forcing him to justify himself with bluster and double talk. (Though he also had scholarly enablers: S. V. Jankowski, in his 1969 preface to Pound's translation of Sophocles' ''Women of Trachis,'' noted that Pound ''refuses to recognize the Greek syntax as a determining factor.'') Even the long-sufferingly loyal Eliot was amused by his pose of erudition. Humphrey Carpenter, in his definitive 1988 biography, ''A Serious Character,'' treats even Pound's anti-Semitism, however abhorrent, as another form of playacting. ''A naughty schoolboy might do as much, and really there seems to be something essentially childish in his whole interest in Jews and Jewry.'' Except in words, Pound was never violent and seldom unkind; his radio rants about ''kikes'' seem solipsistically disconnected from the real world, in which Hitler was actually exterminating the Jews of Europe. We can't dismiss Pound as either a dilettante or a charlatan -- he worked too hard, and took his self-assigned missions too seriously -- but much of what he wrote betrays an undercurrent of willed self-delusion, and a sub-undercurrent of suppressed self-doubt.
In a 1967 Paris Review interview, Vladimir Nabokov scoffed at ''the pretentious nonsense of Mr. Pound, that total fake.'' You wonder how much of that pretentious nonsense Nabokov actually bothered to check out, but the creator of such posturing self-deluders as Humbert Humbert and Charles Kinbote had a keen nose for (and a suspicious sympathy with) intellectual impersonations. Now that Pound's innovations are taken for granted, he reads less like a poet than like a writer first doggedly, then desperately, imitating a poet. What he called the ''ideogramic method'' of the ''Cantos'' -- juxtaposing images and texts, ideas and allusions, without the connective tissue of sequential logic -- too seldom communicated to readers what he hoped it would. In old age, he essentially admitted he'd been faking it: not to fool anybody else, but to fool himself. ''I knew too little about so many things,'' he once told his friend Daniel Cory. ''I picked out this and that thing that interested me, then jumbled them into a bag. But that's not the way . . . to make a work of art.'' Hard-core Poundians can explain this away as late-life depression, but its stern lucidity sounds like that fierce young teacher and theorist who did his damnedest to purge poetry of artiness -- which he hated in part because it was always his own besetting sin.
The 1,363-page ''Poems and Translations'' collects most of Pound's early creative work, including 76 previously unpublished or uncollected poems, much of it produced between 1905 and 1923, when he began pouring all his serious verse into the 802-page ''Cantos.'' Compared with equivalent stretches of ground-clearing and throat-clearing by Frost or Yeats, little remains readable. This is partly because, thanks to the modernist emphasis on subjective experience, poetry has largely come to mean their sort of post-Romantic personal lyric. The archmodernist Pound had a premodernist idea of what it was to be a poet: for him, as for Pope -- or Longfellow -- poetry was less private and organic than public and imitative, constantly in discourse with the reader and the tradition. (Yeats and Frost worked that side of the street too, but ''Among School Children'' and ''To Earthward'' are more to our taste now than ''Under Ben Bulben'' and ''Build Soil.'') So Pound labored away at his translations and imitations, homages and ripostes, evocations and provocations; he tried on genres, formal and metrical schemes, attitudes and personae -- as he pointedly titled the collected non-''Cantos'' poems he published in his lifetime. He offered up war chants, aubades, songs, ballads, satires, parodies, dramatic monologues: long on bile but short on juice. Where was the man himself? To Pound, caught up in his role as the Prospero of Poetry Island, the merely personal must have seemed self-indulgent and irrelevant. Or unfaceable. Or unreachable. His reading taught him that only emotion endured, but unlike Yeats, he had little inclination for ''walking naked.'' And this impersonality put him, for all his prescience, on what now seems the wrong side of literary history.
Still, that doesn't account for why Pope is still fun, while reading Pound is such a slog. The earliest poems traffic in the tin-eared archaism he later dismissed as ''stale cream puffs'': ''So hath the boon been given, by the poets of old time / (Dante to Beatrice -- an I profane not). . . .'' Though his characteristic religious mode was paganism, the jog-trot ''Ballad of the Goodly Fere'' evokes muscular Christianity -- what was he thinking? -- in cringe-inducing dialect: ''Ha' we lost the goodliest fere o'all / For the priests and the gallows tree? / Aye lover he was of brawny men, / O' ships and the open sea.'' The much-admired (at least by Pound) ''Sestina: Altaforte,'' in which he channels the bloodthirsty Bertrans de Born, starts off with a bang that turns into a clunk: ''Damn it all! all this our South stinks peace.'' In his love poems, women disappear into a mist of melancholy mannerism: ''She, who moved here amid the cyclamen, / Moves only now a clinging tenuous ghost.'' And when he shucks the fusty sentimentality to reveal himself as the artist aggrieved -- a favorite theme -- the tone sets your teeth on edge, whether he goes for archness (''Come, my songs, let us speak of perfection -- / We shall get ourselves rather disliked'') or ham-handed abuse: ''Let us deride the smugness of 'The Times': GUFFAW! / So much for the gagged reviewers, / It will pay them when the worms are wriggling in their vitals; / These are they who objected to newness.''
The 1920 sequence ''Hugh Selwyn Mauberley,'' Pound's self-styled ''farewell to London'' and his pre-''Cantos'' masterwork, holds up better. In what seems intended as a portrait of a literary wannabe, he's dried off the language and bundled the fury in crisp quatrains:
The age demanded an
image
Of its accelerated
grimace,
Something for the modern stage,
Not, at any rate, an Attic grace. . . .
Poundians rightly point to this poem when they talk about his technical mastery: notice the way he plays the eye rhymes (''image'' / ''stage,'' ''grimace'' / ''grace'') against the slant ear-rhymes (''image'' / ''grimace,'' ''stage'' / ''grace'') to give the illusion of couplets. Yet even this controlled performance, which gave Eliot clues for ''The Waste Land,'' meanders into satirical sketches, and ends on a random, if evocative, note:
The face-oval beneath
the glaze,
Bright in its suave bounding-line, as
Beneath half-watt rays
The eyes turn topaz.
A far cry from ''The Waste Land'' and its resounding ''shantih shantih shantih'' -- the ending, by the way, on which Pound the editor insisted. In his own work, the larger structure eluded him.
Nearly half of this collection is translations, some surely untrustworthy, most surely skippable. Pound puts old Italian and Provençal into antiquated poetryese -- ''Me hath she cast from high, / In fell disease / I lie'' -- and Sophocles into bizarro vernacular American: ''When someone says Orestes is comin' / then she gets scared and blows her top proper / goes shoutin' frantic.'' His more straightforward treatment of Japanese Noh plays and Confucian treatises wears better; no one should mind his Confucius coming out with the occasional n'est-ce pas. But Pound never wrote anything better than his versions of Chinese poems in the 1915 volume ''Cathay'': ''Lament of the Frontier Guard,'' ''The Jewel Stairs' Grievance'' and the much-anthologized ''The River-Merchant's Wife: A Letter'': ''The paired butterflies are already yellow with August / Over the grass in the West garden, / They hurt me.''
This is just the poetry he wanted in his Imagist days, back when he was prescribing enduring emotion with no superfluous words. That these poems weren't originally his, but graceful adaptations, matters less than their effect and their influence. They show him at his best: as the tireless talent scout, the pitiless editor and the great impersonator. If after 1,300 pages we still know Ezra Pound only as a collage of voices and attitudes, mannerisms and masks -- well, that was Ezra Pound. His ultimate centerlessness, more than his rants and his hatreds, more than his ultimate self-derailment, makes him an uncanny presence among the Library of America's black-jacketed eminences, despite the credentials he earned. As to the credentials he faked, discriminating readers will detect those. But he's in the club now, and if we can live with Longfellow, we can live with him.
David Gates's most recent book is ''The Wonders of the Invisible World,'' a collection of stories.
