THE stylish $10,000 satin gown with buttons all the way down the back in the window of Claire's Treasures, a swank thrift shop in Cedarhurst, has been worn by six brides.
Shayna English, 23, an unemployed teacher, strolled down the aisle in the long, formal dress with collar and cuffs at her wedding on Dec. 1 to Jeremy Horowitz, a 25-year-old accountant. When she found the recycled gown at Claire's Treasures, it was stained, but she loved it anyway.
''For me personally, it was a question of affordability,'' Mrs. Horowitz said. ''There are plenty of stunning gowns out there these days, but they are quite expensive.''
Mrs. Horowitz didn't have the $300 to have the dress altered and cleaned. Nor could she have afforded the formal wedding with a sit-down dinner for 315 guests at Congregation Beth Sholom in Lawrence. But she was in luck. Nicole Gleitman, the owner of Claire's Treasures, is a wedding benefactor.
In the last four and a half years, Mrs. Gleitman, 46, of Woodsburgh, has helped more than 200 couples marry -- from lending the bride a gown to picking up the tab for a modest affair and helping set up their new home with pots, pans and furniture.
Mrs. Gleitman's shop for needy brides, which opened a few weeks ago, grew out of a fund she started in 1999, shortly before her sister, Claire Kamhi, died of pancreatic cancer. When friends asked to which charity they could donate, Mrs. Gleitman thought of the young couple whose wedding expenses she had just been asked to help defray by her rabbi's wife.
At the Claire Kamhi Hachnossat Kallah Fund's first breakfast, the response was overwhelming. ''The sanctity of marriage was the most important thing in her life,'' Mrs. Gleitman said of her sister. ''Everyone left checks not knowing that there was such a need in the community.''
A year later, Mrs. Gleitman opened a bridal ''gemach'' in her basement, collecting expensive gowns from brides in her neighborhood who would never take the dresses out of the closet again and recycling them to disadvantaged brides. Based on the Hebrew words gemilat chasadim, meaning the act of helping people, a gemach is a place where the needy can borrow clothing and obtain household goods for little or no cost.
To generate more money and set an example for her three children, Mrs. Gleitman opened the shop. Claire's Treasures is believed to be the first storefront to emerge from a network of dozens of underground gemachs operating out of Orthodox Jewish homes in the Five Towns, Queens, Brooklyn and recently West Hempstead.
''My goal is so that we can help even more people, and not just Jewish people,'' Mrs. Gleitman said.
The storefront location is less embarrassing, Mrs. Horowitz said. ''That person feels like they are going to a store and they are going shopping for their stuff and not like they are a charity case who has no other options,'' Mrs. Horowitz said. ''People can come in and look around and be dignified and not feel like they are taking charity.''
While Mrs. Gleitman specializes in helping brides, other gemachs offer children's clothing, baby furniture and medical equipment like crutches and wheelchairs. In November, Gigi Bressler opened a special-occasion dress gemach in a spare bedroom of her West Hempstead home, offering barely worn $2,500 outfits to mothers of the bride and groom or the mother of a child celebrating a bar or bat mitzvah for a flat $100 cleaning fee. The proceeds will go to the Young Israel of West Hempstead's community food program.
Besides wedding gowns, Mrs. Gleitman stocks new Lenox vases and candy dishes, ceremonial silver, toaster ovens, juice makers and picture frames that patrons might otherwise have stuffed into a closet, like the crystal Waterford candlestick that Lorna Jedwab of Lawrence dropped off on a recent afternoon.
''It was a gift I received,'' Ms. Jedwab explained. ''I have enough of these types of items and instead of recycling it as a gift, I am bringing it into the shop to be sold for the benefit.''
Depending on their needs, Mrs. Gleitman said, brides might get a $100 gift certificate or a free bedroom set. Money generated by other shoppers is funneled back into helping brides.
''People are sometimes surprised of who is in need,'' Mrs. Gleitman said. A typical scenario, she said, is the comfortable couple living in a nice home that get divorced, leaving the wife in the sudden position of having to work. Struggling just to make the mortgage payment, she hasn't a clue how to pull off a fancy wedding for her daughter.
''This kid grew up in a certain lifestyle,'' Mrs. Gleitman said. ''How is the mother supposed to do it by herself when wedding gowns can cost up to $10,000 or more?''
Not to mention the cocktail hour, ceremony and wedding dinner and dance.
''The norm in our neighborhood would be minimum $75,000,'' Mrs. Gleitman said, confiding that the true number is embarrassingly higher and a stretch even for the well-to-do.
For $6,000, Mrs. Gleitman said, she can arrange for a basic wedding with a reception for 150 guests. It would not include hors d'oeuvres, she said, and the three-course dinner would be chicken, potato, perhaps a bowl of soup, a smidgen of dessert.
''It's a one-man band and fake flowers and they can't do more than that,'' said Mrs. Gleitman, who works out bargain-basement deals with caterers. ''The weddings are not in any wedding hall that you read about in the wedding section, that's for sure.''
Starting out is expensive, Mrs. Gleitman said, especially when rents are high and either the bride or groom is still in school. Sometimes a couple can't afford to rent an apartment until they cash in their wedding presents.
''How can they do it?'' said Mrs. Gleitman, who was born in Morocco, grew up poor and is determined to help others because of her own good fortune as a result of her husband, Marc, investing in real estate. ''They can't. We help however we can.''
Rabbi Simcha Lefkowitz of Congregation Anschei Chesed in Hewlett is on the advisory board that checks whether the couples Mrs. Gleitman wants to help are truly in need.
''There's tremendous pressure,'' Rabbi Lefkowitz said. ''People think that everybody can afford beautiful weddings of $100,000 or more. There are many families in the community, hardworking families that just can't do this.''
Rabbi Lefkowitz said that for some couples what is supposed to be the time of greatest joy becomes the greatest stress because they can't afford to get married.
''This fund comes to help them at a very important juncture in their lives,'' Rabbi Lefkowitz said. ''They don't have money for the wedding. They have no money for furniture. There is no money to start their life.''
When Merrelle Bialestock gets married on Feb. 10 at a catering hall in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, in front of 150 guests, she will be wearing a gown that another bride's parents gave to Mrs. Gleitman unworn when the bride found a dress she liked better.
''It fit me perfectly,'' said Ms. Bialestock, who came to Mrs. Gleitman's shop in search of a dress because she has eight siblings and said her parents couldn't afford to help with the wedding. ''She didn't charge me a drop. All she said I had to do was bring it back so other girls could enjoy it.''
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
