Four months into Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's historic overhaul, the New York City public school system is straining under the pressures of extraordinary change, showing sparks of improvement against a backdrop of widespread confusion.
Some changes seem to be serving children well: at Public School 30 in the Mott Haven section of the Bronx, for instance, Lisa Ripperger, an assistant principal, said the new citywide literacy curriculum and classroom libraries were encouraging children to read, making it increasingly common for fourth and fifth graders to devour books about, say, Cam Jansen or the Polk Street Kids along with their school lunches.
But other changes have created a disarray that many veteran educators say is unprecedented. Ms. Ripperger, for example, said she did not get a regular paycheck until mid-November. And when it came, it was for the amount she would have earned as a teacher. Many newly hired teachers reported similar delays in getting paychecks and health benefits; like Ms. Ripperger, they had to rely on emergency school paychecks.
There have also been glaring problems with the disciplinary system, severe overcrowding in some middle schools and high schools and persistent complaints that six new Regional Operations Centers have been slow to respond to building maintenance and other back-office needs.
''It's hard to untangle what is the normal disturbance and chaos that happens with new stuff, and what is actually a systemic problem,'' said Jill Chaifetz, executive director of Advocates for Children, a nonprofit group that closely monitors the school system and draws financing from private foundations as well as the state and federal governments. ''As people try and flex the muscles of this new system, we're finding that some things can't respond either as quickly or as well as we had hoped. The question is: Is that part of the growing pain?''
In interviews, educators, parents and students said they felt caught in a netherworld between the old system they knew and a new one that is not yet fully formed.
Among their concerns are these:
*Special education services and evaluations have been delayed, parents and educators say, because of difficulties in finding records that were moved to new regional offices from the old community school districts.
*While the new parent coordinators at some schools are reaching out to parents who long felt neglected, in others they have yet to carve out a role. In the largest schools, officials acknowledge, the parent coordinators are overwhelmed. Whether they are worth the $43 million price tag remains to be seen.
*Queens high school principals say they feel so isolated in the restructured bureaucracy, which eliminated the boroughwide high school district, that they now meet informally over dinner once a month to exchange tips on the new system.
''We don't have the big picture of what's happening,'' said one principal. The new regional structure, which mixed high schools into smaller networks along with elementary and middle schools, has been unhelpful, this principal said, adding: ''When we had 35 high schools together, the communication was constant.''
The mayor's overhaul, called Children First, includes parts that cannot be fully assessed for months if not years, like a training academy for new principals and the new curriculums, which will be judged largely by standardized testing.
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein said the new system, while hardly flawless, was functioning well.
''If you look at the key things of Children First, they are working,'' Mr. Klein said in an interview last week. ''Some of them, not surprisingly, have hit a few bumps. But they are working.''
Most important, the chancellor said, the system has been transformed in little more than a year.
''There is no question that there are lots of people in the bureaucracy who will resist this kind of structural -- more importantly, cultural -- change,'' Mr. Klein said. ''I think the good news is that it has happened.''
Mr. Bloomberg is the first mayor in more than 130 years to hold direct control over the school system, the nation's largest. With Mr. Klein, he has sought to change virtually everything, from how most students are taught reading and math to how principals order supplies. He has bluntly told voters to judge him on whether the schools improve.
Mr. Bloomberg now appoints a majority of members of a weakened Board of Education, which he renamed the Panel for Educational Policy. Even members of the panel say it does little more than rubber-stamp the mayor's decisions.
True to Mr. Bloomberg's word, mayoral control has ended years of public squabbling among the mayor, chancellor and Board of Education. But relations between the administration and the teachers' and principals' unions have been icier of late than in recent memory. This came as a particular disappointment to private supporters, who have committed $160 million to the school system since Mr. Klein took over.
''We worked hard for reform, and for a while it looked like it was going down the drain as we saw City Hall and the teachers and principals all squabbling in the pages of the newspaper,'' said Kathryn S. Wylde, president and chief executive of the Partnership for New York City, a business group that pledged $30 million to the Leadership Academy for principals. ''It's hard for the business community to be enthusiastic when the educational community appears to be spending more time fighting with each other than figuring out how to improve the schools and educate the kids.''
By far, the most spectacular failure of the mayor's centralization effort has been the breakdown in the discipline process, which caused long delays in suspending and removing dangerous students from the schools and led a chastened Mr. Bloomberg to bluntly admit, ''We've screwed up.''
At the same time, this failure brought the potential benefits of mayoral control into focus. Mr. Bloomberg quickly took responsibility and developed a plan to flood the most dangerous schools with extra safety agents and to impose a ''three strikes and you're out'' policy for repeat offenders of the discipline code.
But not every problem leads to a mayoral proclamation, and some parents say the major reshuffling has had significant side effects.
Betty Stryker, vice president of the PTA at Intermediate School 2 on Staten Island, said the burdens of the new curriculums and newly required double periods of math and reading were sapping teachers' time and patience, leaving them with less energy to deal with individual students' needs.
''It's draining and I see it,'' Mrs. Stryker said. ''I'm just not positive it's going to work.''
Elementary school teachers are discovering that the new literacy program is less a curriculum than an approach, with rituals like guided small group reading and read-alouds, but little in the way of specific, designated content. It seems to be working best in schools where it was in place to some extent the year before.
At P.S. 30, for instance, teachers already used a balanced literacy approach. Even so, Ms. Ripperger said, some teachers are struggling to handle some aspects of the curriculum, like guided reading, in which a teacher works with one small group of readers while other small groups work independently. Ms. Ripperger said she felt confident that with time, teachers and students would get the hang of the new curriculum.
''We have to have some faith and keep going,'' she said. ''I believe fundamentally in the concept of the reform.''
Others disagree.
Lorraine Skeen recently resigned as a local instructional superintendent, a new position created by the mayor's overhaul that had her supervising 10 schools in the Bronx. She left in part because she lacked faith in the literacy program.
''My sense from the teachers is much of what they had before that worked for them has been taken away,'' Ms. Skeen said. ''In certain cases, people are floundering, because it's a very very open-ended program, and it's not systematic.''
In most schools, there has been more training this year than in years past, partly because of new literacy and math coaches as well as an extra 50 minutes of teacher training a week. Even so, some teachers and supervisors say the training has been more theoretical than substantive.
Megan Behrent, an English teacher at Franklin D. Roosevelt High School in Brooklyn who, under the new system, teaches two 90-minute literacy classes to ninth graders reading below grade level, said a week of training in the summer and two days in November were helpful but not sufficient.
''It's a lot of explaining how great this program is and how this program is supposed to work,'' she said, adding that when teachers have or anticipate problems, ''those things are not dealt with as much.''
Mr. Klein said in the interview that he was particularly pleased with the parent coordinators, the math and literacy coaches and the principals' academy. He also praised the New Beginnings centers, 16 mini-schools for disruptive (but not extremely violent) high school students.
The high schools that send students to the centers say they are also pleased with the program. As a result, four more centers are being created this spring. But some New Beginnings staff members say the program, like much else about the overhauled school system, is still getting its footing. Some sites have been sent students they are unprepared to handle, like violent or special education students.
David Raubvogel, an assistant principal at two New Beginnings Centers in the Bronx, praised the concept but acknowledged that starting them had been like ''changing the wheel while the car is moving.''
Ms. Chaifetz of Advocates for Children said it was too soon to draw firm conclusions about the New Beginnings centers or most other aspects of the new school system.
''I think you really have to wait for it to shake out,'' she said. ''All you can see are some glimmerings.''
