Prime Minister Tony Blair surprised British troops stationed in southern Iraq on Sunday, paying them a quick postholiday visit to survey their progress and extol them as ''the new pioneers of soldiering in the 21st century.''
Looking tanned and relaxed after his vacation on an Egyptian beach, Mr. Blair spoke to several hundred soldiers at a muddy, sprawling logistics base in Shaiba, outside this city, where he underscored what he described as the radically changed role of modern warfare and the challenges ahead.
''Your soldiering has got not just to be about fighting and being able to engage in combat, and to win that combat and win it well, which you do brilliantly,'' said Mr. Blair, in blue jeans, a navy blue sport jacket and no necktie, from a small hastily erected platform. ''But it is also to win the peace; it is to win the hearts and minds of people.''
Iraq, he said, ''was the test case,'' a country ''whose regime had a proven record of the use of weapons of mass destruction, not just their development,'' and a history of torturing and repressing its own people.
''If we had backed away from that, we would never have been able to confront this threat in other countries where it exists,'' Mr. Blair said.
About 11,000 British troops are stationed in the southeast region around Basra, and 52 British soldiers have died since the occupation of Iraq began last spring.
In a briefing with reporters aboard his airplane later, Mr. Blair said he had decided to pay a second visit to Iraq -- the first was in May -- to thank the troops but also to send a message to the Iraqi people that occupation forces are committed to staying as long as they are needed. Now had seemed his ''best chance'' to come, he said.
After a quick tour of a new Iraqi police training academy in Zubayr, just south of Basra, and a get-together with the governor of Basra at a former palace of Saddam Hussein's overlooking the Shatt al Arab waterway, Mr. Blair said he was pleased at how much had changed since his last visit. He said a subsequent meeting here on Sunday with L. Paul Bremer III, the American administrator in Iraq, also had reinforced his view that Iraq was transforming itself in tangible ways, despite insurgent sabotage.
''It is very important to show the people of Iraq that we are not walking away,'' Mr. Blair said.
But Mr. Blair's trip also came at a politically sensitive time for him.
Any day now, Lord Hutton is expected to deliver his final report on whether the intelligence on Iraq's illicit weapons was embellished by Mr. Blair and his aides in order to make a case for war. Many members of his own Labor Party and a majority of Britons bitterly opposed the war, and the report is expected to receive enormous attention.
The prime minister also faces considerable opposition at home for his proposal to raise university fees, which many see as an erosion of Britain's social fabric. In addition, Mr. Blair has been plagued by reports of ill health after he suffered from a minor heart ailment a few months ago.
Not all the news has been bad for Mr. Blair. Mr. Hussein was captured last month and, most recently, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, the Libyan leader, agreed to disclose and dismantle Libya's unconventional weapons, a coup for Mr. Blair, who for years had pressed for a diplomatic solution in Libya.
Mr. Blair reiterated today that he continued to believe in the weapons-related intelligence he and his staff received. He said states with dangerous weapons, coupled with the proliferation of terrorism, posed the biggest threat to the 21st century. ''If we don't deal with it, we will rue the day we didn't,'' he said.
After his meeting with Mr. Bremer, Mr. Blair said he was confident that the vast majority of Iraqis did not want a government built on fundamentalist Islamic principles, as in Saudi Arabia and Iran. ''They don't believe that a democratic Iraq is going to be an extreme Iraq,'' Mr. Blair said.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, Mr. Bremer's deputy and the highest-ranking British official in Iraq, agreed and said ''political activity is beginning to bubble up.'' Information from numerous public opinion surveys in Iraq, Mr. Greenstock said, indicates that 80 percent of the people want a ''more open society, a secular society'' that also respects religion and Islamic principles.
While occupation forces are trying to prepare for elections next year and the transfer of sovereign power to Iraqis, Mr. Greenstock said the security situation remained volatile.
The past few weeks have brought some successes: a string of arrests and a series of new leads based mostly on paperwork found in Mr. Hussein's briefcase, he said.
''But the opposition is also getting more sophisticated, with bigger bombs,'' he said. ''They've broken up into cells and learned not to depend on central command and control. The cells are working quite separately from each other.''
A ''huge proportion'' of the insurgents are former Hussein regime loyalists, although Al Qaeda is ''clearly trying to come in,'' Mr. Greenstock said, but so far the cells have shown a lack of coordination.
''We are not finding it is as easy for them to work together as we thought, or as they thought,'' Mr. Greenstock said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE BRITISH
