Dikembe Mutombo taunted his former Nets teammates through three and a half quarters last night, talking and wagging his finger menacingly after swatting their shots from his perch in the paint.
But when the game forced the sure hand of a superstar, Mutombo was on the bench watching Nets point guard Jason Kidd with equal parts admiration and jealousy.
Kidd had already scored 10 points four minutes into the fourth quarter to wrest control from the Knicks, just as he has done with the cross-river rivalry during the past three seasons.
Then, with the score tied at 70-70, Mutombo went to the bench for 70 seconds in favor of the quicker Kurt Thomas.
In that time, Kidd scored on a runner and an 18-footer and passed to Kerry Kittles for a 3-pointer, starting a 17-2 run that sent the Nets celebrating and the Knicks spiraling further out of contention with a 95-85 loss at Madison Square Garden.
Kidd scored 19 of his game-high 35 points in the fourth quarter, racing up the floor to pull the Nets away to their fifth consecutive victory over the Knicks and their 10th in 11 games against them.
''Sometimes it's just so fun to sit on the side and watch him,'' Mutombo said. ''It's amazing to see the squad they got. They don't have so many big guys. Only that Kidd they got there is making the team play like they are something else.''
Kidd's dynamic presence underscored the Knicks' weaknesses again, as they have not been able to compete against a quicker, more athletic and now seasoned team. The Knicks lost for the second consecutive game after a four-game winning streak against lesser-quality teams, dropping to 14-21 while the Nets improved to 19-14.
''They got on a roll and when they play that way, that's why they went to the finals two years in a row,'' Knicks guard Allan Houston said. ''Yeah, it's disappointing and it's embarrassing. But what can you do? You get back tomorrow and keep working hard.''
Despite trying to slow the tempo, the Knicks faltered on defense in the final six minutes. Their starting point guard, Frank Williams, sat out his second consecutive game with a strained groin muscle.
Kidd took advantage of the smaller backup point guard Moochie Norris, posting him up, before Coach Don Chaney reinserted last night's starter, Charlie Ward, with 5 minutes 38 seconds left.
Mutombo said that in the fourth quarter, the Nets switched offenses to draw him out of the paint, but the Knicks did not adjust.
''We could have done things differently, maybe throw a little bit of zone,'' Mutombo said.
Mutombo blocked Kidd's shots three times through the first three quarters, finishing with a season-high 10 blocks to tie the franchise record set by Joe Meriweather in 1979. But Mutombo's performance against the Nets, who bought out his contract at the beginning of training camp, was not enough.
Nor was the resurgence of Antonio McDyess, who was motivated by a morning pep talk from Chaney to score 14 points and grab 11 rebounds.
Keith Van Horn scored 21 points against the Nets, who traded him two summers ago, to lead the Knicks in scoring for the sixth straight game, but he scored only 4 points in the fourth quarter.
''Any time you have one or two of your guys play their hearts out, it's disappointing because somewhere along the line everybody didn't do it on a consistent basis,'' said Houston, who scored 9 of his 17 points in the fourth quarter. ''We had a lot of people play hard for a lot of the game, but when it counts the most, we got to knuckle down and get stops. They just outplayed us in the fourth quarter.''
The Knicks took a 65-63 lead after McDyess scored 5 straight points with 9:45 to play. But Kidd answered by scoring 7 straight points that sparked the Nets. Mutombo came back in with 5:04 to play, but the Nets had the momentum and the Knicks never got closer than 78-72.
''Keith and Deke played extremely well,'' Kidd said. ''Deke blocked everybody's shot and gave the waggle, but at the end of the night, we got the most important thing.''
Before a capacity Garden crowd with split allegiances, Kidd and company showed why they dominate more than just the area. He shot 11 for 27 and had 13 assists, feeding Kittles, who scored 20 points. Richard Jefferson scored 15 and Kenyon Martin added 13.
Van Horn was frustrated by the Nets' domination.
''I know Dikembe wanted it bad; I wanted it bad,'' he said. ''Everyone on this team wanted it bad. We just had a mental breakdown in the fourth quarter.''
Houston said the Knicks were not caught up in the rivalry. ''We're looking to get to the playoffs and get to the finals, we're not looking to catch anybody,'' he said. ''We're just going to continue to stay positive and work towards our goal. We still have a lot of green grass in front of us.''
Only, the grass is a lot greener on the other side of the Hudson.
REBOUNDS
HOWARD EISLEY, the fourth point guard on the Knicks, did not play for the second time in three games. CHARLIE WARD, starting for the injured FRANK WILLIAMS, scored 15 points. MOOCHIE NORRIS shot 3 of 10 and had 9 points. ''I mentioned to our guards, we have a lot guys here, that if a guy isn't playing well, I'm going with somebody else,'' Knicks Coach DON CHANEY said before the game. . . . The Knicks hope to complete the waiving of JOHN AMAECHI today, freeing up a roster spot.
PRO BASKETBALL
