There are truly great qualities to the singing of the popular tenor Roberto Alagna. Yet from the time he was unhelpfully touted by his recording company in the mid-1990's as ''the fourth tenor'' until today, he has never rid his singing of some frustrating vocal idiosyncrasies. That was true again on Friday night when Massenet's ''Werther,'' in the Metropolitan Opera's dusty 1971 production, returned to the company with Mr. Alagna in the title role. The evening also offered the alluring mezzo-soprano Vesselina Kasarova as Charlotte and an appealing young Canadian conductor, Jacques Lacombe, in his Met debut. But Mr. Alagna was the main draw.
Though Massenet's operas, hugely popular in their day, can seem musically thin and dramatically cloying to modern audiences, ''Werther,'' based on the Goethe novel, is his strongest and most involving work. But only if you have the right tenor in the title role of an aimless courtier, a dabbler in poetry intoxicated with his own perceptions of life who is seeking refuge in the country from emotional entanglements and the loss of a loved one.
Mr. Alagna, a dashing stage presence, embodied the role. As an actor he can sometimes be self-absorbed, but that quality was perfect for Werther, who falls instantly and helplessly in love with the good-hearted Charlotte, the lovely eldest daughter and surrogate mother to the children of the widowed Bailiff (the manager of the royal estate at Wetzlar in late 18th-century Germany). That Charlotte promised her dying mother to marry the eligible businessman Albert just makes her more appealing to Werther: she is the idealized, unattainable woman.
Through his ardently sung and impetuous portrayal, Mr. Alagna conveyed the sense that Werther's fatal devotion is more about his own obsessions than Charlotte's desires. He gave a boldly physical performance. Not many tenors during the final scene when the despondent Werther dies of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, could roll off a bed and fall flat onto the floor as Mr. Alagna did.
You must credit this French tenor with a keen understanding of French operatic style. The enunciation of the text and the formation of the vocal sound go hand in hand in the French way. His phrasing was supple and pliant. He captured that slightly nasal vocal quality of the French idiom without turning it into an affectation.
Yet, as on many nights with this proudly self-reliant singer, there were trouble spots in his singing, a result it seemed of technical glitches. Interestingly, he reveled in the full-voiced top notes that would test most tenors. But his mid-range singing was sometimes patchy. His sound would turn leathery; his voice would catch in the throat mid-phrase.
His singing stood in contrast to Ms. Kasarova's, whose dusky, warm voice was wonderfully suited to Charlotte's music. Though her performance was not flawless, here was a vocalist who understood the ways of her voice. The strapping and robust baritone Christopher Schaldenbrand was Albert, and it makes a difference to the overall drama when this character is portrayed as a decent, handsome and appealing husband. The love between Werther and Charlotte must seem consuming and irrational. There should be no obvious reason for her unhappiness in her marriage.
The lyric soprano Lyubov Petrova was a delightful Sophie, Charlotte's perky younger sister, and an oblivious innocent. The bass Paul Plishka made a gruff-toned, verbally indistinct Bailiff. Mr. Lacombe led a surely paced and rhapsodic account of the score, replacing the veteran French conductor Michel Plasson, who withdrew some weeks ago because of illness.
The whole cast received a prolonged ovation, but Mr. Alagna understandably drew the most vociferous bravos. Whatever his technical flaws, he excites audiences and is the real thing: a stylish French tenor. There are five more performances through Jan. 22.
MET OPERA REVIEW
