Lunch on Dec. 31 at the Palm, the vintage 19th and M Street steak-and-pricey-onion-rings haunt, was a festive pre-New Year's Eve celebration of happy Washington political brokers. And who should be at one of the tables, looking alarmingly relaxed, but Jack Oliver, the deputy finance chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign.
Unfortunately, Mr. Oliver's table was too far away for effective eavesdropping, so there was no way of knowing why Mr. Oliver had the time to take a leisurely lunch, deeply uncharacteristic of the disciplined Bush White House, on the eve of the 2004 campaign. (Mr. Bush sets the tone by eating a lunchtime salad in his dining room off the Oval Office, where he often channel surfs, alone.)
But a post-lunch call to Ron Kaufman, one of Mr. Oliver's dining companions -- the other was Wayne L. Berman, a longtime Republican fund-raiser and lobbyist -- turned up some interesting talk among the three about whether Howard Dean, the leading Democratic candidate in recent polls, was another Michael S. Dukakis, the Massachusetts governor who badly lost the 1988 presidential election to Mr. Bush's father.
''The similarities are that they see themselves as good managers first and politicians second,'' said Mr. Kaufman, who remains the first President Bush's political adviser and whose job during the 1988 Bush campaign was to move to Boston, he said, ''and drive Dukakis nuts.''
Neither of the two former Northeastern governors is a ''schmooz-er,'' Mr. Kaufman added. But that did not necessarily mean, he said, that the current Bush campaign thinks the election will be the brutal rout for Dr. Dean that the 1988 race was for Mr. Dukakis. If there was a consensus at Mr. Oliver's table, it was that Dr. Dean was a stronger, better organized candidate than Mr. Dukakis, and that 2004 will be a lot closer than 1988. But nobody sounded too frantic.
Mr. Oliver did not return phone calls, leaving that task to his boss, Ken Mehlman, the wiry, highly caffeinated Bush campaign manager. Mr. Mehlman, who sounded as frantic as ever, said that no, no, no -- no one at the campaign was remotely relaxed. Certainly not Mr. Mehlman, who said that he couldn't remember what he did for lunch on Dec. 31. Maybe a lonely-guy salad at his desk?
''I would say that we're very focused,'' Mr. Mehlman said, sounding so focused that he seemed about to jump through the phone. ''We're not taking anything for granted. The country is competitive politically, and because of that I take seriously every one of our potential opponents.''
Will Dr. Dean implode? ''I don't have any idea about that,'' Mr. Mehlman said briskly, then he promised to call back with statistics showing how prepared for the battle the Bush campaign was.
Faster than you could say ''Florida election recount,'' he did. So far, Mr. Mehlman said, the campaign has trained 5,500 county and precinct leaders in 52 regional training sessions around the country, teaching them how to register voters, write letters to the editor, be the hosts of Bush-Cheney block parties and otherwise turn out the Republican vote on Election Day.
Money meanwhile continues to flow into Bush-Cheney election headquarters in Arlington, Va., where officials expect to announce the latest tally on Monday or Tuesday. Officials there say that Mr. Bush could have close to $120 million, and that he could reach his goal, $170 million, by March, when the Democrats may well have a nominee. That will allow Mr. Bush to switch from $2,000-a-plate fund-raisers in sterile hotel ballrooms to classic political activities, like rallies and baby-kissing shopping-mall tours.
Mr. Bush plans to continue the check collecting on Monday at a fund-raiser in St. Louis, classic swing-voter territory, which was planned as the first of a half-dozen money events this month. The man behind the fund-raiser is Sam Fox, chairman of the Harbour Group Ltd., a holding company in Clayton, Mo. Three years ago, Mr. Fox gave $100,000 to Mr. Bush's inaugural committee.
So far in 2004, Mr. Bush has seemed as relaxed as Mr. Oliver, and he even spent the first day of the year on a quail hunt in Texas with his father. (Mr. Bush reported that he shot five quail, which amounted to 65 fewer birds than Vice President Dick Cheney gunned down in a lusty morning of pheasant hunting last month.)
Notably, when reporters asked Mr. Bush for his New Year's resolution, he did not say anything that might seem as politically overeager as wanting to win re-election. Instead he said he wanted to lose weight, eat fewer desserts and rehabilitate a bad knee.
''I miss running,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The elliptical machine is good,'' he said, but added that it did not give him the same sensation as running.
Mr. Kaufman, meanwhile, said that he and Mr. Oliver and Mr. Berman have had a New Year's Eve lunch for the last three years, and that they always make predictions on where they will be when the next Dec. 31 rolls around. The predictions are then sealed in an envelope and opened with much mirth the following year.
Mr. Kaufman absolutely refused to reveal any predictions about Mr. Bush's campaign.
White House Letter
