First came the teasing: one man made a crack about another's sexual orientation. Others may have laughed. The target of the teasing responded with a taunt, a firefighter familiar with the case said, and then, in a flash, a metal chair sailed through the air, shattering bones in the teased man's face and partly severing his nose.
In that horrifying instant last Wednesday, a verbal fight swiftly escalated into violence in a Staten Island firehouse, officials say, leaving one firefighter on a respirator in a hospital and another under arrest, his career in peril. While the details are still under investigation and more charges, against firefighters accused of covering up the incident, are possible, the fight has opened a window of sorts on New York City's firehouse culture, including certain aspects that may have combined to disastrous effect.
Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta said last week that the fight at least partially stemmed from the close confines of firehouse living, where shared meals and sleeping quarters can lead to a boiling over of sibling-like relationships fueled by constant ribbing and full of all the tensions, personal feuds and intense competition of any family ties. To be sure, razzing is as much a part of firehouse life as communal meals and the shattering peal of alarm bells. But what set the Staten Island incident apart, surprising even longtime firefighters, was that it culminated in violence.
Other factors may have exacerbated the tense exchange between Firefighter Robert Walsh, who was injured, and Firefighter Michael R. Silvestri, who was arrested, including alcohol and a dispute over taking advantage of colleagues, which is considered taboo, firefighters and fire officials say.
Part of the mystique of firefighters is their seeming ability to remain forever young and daring. But as admirable as those traits can be, this youthfulness can at times translate into what the outside world might consider adolescent behavior. The endless flow of taunts can seem vicious and cruel. Those who have lived in and studied the world of firefighters -- which remains overwhelmingly male -- say there are good reasons why such an atmosphere is cultivated. After all, who but someone with a teenage boy's daring sense of immortality would willingly run into a burning building to save someone's life?
''Everybody verbally abuses young firefighters,'' said Vincent Dunn, a retired deputy chief, who added that even longtime firefighters do not outgrow the sport of razzing. ''Nobody wants physical violence -- that's a no-no. But there's a lot of verbal abuse. It's like society.''
In firehouses across the city, firefighters say they use taunts to build camaraderie. The idea, firefighters say, is to find a colleague's greatest weakness and taunt him -- or her -- about it over and over again until it no longer wounds the person's pride. That colleague will be a stronger individual at a moment of crisis, firefighters say.
There is, for example, the firefighter who once worked as a manager at Bloomingdale's before joining the department. His colleagues learned of his former job and, for more than a decade, the only personal pronouns they have used to refer to him have been ''she'' and ''her.''
Another firefighter, teased by his colleagues about having a small skull, once found a photo of his head nestled in a pea pod on the label of a can of peas. And a short firefighter was given a child's oxford shirt when he passed the lieutenant's test.
''One thing in the firehouse is that they love anyone who has the ability to make them laugh,'' said Mr. Dunn. That person is held in high esteem in the firehouse, he said.
A firefighter at a firehouse in Astoria, Queens, yesterday explained it this way: ''To be picked on is to be liked. It's like being out with friends. You have to be a sport about it. If you can't take it, don't give the heat.''
A firefighter familiar with the Staten Island fight said that Firefighter Silvestri was known to call Firefighter Walsh by homosexual slurs, as he allegedly did last Wednesday evening. Using taunts to emphasize seniority could have been a factor, the firefighter said. Firefighter Silvestri, 41, had 15 years with the department, while Firefighter Walsh, 40, had just 8.
''It's just a way of ranking each other,'' the firefighter said, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the investigation. ''It's just one more way to get at one another.''
To defend himself, the firefighter said, Firefighter Walsh mentioned that Firefighter Silvestri had arranged for a junior firefighter to work his regular shift on Thanksgiving Day, then came in to work on overtime pay. According to the firefighter, Firefighter Walsh had mentioned that subject more than a few times since Thanksgiving. Alleging that a firefighter is taking advantage of his colleagues in making the system work to his own benefit is a sore subject in any firehouse, and the firefighter said that Firefighter Walsh's references to this galled Firefighter Silvestri.
In firehouse culture, people who work the system to their advantage are all too familiar, just as any family knows who it is that never washes the dishes or carries out the trash. (Firefighters even have a name for these types: ''square-rooters.'')
Usually, these disputes are resolved without violence. ''If a guy comes in and he doesn't do the right thing, that's where some of the needling comes in,'' said a firefighter in Jackson Heights, Queens. ''Hopefully, he'll get the idea and set things right.''
''If you got a problem, all you need to do is mention it at the dinner table,'' the Jackson Heights firefighter said, a reference to the large kitchen table where anywhere from 6 to 20 firefighters take their three meals a day. ''You get all the advice you need. It's firehouse therapy.''
Officials are investigating whether alcohol played a role in the fight. A blood sample taken from Firefighter Walsh that night at Staten Island University Hospital revealed trace amounts of alcohol, but it has not been determined when the alcohol was consumed; one fire official said it could have been consumed even a day earlier. No other firefighters were tested for alcohol, and when senior members of the department and police arrived at the firehouse, after midnight, there was no evidence of drinking, officials said.
For a 138-year-old department, the prohibition against drinking came relatively recently. Drinking in some firehouses was common before 1970, Mr. Dunn said. It began to drop off as firefighters moved to the suburbs in the late 1960's, Mr. Dunn said, and drives home demanded sobriety. Shortly after the autopsy of a Bronx firefighter who fell off a fire engine in 1969 showed evidence of alcohol in his blood, Mr. Dunn said, the department banned alcohol from firehouses and prohibited firefighters from drinking while on duty.
Yesterday, the Staten Island district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr., was sworn in to office, hours after discussing the case by phone with Police Commissioner Raymond Kelly. Both officials said that the investigation was continuing, and that it remained to be seen whether other firefighters accused of participating in a cover-up of the incident would face criminal charges. One fire official has said it was likely that other firefighters who were present would face administrative charges.
Correction:  January 7, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Monday about firehouse culture in New York City referred incorrectly in some copies to the source of the comment ''If a guy comes in and he doesn't do the right thing, that's where some of the needling comes in. Hopefully, he'll get the idea and set things right'' and ''If you got a problem, all you need to do is mention it at the dinner table. You get all the advice you need. It's firehouse therapy.'' The speaker was a firefighter in Jackson Heights, Queens, not from Astoria.
