The robotic rover Spirit is on the surface of Mars, its arrival Saturday night the suspenseful beginning to a new stage in the exploration of the geology and perhaps biology of the planet that has long fascinated its neighbors on Earth.
Relieved by their long-awaited success, flight controllers and scientists became increasingly ecstatic on Sunday as the 400-pound Spirit raised its camera and antenna mast and began transmitting black-and-white picture postcards of its landing place on a broad plain in Gusev crater, near the Martian equator.
The first successful landing on Mars since 1997 had touched down almost exactly on target. At last, for NASA officials and engineers the memory of the embarrassing failure of the Mars Polar Lander in 1999 had been exorcised. Their spacecraft was on Mars, standing upright and facing south.
All around the arid surface were rocks that scientists suspected once held an ancient lake. But no boulders were in sight that could be impediments to the six-wheel rover's movements. Whirling dust devils left tracks where they had scoured the surface, exposing underlying rock. Nature, it seemed, had thoughtfully cleaned off the rocks for the robotic visitor.
Some of the the rocky, pitted surface made flight controllers shudder. A touchdown a few feet one way or the other could have ended much less happily. But some of the spots appealed to scientists as places the rover may be sent to investigate. A depression more than 60 feet in the distance tantalized geologists. And beyond a scattering of craters were low hills on the far horizon.
''We hit the sweet spot,'' exclaimed Dr. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell, the mission's principal science investigator. ''We are in the place we absolutely wanted to be in Gusev crater.''
From an analysis of pictures the spacecraft took as it was descending to the surface, scientists and navigation engineers determined that Spirit landed close to the center of its target, an ellipse about 42 miles long and 3 miles wide. Gusev (pronounced GOOSE-ev) is a 4-billion-year-old crater about the size of Connecticut.
''It may be a dry lake bed,'' Dr. Squyres said, ''but it's really been chewed up by cratering.''
With more of its instruments and antennas deployed and checked out, the spacecraft began taking some color pictures Sunday. But the photographs were not expected to be transmitted to Earth and made public until Monday. The color pictures are to be pieces of a panoramic mosaic of the landing site in three-dimensional color. The mosaic, Dr. Squyres said, ''will be a truly spectacular image.''
Jennifer Trosper, the mission manager at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory here, said it would be another nine days before the rover rolled into action for at least three months of surface exploration. There are tests to perform, batteries to charge with solar energy and pictures to be studied in planning the first traverses over the alien topography. The rollout delay was expected.
Matt Wallace, an engineer planning the rover's surface operations, said that an immediate goal was to establish direct communications between Spirit and Earth with the craft's more powerful antennas, which are capable of high-speed radio transmissions of data and pictures. Most of the early transmissions have been relayed through two spacecraft orbiting Mars, Mars Global Surveyor and Mars Odyssey.
Flight engineers also wanted time to analyze Spirit's descent and landing data to see if there were lessons to be learned and procedures to alter before the next attempt to land on Mars, on Jan. 24. A twin of Spirit, a rover named Opportunity, is scheduled to touch down on the opposite side of the Martian equator, in a region called Meridiani Planum.
The two spacecraft in the $800 million mission were sent to two different regions for a single purpose: to study the planet's rocks and sediments for signs that Mars once had an abundance of water and could have harbored some forms of life. From earlier photography, the Gusev site appears not only to be a dried lake bed but also to have a drainage valley running into and out of the crater. The Meridiani basin appears to be rich in gray hematite, an iron oxide mineral that usually forms in association with water.
The three previous landing successes were two Viking spacecraft in 1976 and Mars Pathfinder, with its robotic rover, Sojourner, in 1997. When the Mars Polar Lander disappeared trying to touch down near the Martian southern polar region two years later, the loss prompted a management shake-up at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and cancellation of a landing that had been scheduled for 2001.
More money and more rigorous testing went into the current missions. The rovers are about 15 times larger than Sojourner. Each is capable of traveling about 125 feet a day; Sojourner managed little more than a daily three feet.
But first Spirit had to reach the Martian surface in one piece. The seven-month flight from Cape Canaveral, Fla., was smooth. It was the final six minutes that filled the control center here with apprehension.
''It was nerve-racking,'' said Rob Manning, the manager of descent operations.
Navigation engineers had good news: Spirit's aim on Mars was almost perfect, requiring no last-day course corrections. A dust storm on the other side of Mars from the Gusev crater was slightly raising the heat of the global atmosphere, making it somewhat thinner. Flight controllers released the parachute slightly earlier to give it more time to brake its descent.
It was afternoon at the Gusev landing site when Spirit made its first move 15 minutes before touchdown. The craft cast off the module that supported its operations during the cruise from the Earth. Then Spirit turned so that its heat shield faced the angle of descent and maximum frictional temperatures.
Meanwhile, Spirit was being reeled in by Martian gravity, reaching a maximum speed of more than 12,000 miles an hour. Its on-board computer was in complete charge. Between Earth and Mars, one-way radio signals take almost 10 minutes.
Spirit plunged into the upper Martian atmosphere at an altitude of 73 miles, with six minutes to touchdown. The landing site was 437 miles downrange.
Mr. Manning said that except for one brief disruption, flight controllers never lost the radio signal from the craft ''all the way through the descent, and everything happened when it was supposed to happen.''
About two minutes to touchdown, the parachute opened at an altitude of 5.3 miles. Signals from the craft indicated it was decelerating as expected and that the parachute had indeed deployed. The heat shield was jettisoned. Then the rover's cocoon of airbags inflated, with only eight seconds to touchdown. Radar locked on the surface, and retrorockets fired final braking thrusts.
Then the moment came at 11:35 p.m. Eastern time on Saturday. There was no immediate signal from Spirit. That was expected, but still a cause for anxiety. Then the commentator in mission control reported, ''We have signs of bouncing on the surface of Mars.''
Later, pouring Champagne, Sean O'Keefe, head of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, was jubilant. ''This is a big night for NASA,'' Mr. O'Keefe said. ''We are on Mars.''
