It is possible to worry at your first turn to bid about a decision that will have to be made at the seven-level, but few players ever have to face it. And if they do, they may not recognize it. One who did was Ahmed Hussein, playing in October in a money game at the Regency Club in Manhattan.
He picked up the splendid South hand shown in the diagram, with 22 high-card points, including a virtually solid suit. The ''virtually'' became crucial when, to his surprise, he heard his partner open one heart. He expected to reach seven hearts, but it occurred to him that seven no-trump might be safer. How could he find out?
The chance that an ace might be missing seemed small, and Hussein did not worry about that. The number of diamonds held by North was the key to the situation. If he had a void or a singleton, hearts would be the desirable contract, allowing for the establishment of the diamonds with a ruff or two. But if he had two or more, no-trump was likely to be superior.
To solve this riddle, South bid two no-trump. This was the Jacoby convention, asking North to show a singleton or a void. It implies a fit in the opener's suit, and is usually an attempt to determine how far to go in that direction. Here the motive was entirely different.
In theory, the three-heart rebid showed extra values, but the partnership did not have a clear agreement on this point. The bid certainly denied diamond shortage, so without going through the formality of asking for aces, Hussein made a breathtaking leap to seven no-trump, causing some tension around the table. This was a vulnerable grand slam, and a lot of cash was at stake.
Seven hearts would have hinged almost entirely on an even trump split, which occurs 68 percent of the time. With the actual North hand, seven no-trump had roughly equal prospects. But if, as was likely, North had held the diamond jack, or the spade queen, or both, the no-trump advantage would have been much greater.
The lead was the club jack, and South won with the king. He cashed the king-queen of hearts and discovered the bad break. Now he needed the spade guess, and the heart division hinted at spade length on the left. So he cashed the spade ace and led the jack. West covered and dummy's king won. There were some squeeze chances, but Hussein chose to play his diamond winners. When the jack fell on the third round, he was able to claim his grand slam, breathing hard.
BRIDGE
