HIGHLIGHTS
LONDON: TOP POP IDOL -- A 25-year-old Norwegian plumber turned singer, Kurt Nilsen, turned back the competition from 10 other countries to win the title of ''World Pop Idol'' on a London television talent show to begin the New Year. Singing ''Beautiful Day'' by the Irish rock band U2, Mr. Nilsen beat a field that included the American ''Pop Idol'' winner Kelly Clarkson, who took second place. The first of the ''Pop Idol'' competitions was broadcast in Britain in 2001 and was followed by versions in 10 other countries. In the contest for world accolades, viewers from each of the countries voted. Mr. Nilsen won in 9 of the 11 polls, Agence France-Presse reported. After he won the Norwegian ''Pop Idol'' competition last May, his first single, ''She's So High,'' rose immediately to the top of the Norwegian chart.
LAS VEGAS: BRIDAL BRITNEY? -- The marriage license was filed early on Saturday in Clark County, Nev., for the wedding of Jason Allen Alexander and Britney Jean Spears, a pair of 22-year-olds who gave their residence as Kentwood, La., according to Reuters. The wedding actually took place at 5:30 a.m. the same day at the Little White Wedding Chapel on the Las Vegas strip, according to several news reports, with the bride in jeans and a baseball cap. It appears the marriage is not to last. An annulment agreement is to be filed this morning, The Associated Press said. The bridegroom's grandfather told ''Entertainment Tonight'' that he was back in Kentwood. ''He'd been through a lot,'' the grandfather, Robert Alexander said. ''We picked him up in New Orleans coming back and he didn't have too much to say.'' Married or single, Ms. Spears begins a concert tour on March 2 in San Diego.
PARIS: HONORS -- The composer Henri Dutilleux and the singer Charles Aznavour made the French government's New Year's honors list when they were awarded the Legion of Honor last week. Mr. Dutilleux was awarded the grand cross, the highest of the legion's five ranks, Agence France-Presse reported. Mr. Aznavour, who has composed more than 600 songs and sold more than 100 million records in six decades, was named a commander of the legion, the third rank. The chef and restaurateur Alain Ducasse was made a knight, the lowest rank. The Legion of Honor is the highest civilian award given for outstanding service to France.
MUSIC: BEST SELLERS -- And the best-selling album of 2003 was . . . ? The rap/hip-hop ''Get Rich or Die Tryin' '' by 50 Cent, left. According to Nielsen SoundScan figures reported by The Associated Press, ''Get Rich'' sold 6.5 million units and was followed by the Grammy Award-winning album of the year, the pop singer and pianist Norah Jones's ''Come Away With Me,'' which sold 5 million. Following them in the top five were Linkin Park's ''Meteora,'' Evanescence's ''Fallen'' and OutKast's ''Speakerboxxx/The Love Below.'' The OutKast two-CD set was chosen the best of 2003 in a year-end poll of polls in Britain, the BBC reported. Compiled by the HMV music stores, the poll of polls assembled lists of the year's best albums from an assortment of magazines. Dizzee Rascal's ''Boy in Da Corner'' finished second.
MOVIES: BEST SPEECHES -- Remember Robert Duvall exulting, ''I love the smell of napalm in the morning'' in ''Apocalypse Now''? Or Jack Nicholson bellowing, ''You can't handle the truth'' in ''A Few Good Men''? How about Marlon Brando, telling Rod Steiger in ''On the Waterfront,'' ''I coulda been a contender''? These lines were in monologues that captured the top three places in a poll of best film speeches, conducted in England by the video and DVD rental company Blockbuster, the BBC reported. The 6,500 film fans who took part also liked, in descending order, speeches by Samuel L. Jackson in ''Pulp Fiction''; Michael Douglas (''greed . . . is good'') in ''Wall Street''; Peter Finch in ''Network''; Ewan McGregor in ''Trainspotting''; Clint Eastwood in ''Dirty Harry''; Richard E. Grant in ''Withnail and I''; and Mel Gibson in ''Braveheart.''
DANCE: COMING ATTRACTIONS -- Out of the Christmastime of ''The Nutcracker'' and into ''Midsummer.'' That's the story at the New York State Theater, where the New York City Ballet will open its 2004 winter repertory season at 7:30 tomorrow with a performance of George Balanchine's ''Midsummer Night's Dream.'' Through Feb. 29, the season, including works like ''Coppélia'' and ''Harlequinade,'' ''Apollo,'' ''Prodigal Son,'' ''Jewels'' and ''Slaughter on Tenth Avenue,'' continues the company's yearlong celebration of Balanchine's centennial. Besides his choreography, it will include a world premiere, on Jan. 23, of ''Double Feature.'' Inspired by the silent film era, this full-length ballet by Susan Stroman pays tribute to Balanchine's role as a choreographer in Hollywood and on Broadway.
FOOTNOTES
Vienna, Berlin, Paris. La Scala in Milan. The Sydney Opera House. Royal Festival Hall in London. The Kennedy Center in Washington. These are but a few of the places where the German-born chanteuse Ute Lemper, left, who is also a star of musicals like ''Chicago,'' ''Cabaret'' and ''Cats,'' has performed. But on Friday, she will do something new by making her debut in the Cafe Carlyle. Through Jan. 31, her show, ''Voyage,'' will take her audience to Berlin between the wars, into the works of Weill and Brel and Piaf; through musical reflections in Yiddish, Arabic and Hebrew; into the dances of Piazzolla and songs by latter-day writers like Tom Waits, Nick Cave and Elvis Costello.
