In a sign of a further thaw in South Asia's cold war, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India and Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, met Monday morning, state television reported.
It was the first meeting between the two leaders in more than two years, and suggested the further acceleration of the rapprochement between the estranged neighbors. While both sides described the session, and a visit yesterday by Mr. Vajpayee to Prime Minister Mir Zafarullah Khan Jamali, as ''courtesy calls,'' their symbolic weight was much greater.
The two nuclear-armed nations have fought three wars, and nearly fought a fourth in 2002, but relations have steadily warmed in recent months.
The stage is now set for a meeting between leaders who are each staking considerable political capital on making peace and appear to be making progress in doing so. While Mr. Jamali is Mr. Vajpayee's constitutional equivalent, it is General Musharraf who holds the real power.
Mr. Vajpayee acknowledged as much in an interview broadcast on Saturday, when he called General Musharraf, who is also the army chief, Pakistan's highest leader and said he should take part in efforts to improve relations. Mr. Vajpayee is in Islamabad for a summit meeting of seven regional leaders, members of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation.
State television showed Mr. Vajpayee and General Musharraf shaking hands on Sunday before a state dinner.
Yashwant Sinha, India's foreign minister, said Mr. Vajpayee and Mr. Jamali had spent about half an hour together, including 15 minutes alone, and had ''agreed that the momentum that has been created in our bilateral relations should be maintained.''
That momentum has come from a series of confidence-building measures since April, including the restoration of air and land links that had been suspended in December 2001, after an attack on India's Parliament for which India blamed militants supported by Pakistan.
Mr. Sinha subsequently paid a call on Pakistan's foreign minister, Khurshid Mehmood Kasuri, where, Mr. Sinha said, ''we discussed some of the ways in which the momentum could be maintained.''
Comments by officials on both sides suggested that the groundwork was being laid for a dialogue between the countries that would include their core dispute, the divided border region of Kashmir. India, which is mostly Hindu, and Pakistan, mainly Muslim, both claim it. Since 1989 Pakistan has supported an Islamic insurgency in the Indian-controlled part, although it denies providing material aid.
Pakistan has long insisted that it wants a ''composite, sustained and substantive dialogue'' with India, in which Kashmir would figure prominently. A Foreign Ministry spokesman reiterated that position on Sunday. India has long argued that other issues should come first, but in the interview with Pakistan television broadcast on Saturday, Mr. Vajpayee also said a ''continued dialogue'' on Kashmir was necessary.
Mr. Vajpayee had been insisting that no meetings with Pakistani leaders were possible until ''cross-border terrorism'' -- India's shorthand for attacks by militants who have infiltrated into Indian-held Kashmir from Pakistan -- had ended. While Indian officials say the infiltration and militant activity have decreased, no one contends that they have ended. Mr. Vajpayee is going ahead with the meetings, or courtesy calls as they were officially described, nonetheless.
In part, analysts say, that may reflect a recognition that General Musharraf has already gone fairly far out on a limb, first by declaring a unilateral cease-fire with India and then indicating in an interview that Pakistan could be flexible on long-held positions on Kashmir if India could.
For now, General Musharraf appears to have a degree of political support for the change in course he is charting. Mushahid Hussain, a senator with the Pakistan Muslim League, noted that even members and some leaders of the Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal, the opposition coalition of hard-line Islamist religious parties, attended a reception for Mr. Vajpayee on Sunday held by the Indian ambassador.
Support for ''the principle of dialogue -- of normalization -- seems to be across the board,'' Mr. Hussain said. ''There is no political constituency that actively seeks confrontation with India.''
The religious parties issued a statement on Sunday that reiterated the right of self-determination for the people of Kashmir, but said that ''if both countries adopt a realistic approach, they could reach to a just and peaceful solution to the Kashmir dispute.''
The regional summit meeting opened Sunday with speeches by the assembled leaders. While they primarily talked about issues like poverty and trade, several of the leaders also touched on the unmistakable sense of movement about the subcontinent's most intractable dispute.
''The air over Islamabad is filled with optimism,'' said Bhutan's prime minister, Lyonpo Jigmi Yoeser Thinley.
Sri Lanka's president, Chandrika Bandaranike Kumaratunga, said the ''vision and courage'' shown by the leaders of India and Pakistan had infused the meeting with ''a renewed sense of purpose and vigor.''
In their speeches, Mr. Jamali and Mr. Vajpayee struck similar themes, saying the region needed to overcome its political discord before it could make economic progress.
''It is the stark reality of political differences and disputes that has held back prospects of real economic cooperation in South Asia,'' Mr. Jamali said.
Mr. Vajpayee said, ''We must make the bold transition from mistrust to trust, from discord to concord and from tension to peace.''
After Mr. Vajpayee spoke, Mr. Jamali described him warmly as ''a visionary, a poet, a prolific writer and an able politician, which are the qualities of a true leader.''
Soon after, Mr. Vajpayee paid his call. ''They met in a warm and friendly atmosphere,'' Mr. Sinha said. But he made it clear, in response to a question, that Mr. Vajpayee had not invited Mr. Jamali to visit him in New Delhi.
The summit meeting itself was a notable assembly of the leaders of one-fifth of the world's population. The nations represented ranged from the tiny Buddhist kingdom of Bhutan, home to 700,000 people, to India, a Hindu-majority democracy of more than a billion people.
All of them, noted Dr. A. H. Nayyar, a physicist and peace advocate, have a stake in bilateral progress
