Whether crouched in the mangroves of the Yucatán waiting for agile green-winged teal to whip past, lying on my back in a jouncing, anchored skiff on Long Island Sound watching a flock of bluebills laboring upwind toward me low over the waves, or huddled in sparse cover on the vast, tidal flats of James Bay, Ontario, in quest of snow geese, I have pursued waterfowl in many places. But my favorite spot is where I bagged my first duck nearly 70 years ago: the salt marsh at the head of Tisbury Great Pond's Town Cove here on Martha's Vineyard.
It isn't a place where I go to get my limit of ducks. That rarely happens. On three of the eight sorties I have made there this hunting season, I didn't fire a shot.
I usually hunt Town Cove with my younger son, Jeff. Our minimal goal is to get enough ducks, most of them mallards, in the freezer to provide two or three family feasts in December and January. Unseasonable warmth has worked against us this year. There were plenty of birds around, but they rarely visited Town Cove until long after sundown. Our best hunting comes when most of Tisbury Great Pond and other nearby inland freshwater ponds are sheathed in ice. Then, there is almost always some open water in front of our blind at the mouth of Mill Brook where waterfowl can rest and feed.
We don't hunt the place hard. It's too small for that, and if it were pounded every day, most of its visiting ducks and Canada geese would go elsewhere. It's a lovely spot where we can engage in the waterfowling hunting ritual -- building blinds, setting out decoys, honing our duck-calling skills -- and occasionally bring home a meal or two.
We walk a couple of hundred yards down Mill Brook to get to our blinds, and sometimes I carry a plastic bag that I fill with watercress, which will be available until bitter cold causes it to die. On our last visit to the brook, two white-tailed deer were dining on watercress. Muskrats also eat it as do some ducks, mallards among them.
Our Town Cove sojourns are relaxed affairs. If we are in the same blind together -- and most of the time we are -- Jeff, who sits on my left, takes the birds on his side, and I shoot those on my side. If it's a single, one of us murmurs, ''Take him.'' This system works particularly well because Jeff shoots from his right shoulder and I from my left. Each has the opportunity for a maximum swing and follow-through on ducks going by his end of the blind. We err on the conservative side in waiting for the birds to come well within range. Not having a retriever, we also try to avoid shots that would result in our quarry falling into the dense swamp on either side of us.
A duck blind is a marvelous spot for good talk, because it encourages both intimacy and inspired story-telling. There are occasions when the talk becomes so animated that neither inhabitant notices that a brace of mallards has landed among the decoys.
A northwest gale was rattling the ''bare, ruined choirs'' of the swamp maples along the brook's west shore on a dark afternoon when Jeff and I last went waterfowling. We missed an easy chance, when, as we were installing a new bench in the blind, four mallards flew directly overhead, less than 30 yards away. This is a common duck-hunting event. Flying at 40 or 50 miles an hour, often through dark skies, ducks can materialize out of nowhere in seconds. There is also the matter -- when one has lurched past three score and 20 -- of deteriorating vision, particularly in poor light.
A half-hour later, we spotted a flock of seven mallards flying from left to right in front of us. We called to them. They turned, started to descend toward our decoys, then flared and dropped down into the western edge of the marsh about 250 yards away, a spot where we also have a blind. This happened again with a larger flock, and Jeff decided to go to the other blind.
Shortly after his form had blended into the swamp and marsh, a great blue heron landed on the mud flat less than 50 feet away. A frequent visitor to the spot, it stood and stared uneasily at my hiding place -- herons have marvelous eyesight -- and when I moved my head to get a better view of the bird through a hole in the blind's camouflage, it flung itself aloft with a hoarse cry and lumbered away.
Some years ago, I know not where, I read an account of someone who had observed a great blue heron dangling a small, shiny piece of metal, perhaps the flip-top from a beverage can, from its bill to attract minnows. When its prey responded, the heron would drop the lure and spear the fish with its bill. I have been hoping to see a lure-using heron ever since.
Three shots sounded from the direction in which Jeff had gone, and five seconds later three mallards swept past to my right. I tried to ''get on them'' -- to use gunner's jargon -- but even as I snapped off one shot, I knew I was well behind my target. Distressed by my ineptitude and my lack of control, I reloaded and resolved to wait until I had a proper opportunity. It never came.
Jeff came out of the marsh with two fat mallard drakes. It was past shooting time, so we emptied our guns and sat in the blind to see what the gathering darkness would bring.
Several flights of mallards landed out in front of us, then we heard the distant calling of Canada geese that had lifted from their feeding in nearby farm fields. More than 50 landed among the mallards with great clamoring followed by small talk, followed by silence and as we left the blind and walked up the brook, several black-crowned night herons labored overhead bound for a night of wading and fishing on the margins of the marsh.
OUTDOORS
