The year is beginning with signs of economic recovery, but when the new Legislature convenes this month it will confront a budget season that New Jersey officials say will be the most desperate in years.
It is a crisis that everyone in Trenton long expected but barely mentioned in the legislative campaign last fall. For the 2005 fiscal year, which begins July 1, the state faces a shortfall that could amount to one-fifth of the total budget. And the last two budgets, patched together with elaborate effort to avoid increases in the sales or income taxes, exhausted obvious one-time fixes.
''Of the four budgets we've done, this is the toughest,'' the state treasurer, John E. McCormac, said. ''A lot of easy solutions have been taken. We've cut the budget three years in a row, so the fourth year for the same reason gets a lot harder.''
Mr. McCormac declined to put a number to the expected deficit before Gov. James E. McGreevey presents the budget on Feb. 24, but in an analysis quietly circulated among legislators in November, the nonpartisan Office of Legislative Services said the gap could reach $5 billion.
New Jersey's shortfall is ''pretty huge,'' said Nicholas Johnson, the director of the state fiscal project at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a research group in Washington. In a survey by the center that accounted for about half the states, New Jersey was second only to California in the size of its projected deficit for the 2005 fiscal year as a percentage of its general fund.
And in finding a gap of 17 percent in New Jersey, the center used a conservative estimate of $4 billion for the deficit, Mr. Johnson noted.
Mr. McCormac said the current fiscal year should bring an end to a two-year decline in receipts from the three major taxes -- personal income, corporate income and sales tax -- that together account for two-thirds of state revenue. Especially encouraging is a recovery in income-tax withholding, he said, ''which means people are working.''
But much of the revenue that closed the budget gap this year and last has been exhausted. This year's $24 billion budget relied on the last money, $1.3 billion, the state could borrow against future receipts from the national tobacco settlement, and on more than $500 million allotted New Jersey in a federal aid package that is unlikely to be renewed.
''Given the loss of those sources,'' Mr. McCormac said, ''even if we had a billion in growth we'd still be a billion short.'' Corporate tax collections are also expected to decline in 2005 as some provisions of the overhaul enacted two years ago expire.
In addition, in balancing this year's budget, the legislature tapped some of the more politically palatable tax sources, imposing new charges on Atlantic City gamblers and giving New Jersey the nation's highest state cigarette tax. Now the options are fewer.
At the same time, under current mandates and salary and benefit formulas, state spending would rise about $3 billion next year, mostly in health-related costs, Mr. McCormac said.
The incoming Senate Republican leader, Leonard Lance, who is a budget committee member, dismissed the administration's protests about rising costs. ''If my personal budget at home grew unchecked, I would be in bankruptcy inside a year, so that argument is not persuasive,'' Senator Lance said.
The state has already cut spending on property-tax relief, eliminating NJ Saver rebates to households earning more than $200,000 a year and then, in a difficult compromise last year, cutting the rebates by half. The state has also frozen aid to school districts and municipalities for two years, putting pressure on local property-tax payers and pressure on legislators to resume annual increases.
On the revenue side, one proposal sure to reappear is a tax increase for high earners, generally known as the millionaire's tax. Last year, the Fairness Alliance, a group of about 100 labor and social welfare organizations, campaigned unsuccessfully for a plan to raise the rates on incomes starting at $400,000 a year. This year, according to the architect of the plan, Jon Shure, the president of New Jersey Policy Perspective, a liberal research organization in Trenton, the Fairness Alliance will propose a more far-reaching increase, though he said it would not affect more than 5 percent of taxpayers.
While the Democrats are taking control of the Senate and tightening their grip on the Assembly in the new Legislature, which will convene Jan. 13, Mr. Shure, a Democrat, noted that many Democratic legislators opposed his plan last year and some Republicans were receptive to it.
Some Democrats, in the Legislature and in the McGreevey administration, say a tax increase on high incomes, especially if it is limited to those over $1 million, stands a better chance this year. But publicly, at least, the governor continues to reject income tax increases.
''He'll approach this the way he has approached the last two budgets,'' Juliet Johnson, a spokeswoman for Mr. McGreevey, said. ''He's seeking to balance by controlling spending but not by raising the sales or income tax. ''
Mr. Johnson of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities said New Jersey's predicament was largely attributable to the state's aversion to taxes. Most states were more willing to enact large tax increases a year or two ago, rather than postponing the pain, he said, adding, ''It's like pulling off a Band-Aid real fast.''
