Following are excerpts from statements by the Democratic presidential candidates at a debate in Johnston, Iowa, on Sunday afternoon, as recorded by Federal Document Clearing House Inc. Two candidates -- Gen. Wesley K. Clark and the Rev. Al Sharpton -- did not take part.
RICHARD A. GEPHARDT  On trade agreements
I got a treaty with Jordan through the Clinton administration that really paid attention to labor and environmental rights. The Gephardt amendment is in law in the country, and it got markets open, like in Japan, where we've had to face unfair trade practices. And the steel tariffs, which have helped save a steel industry in this country, came in part from my advocacy. Now, everybody up here, except Dennis, voted for Nafta and voted for the China agreement. They did the wrong thing.
JOHN KERRY  On his health care plan
I roll back a tax fund that will then pay for all the catastrophic cases in our country. That means there is a cap of $50,000 on any health care premium that anybody's paying. The result will be, premiums drop for every single person by $1,000 or more. I will lower costs of prescription drugs by allowing bulk purchasing of Medicare. It's a disgrace what happened in Washington the last months. This is one of the biggest giveaways to the drug companies in history.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN  On international trade
We can't create jobs by building up walls of protectionism. I looked at the stats in Iowa. One-fifth of the manufacturing jobs in this state -- by the number I saw, more than 100,000 -- are dependent on trade. The top two and three markets for goods from Iowa, both agricultural-grown goods and manufactured -- Canada and Mexico, the countries we're in Nafta with. You break Nafta, you're going to cut out tens of thousands of jobs here in Iowa.
JOHN EDWARDS  On trade agreements
I voted against the Chilean trade agreement, against the Caribbean trade agreement, against the Singapore trade agreement, against final passage of fast track for this president. And the reason is because I've seen what's happened in my state of North Carolina, with the loss of manufacturing jobs. I have been hearing in all these places I've visited here in Iowa how devastating it is.
HOWARD DEAN  On overhauling health care
Jimmy Carter tried to reform the health care system. Bill Clinton tried to reform the health care system. Every time, we couldn't get that stuff through Congress. And I was involved in the second one, and very, very peripherally in the first one. This is the third time. This time we're going to do it. I'm not interested in reforming the system first. I want everybody in the system first. I'm tired of people being uncovered. I'm tired of people paying almost as much for their health care payments every month as they do for their home mortgage. I want everybody in the system.
DENNIS J. KUCINICH  On trade
I think that every working person in America is going to be interested in the answers that have been given here about Nafta and the W.T.O., because not a one of these candidates has been willing to take the position that I've taken in saying that my first act in office will be to cancel Nafta and the W.T.O. We've lost over three million manufacturing jobs in this country. The president has that authority.
CAROL MOSELEY BRAUN  On the economy
We are going to have to take steps to reverse those trends that are sinking our economy and sinking our ability to create jobs. What would I do? In the first instance, I'd have health care reform. Seeing to it that every American has health care is not only a way to solve a social problem, but also a way to take the costs of health care off of the back of our productive sector, our manufacturers, our small businesses, so that we can create jobs here at home. Two, environmental protection. Creating whole new industries with technology transfer.
