WINTER SPORTS  Finn Wins Slalom, Cast and All
Kalle Palander of Finland won a World Cup slalom yesterday in Flachau, Austria, despite a cast on his arm, and Bode Miller of the United States failed to finish again.
Palander, the defending World Cup slalom champion, has tendinitis in his right forearm and has been wearing a cast since before Christmas. He finished in 1 minute 42.24 seconds. He was 0.54 ahead of Manfred Pranger of Austria and 0.56 ahead of Giorgio Rocca of Italy.
Miller straddled a gate midway down the run; on Saturday, he skidded off the course in a giant slalom. (AP)
Austrians Sweep Super-G
Alexandra Meissnitzer won a World Cup super giant slalom yesterday in Megève, France, for her first victory since 1999, leading an Austrian sweep of the top three places.
Meissnitzer covered the twisting, tree-lined course in 1 minute 24.98 seconds, followed by Renate Götschl (1:25.19) and Michaela Dorfmeister (1:25.40). Kirsten Clark of the United States was sixth. (AP)
American Wins Nordic Combined
Todd Lodwick of the United States won a Nordic combined event yesterday in Schonach, Germany, edging the overall World Cup leader Ronny Ackermann of Germany by two ski lengths.
Lodwick finished the 15-kilometer race in 34 minutes 29.5 seconds. Ackermann, who won five of the first six World Cup events this season, was 0.7 of a second behind. (AP)
Germans Dominate Luge
Silke Kraushaar of Germany won the luge singles at the European championships yesterday in Oberhof, Germany, extending her streak in the event to 78 straight international victories.
Kraushaar broke the course record with her second run of 41.461 seconds, finishing with a total of 1 minute 22.995 seconds. Germany has not lost in the women's singles since November 1997. It swept the top four spots yesterday.
Steffen Skel and Steffen Wöller of Germany won the men's doubles. (AP)
Slovenian Jumps to Victory
Peter Zonta of Slovenia claimed his first World Cup victory yesterday, winning the third leg of the Four Hills tournament in Innsbruck, Austria, ski jumping's most prestigious event.
Zonta capitalized on favorable wind in rallying from eighth place after the first jump. Zonta had jumps of 128 and 128.5 meters for 265.2 points. He was followed by two Finns, Veli-Matti Lindstroem and Janne Ahonen. (AP)
SOCCER  Arsenal Keeps Winning
Arsenal stayed on course for a record-tying third straight F.A. Cup title, rallying past Leeds, 4-1, yesterday. Manchester United won, 2-1, at Aston Villa; Liverpool defeated third-division Yeovil Town, 2-0; and Fulham downed second-division Cheltenham, 2-1. (AP)
CRICKET  India Will Tour Pakistan
India will travel to Pakistan in March, the Indian cricket board announced yesterday. India has not gone on a full tour of Pakistan since a four-match series in 1989-90 because of political tensions over the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir. (Reuters)
TENNIS  Schiavone Loses in Australia
Sixth-seeded Francesca Schiavone of Italy was upset in the first round of the Australian women's hard-court championships yesterday in Gold Coast, Australia, losing to María Sánchez Lorenzo of Spain, 3-6, 6-2, 6-3. Seventh-seeded Magui Serna of Spain defeated Casey Dellacqua of Australia, 6-2, 6-4. Eighth-seeded Patty Schnyder of Switzerland beat Jelena Jankovic of Serbia and Montenegro, 6-4, 6-0. (AP)
