A bouquet of red roses lay beside the clear plastic ballot box in polling station 66 here on Sunday, and nobody seemed to mind that the emblem of Georgia's energetic new president was already in place before the first vote had been cast.
Almost everybody in this troubled nation voted for Mikhail Saakashvili, the 36-year-old lawyer who six weeks ago led what he called the Rose Revolution -- the peaceful ouster of Eduard A. Shevardnadze from the office he had held for 12 years.
At a news conference after a preliminary count had pronounced him the overwhelming winner, Mr. Saakashvili outlined the huge tasks he faced and warned, ''You cannot do everything in one day. We will go step by step.''
An independent survey of voters leaving the polls put his winning total at about 86 percent. The Central Election Commission said that in this nation of close to 5 million people, 1.7 million had voted, a number Mr. Saakashvili said was the highest in Georgia's history.
In a performance that showcased his charisma, the young new president answered questions in rapid-fire English, Russian and French, as well as Georgian -- and then introduced his popular Dutch wife, who did the same.
''We have got a very important mandate from the people to clean up Georgia, to make it peaceful and prosperous, to make Georgia efficient, investor-friendly, to consolidate power,'' Mr. Saakashvili said.
He added, ''I realize how big a burden I have taken on my shoulders and how big a burden all of us have taken on our shoulders.''
Thirteen years after the Soviet Union collapsed and Georgia became independent, this mountainous nation rich in fruits, vineyards and Black Sea beaches has fallen further than any other former Soviet republic.
Its economy has stagnated from corruption, mismanagement and the loss of former Soviet markets. Joblessness and poverty have become the norm. A breakdown in government services has left many without heat or electricity this winter.
Two large regions have declared themselves independent and did not take part in the vote on Sunday. A third, led by a regional chief who had supported Mr. Shevardnadze in the final days, set up border checkpoints and mostly boycotted the election.
Strategically situated on Russia's southern border and with a vital pipeline due to begin carrying oil from the Caspian Sea to Turkey across its territory next year, Georgia is a pawn in a big-power rivalry between Russia and the United States.
A seven-hour drive across Georgia's main east-west highway on Wednesday was a disheartening tour of vacant factories, barren countryside, abandoned gas stations and half-empty villages where residents hawk shanks of meat by the roadside, signals of a collapsed economy.
The second largest city in Georgia, Kutaisi, about 200 miles west of Tbilisi, has lost much of its industry and population as workers travel to Russia to find jobs.
The popular uprising last month that followed a parliamentary election tainted by fraud has brought a burst of hope to Georgia, symbolized by the red roses handed to Mr. Saakashvili when he meets the public.
''I'm sure he'll be successful as president,'' said Mikhail Kintsurashvili, 85, a retiree, as he went to vote. ''He takes things very seriously, and he's very motivated.''
But as he himself said, Mr. Saakashvili must now justify people's hopes by improving their lives.
''If he tries, he can do it,'' said Dato Bashidze, 40, who like many Georgians supports himself by doing one thing and another. ''He'll have a little time. That's why we elected him, to get to work on our demands.''
Initial reports from monitors were that the voting had been markedly free of the manipulation that characterized elections under Mr. Shevardnadze. Mr. Saakashvili said the results in a handful of precincts where procedural violations had been reported would be invalidated.
He attributed his overwhelming victory to the absence of serious challengers in the six-candidate field. He has formed a governing alliance with his two partners in leading the popular uprising, Zhurab Zvania and Nino Burdzhanadze.
Mr. Saakashvili asserted Sunday that Mr. Shevardnadze could keep his armed guard and remain in his home. But he said he did not want to talk about the former president. ''Mr. Shevardnadze stays in the past for Georgia with many mistakes, and I would also say with many crimes,'' he said.
Asked at a polling station whether he had voted for the man who had driven him from power, Mr. Shevardnadze smiled an enigmatic smile and said, ''You guessed my choice.''
''He is young, he has a lot of energy, and is well educated,'' Mr. Shevardnadze said, and then added: ''He should talk less and work more. Enough of populism. There is a lot to be done.''
