Israel, which is facing sharp criticism for its settlement-building policies, announced Sunday that it would dismantle two small West Bank outposts and sought to play down a previously announced plan to expand settlements in the Golan Heights.
The actions were seen as an effort to address the international criticism about Jewish settlements, but settlement opponents described the moves as cosmetic.
The stalled Middle East peace plan calls for Israel to take down dozens of settlement outposts erected since Prime Minister Ariel Sharon came to power in March 2001.
Mr. Sharon's government has moved slowly, demanding that Palestinians act first to meet their peace plan obligations by breaking up militant factions carrying out violence against Israel.
The Israeli government announced last week that it planned to take down four West Bank outposts, and added two more to the list on Sunday.
One of them, Havat Maon, has been torn down twice by Israeli governments in the last four years, only to be rebuilt by the settlers, and is now home to two families. The other is uninhabited, consisting of a mobile home used for religious study and worship, said Peace Now, an Israeli group that monitors settlements.
''The government is now under more pressure to deal with this issue,'' said Dror Etkes, a spokesman for the group. ''But this is not real progress. It is not directed at the larger outposts that have real infrastructure.''
Israel has taken down about 10 outposts since work on the peace plan began in June, but several have been re-established. More than 50 are now in place, Peace Now said.
Settlers have filed legal appeals and say they will resist efforts to take down the outposts. On several occasions, hundreds of settlers have converged on the isolated hilltop outposts and scuffled with Israeli security forces as they dismantled mobile homes and makeshift structures.
The government has not said when it will dismantle the six outposts, but Israeli news reports said it could happen soon.
Palestinians regard the settlements as one of the main obstacles to the creation of a Palestinian state. Israel has built about 150 formal settlements in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and the unauthorized outposts sprang up in recent years.
Israeli officials sought Sunday to clarify the government's plans for settlers in the Golan Heights, where 18,000 Israelis live on land that Israel captured from Syria in the 1967 Middle East war.
A debate erupted last week when Agriculture Minister Yisrael Katz said the government had decided to build homes for 900 families in the Golan, which could add several thousand residents to the Israelis already living there.
An official in the prime minister's office said Sunday that the 900 housing units would be built in existing Golan settlements, with some intended as tourist cottages, while others would be available to families moving there. The official described the building as part of a plan to develop tourism and agriculture in a region that has been suffering economically.
Israel's deputy prime minister, Ehud Olmert, denied that the government had approved a major building plan in the Golan. ''All news about a comprehensive expansion of the Israeli buildings in the Golan Heights is untrue,'' he said. ''There is no such program. The government has not approved it.''
Syria, which has called for renewed peace talks on the Golan, said the Israel action would undermine attempts to resolve the dispute over the territory. The United States has also sought a clarification of Israel's intentions there.
In another development on Sunday, Israel said it would permit 29,000 Palestinian workers and businessmen to commute each day from the West Bank and Gaza.
Before fighting began anew three years ago, up to 150,000 Palestinians entered Israel daily. Israel reduced the number to a few thousand as part of an effort to halt Palestinian attacks. The number has been rising over the last few months as the level of violence has decreased.
Also, an Israeli military court sentenced five Israeli teenagers to a year in prison for refusing to perform the military service required of most Israelis after they finish high school.
In the last two years, some military reservists have refused to serve in the West Bank and Gaza and have received short prison sentences, usually of a month or less. But this case was considered unusual because very few Israeli teenagers have refused their initial period of service, which is three years for men and about two years for women.
