Investors made 2003 the year of living dangerously, shaking off wartime concerns and disclosures of scandals corrupting the very heart of the marketplace -- from the New York Stock Exchange to the mutual fund industry -- to break a three-year losing streak. All major stock indices registered their first annual gains since 1999.
The new year's first piece of economic news suggests that the ongoing recovery continues to gather strength, and should bolster investor confidence. Far surpassing economists' expectations, an influential monthly index of nationwide manufacturing activity posted its highest number in two decades in December. The report augurs well for the economy's chances of reducing unemployment in coming months.
Jobs have been hard to come by early on in this recovery. That's not unusual, as businesses are able to meet a surge in consumer demand with their unsold inventories, or by tapping unused capacity. Moreover, despite a fall in the nation's unemployment rate to 5.9 percent from 6.4 percent in the second half of 2003, technology-driven productivity growth and the exporting of many jobs overseas have raised concerns that this time a frothy economy might not lead to a labor market in which workers feel secure about their prospects and see wages rise briskly.
Such concerns seem a bit premature, but a lot will depend on how Congress and the Bush administration act in the new year, both on domestic spending and on trade. The extent to which mediocre employment gains can catch up to a boatload of more stellar economic readings on overall growth, corporate profits, productivity and interest rates will be the big economic and political question of the new year.
Indeed, the employment outlook is fundamental to keeping the recovery on track. When people fear for their jobs, they cut back on spending, which  may be one reason holiday sales were far from spectacular.
A major wild card for 2004 is the weakening dollar, which continues to hit record lows against the euro. The currency's troubles provide an immediate boost to American manufacturing by making our goods cheaper overseas, but they present a series of long-term threats to the economic recovery. The United States, after all, was about $1 trillion in the red last year, when you add the nation's current-account deficit (which includes trade and financial flows) to the federal government's huge budget deficit.
A plummeting dollar could help narrow our trade gap, but it also means foreigners will demand a higher interest payment to finance those deficits. That could add to pressure on the Federal Reserve later in the year to start raising the historically low short-term interest rates. (Longer-term rates have already started creeping up some.) The central bank has felt little pressure to move until now because the unemployment rate is still high and acts as a brake on inflation. The prospect of a tight labor market later in the year, added to the strain of a weak dollar and high deficits, could force the Fed to act far more aggressively than it would like to in an election year.
The Bush administration and Congress could have greatly enhanced the economy's prospects if they had been more responsible in their spending. This Republican government seems to think that it can cut taxes and increase government programs without consequence, and that there is no limit to the willingness of China and others, mostly in Asia, to finance our society's lavish lifestyle by buying up our i.o.u.'s -- our Treasury notes. These buyers have not been getting such a great deal of late. But much like a department store peddling credit, they are eager to lend America money so that we can continue purchasing their goods.
Given our economy's growing dependence on China and other trading partners, Washington policy makers would be wise to abstain from any protectionist outbursts aimed at them. Unfortunately, in an election year, asking for that may be as unrealistic as asking for a return to fiscal prudence.
