Gov. John G. Rowland invited about one dozen longstanding Republican legislators to his home Sunday afternoon to gauge support and to apologize again for making false statements last month about who paid for work on his vacation cottage.
What Mr. Rowland heard from his guests was uniform opposition to a proposal floated last week for an investigation of him by the state's legislature, the General Assembly, said Robert Farr, a state representative from West Hartford who attended the meeting.
William A. Aniskovich, a Republican from Branford who is Senate minority leader pro tempore, also attended the meeting. He said that legislators agreed an internal investigation ''risked paralyzing the legislature.''
''The important thing is to make sure the legislature can continue to govern while this federal investigation and and state ethics investigation occurs,'' Mr. Aniskovich said. ''An internal investigation would use up all of the oxygen in the room and there wouldn't be any attention paid to the real work, like the budget, that needs to be done.''
Last week, separate memorandums were prepared, at the request of House Democrats and Republicans, on the process for impeaching a sitting governor. Legislators are also weighing the creation of a bipartisan committee to investigate Mr. Rowland.
Mr. Farr said the consensus of the Republicans who attended Sunday's meeting was against an internal investigation of Mr. Rowland, essentially, they said, because it would be fruitless.
''No one called as a witness is going to testify because no counsel would advise them to do so,'' Mr. Farr said. ''Also, the feds have made it clear that their office is handling it and they don't need the help of anyone else.''
Mr. Rowland has been under intense scrutiny since his admission on Dec. 12 that he had lied when he denied having accepted free work on his Litchfield cottage from contractors and state aides, some of whom are the subject of a federal investigation into possible corruption in the awarding of state contracts. On Sunday, Mr. Rowland repeated that he has done nothing illegal and was cooperating fully with federal investigators, Mr. Farr said.
His apology to legislators was one of several he has made since Dec. 12, but although more than three weeks have passed, Mr. Farr said the aura of ''shock and sadness'' among legislators still lingered. ''Public service is a public trust, he said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Rowland is scheduled to meet at his request with legislative leaders of both parties to discuss the controversy over the cottage. House Majority Leader James A. Amann, a Democrat from Milford, said last Wednesday he was leaning toward urging an internal investigation of Mr. Rowland.
