IN 1987, Danny Martin was a ski lift operator in Big Sky, Mont., when he saw a group of young people coming down a run wearing a new type of wide, single ski. He had never seen a snowboard before. ''I thought, 'I can do that,''' Mr. Martin recalls.
Now, more than 15 years later, Mr. Martin is a sought-after snowboarding guru who jets off to Europe several times a year to tutor his exclusive clientele and sometimes hold their hands as they try to work their way down expert slopes.
On Dec. 23, Mr. Martin, who lives in Avon, Colo., patented a training snowboard to be used indoors, before the novice snowboarder ever hits the slopes.
Compared with the several virtual-reality snowboarding training gizmos already on the market, Mr. Martin's device seems extremely simple. Basically, it is an oblong wooden plank with two rockers underneath. The patent specifies three shapes of rockers, but the shape Mr. Martin has used on hand-built prototypes designed for more than a dozen clients is a wide V-shape.
This simple device, Mr. Martin said, helps aspiring and intermediate snowboarders practice what he considers an essential skill: moving the upper body so the lower body follows.
Such a philosophy is heresy to downhill skiers, who are taught to keep their upper bodies still while initiating movement with the hips, ankles and feet.
''A lot of the snowboarding moves are taught with a skier mentality,'' Mr. Martin said. ''People show up for lessons not knowing that they are being taught by some skier who did a one-day seminar on snowboarding. I would call it ski-boarding rather than snowboarding.''
Subtle shifts in the shoulders, he said, cause subtle shifts in the feet. If the board takes off first, the upper body has to catch up, and unskilled snowboarders often starts flopping their arms, trying to regain balance.
Mr. Martin has written a snowboarding manual explaining his shoulders-first method, which he intends to be sold with a plastic, mass-market version of his indoor-training snowboard. His book agent, Kim Goldstein, says she plans to approach publishers in the next two months with a proposal for the manual, which will be part of a book on snowboarding co-written with Matt Diehl, a freelance journalist.
Snowboarding is a sport dominated by the young. On the Web site, www.snowboard.com, for example, those 19 and younger post three times as many messages as older members.
Mr. Martin does not say so, but his invention appears to be suited to older learners -- say, those over 20 -- so they can practice and envision themselves on the slopes long before they ever reach them. Unlike a skateboard, which was invented more than 50 years ago as an off-season practice device for surfers, Mr. Martin's board does not have wheels and therefore stays in one place.
Mr. Martin said his goal was to teach people to snowboard without ever falling because when beginning snowboarders do fall, they ''slam on the ground harder than they ever have in their life.''
''If you're under the age of 21, you can come back from things like that,'' he said. ''Otherwise, if you are older and you fall a couple of times like that, you start thinking of better things you could be doing.''
Patents may be viewed on the Web at www.uspto.gov or may be ordered through the mail, by patent number, for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.
Patents
