Knicks Coach Don Chaney had a conversation with Antonio McDyess to lift his spirits yesterday morning. His words had resonance.
''It was long enough to come out with both of our heads in the right direction,'' Chaney said. ''He doesn't want to hurt the team. My conversation with him is: 'I'm playing you, I'm playing you not for sympathy, I'm playing you to help the team.'
''His knee is going to take a while. I guarantee and I think he knows I am in his corner 100 percent. I believe in him.''
In a 95-85 loss to the Nets last night, McDyess played his best game since Dec. 20, scoring 14 points and grabbing 11 rebounds and playing with renewed confidence and relief.
''It definitely helped,'' McDyess said. ''When you're frustrated and thinking a lot and not having anyone to talk to, you need someone to be in your ear and tell you positive things. I needed that to focus. Tonight I felt good. Hopefully, I stay that way.''
Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, wants as much success for McDyess as Chaney does. But Thomas did not give McDyess, who is coming back from knee surgery, as strong an assurance last night as he gave Kurt Thomas, who reclaimed his starting spot from McDyess six games ago.
McDyess will be a free agent at the end of the season, and Kurt Thomas plans to opt out of his contract.
''I look at Kurt as a Knick,'' Isiah Thomas said. ''He's a guy that I definitely want to keep here.''
Thomas also said that there was enough time in the season to evaluate any improvement McDyess might make. Thomas acknowledged that teams were inquiring about McDyess in possible trades.
''There's interest,'' Thomas said. ''When you're in the situation we're in, with a record like ours, there's always going to be speculation.''
Thomas Backs Chaney
When Isiah Thomas took over the Knicks' basketball operations, he never said outright that he would keep Don Chaney as coach, only that he would evaluate everyone. Thomas gave him a vote of confidence last night.
''He's got great stuff,'' Thomas said. ''His defense stuff is solid, his offensive stuff is exceptional. He's got a great basketball background. I'm confident if we can put the right things around him from a coaching standpoint, I as a manager can do the right things by him, he can have success here.''
Chaney said he was not paying close attention to such compliments. ''Every coach knows when you get a vote of confidence, go pack your bags,'' he said with a laugh.
Remembering a Trainer
There was a moment of silence before the game for Danny Whelan, the Knicks' trainer from 1967 to 1978, who died Friday at 85.
PRO BASKETBALL: NOTEBOOK
