Bill Parcells was hired as coach of the Dallas Cowboys last year to restore respectability to a franchise in an embarrassing decline. By any measure, a 10-6 record and a playoff berth were not only redemption for the players, who had endured three consecutive 5-11 seasons, but also affirmation for Parcells.
Yet there was hardly a self-congratulatory tone to the Cowboys' locker room after a 29-10 drubbing by the Carolina Panthers in their National Football Conference wild-card game Saturday night at Ericsson Stadium.
As the Panthers demonstrated, the Cowboys are still a work in progress.
''When you lose like this, there's no reason to be satisfied,'' the rookie cornerback Terence Newman said after he was repeatedly burned by the Panthers' receivers. ''I'm personally going to use this game to fuel me during the off-season to work hard and improve on things. I have to improve.''
So do the rest of the Cowboys, as Parcells knows. The stands were still emptying as he began looking ahead to next season and promising roster moves.
''I don't know what I'm going to do right now,'' he said. ''So I'm not really ready to go over the state of the union. But obviously there are going to be some changes.''
Parcells made a plea to reporters to hold off on speculation about which players would be gone by next season. He should have known better.
Moments after his postgame news conference concluded, running back Troy Hambrick was asked about his future with the Cowboys.
''I'm not going to answer that,'' said Hambrick, who rushed for 29 yards on 8 carries against the Panthers. ''I gave my all. There's a lot of errors that I can work on.
''This is my true first season running the football. I took the bitter with the sweet. And I appreciate what my offensive line gave me, an opportunity Coach Parcells gave me, to try to establish myself as an N.F.L. running back.''
Hambrick is one of many question marks on the Cowboys' suspect offense.
Fullback Richie Anderson made two crucial errors against the Panthers in the first half. On a Carolina blitz on the Cowboys' first possession, he dropped a screen pass, a play that could have resulted in a touchdown or at least put Dallas in position to score first. Early in the second quarter, he fumbled with Dallas deep in Carolina territory.
The Cowboys did not see the end zone until the fourth quarter, when it was too late to make a difference.
The defense was hardly blameless. Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme repeatedly preyed on Newman and the rest of the Dallas secondary, exposing a weakness in the N.F.L.'s No. 1 defense in yards allowed a game during the regular season.
''I can't pinpoint anything that I did right today,'' Newman said. ''If you ask me, I'm the one who was responsible for all those points they scored. I put it on my shoulders. My teammates played their butts off, and I was the weak link tonight.
''I definitely view it as a learning experience and I'm pretty sure a lot of my teammates will, too. I'm not the only guy that's been through his first playoff game.''
The question that lingers is how many players will return to Dallas next season. Parcells said he would like to keep many. He will not keep them all.
''I just told the players, 'Another off-season, another training camp, another draft, another preseason,' '' he said. ''You've got to do all that stuff again just to get to where you are right here.
''But I promised them that I wouldn't rest, and I'd be tireless in the pursuit of that. And that when we got back in here, that we'll respond better. That's what I have to do.
''I've got to improve the team by every vehicle at our disposal. We're going to have a good cap situation. I'm certain we're going to be active in free agency. Hopefully, we can have a good draft like we did this year, and some of the players that improved this year can improve more and then, over all, we'll have a better chance.''
PRO FOOTBALL
