People stopped in the drizzle on West Houston Street yesterday and stared at a Nativity scene that looked more like a bad art installation.
Life-size statues of the Virgin Mary, Joseph and the Three Wise Men were gathered in a circle on the hay, pointed not at the newborn king, but at a pink sign that read, ''Please return our infant Jesus.'' The doll-size statue has been missing from St. Anthony of Padua Church since New Year's Eve.
The church has seen better Sundays. During the 11 a.m. Mass yesterday, three purses disappeared. They belonged to women who had assisted at the Mass by distributing communion and giving scriptural readings. The thief grabbed the purses from a back-room closet and dumped them in the church basement before fleeing, but made off with $70, credit cards and a cellphone, church officials said.
''You watch your handbag if you're walking in the street, but you would never think about doing that in church,'' said Carmela Recupero, 48, whose purse was stolen. ''Nothing is sacred. You have to watch out no matter where you are, no matter how safe you think it may be, or how peaceful.''
No arrests have been made in the thefts, the police said. They are also investigating whether some red paint found on two stone pillars at the rear of the altar area at St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday morning was the result of vandalism, said an archdiocese spokesman.
In August, a 200-pound statue of Christ disappeared from the Church of the Holy Cross in Midtown Manhattan, but it was returned a week later in a plastic bag, with several broken fingers, a candle and a satchel of mysterious powder, said the Rev. Peter Colapietro, the church's pastor. The thief was never found, he said.
The police lifted prints from the statue, but Father Colapietro said the church would not press charges because he considers the statue to have been ''borrowed,'' not stolen, he said.
''I guess you can become angry about it, but a lot of times there's an illness involved in this sort of thing,'' said Father Colapietro, who sent the statue's left arm to Ecuador to have the broken fingers repaired.
The statue was reinstalled on a cross at the entrance of the church last week.
Parishioners at St. Anthony's are hoping for a similar reunion with their statue of baby Jesus. The church's Franciscan friars have been rummaging through old boxes in search of a temporary replacement, said Brother Dominic Poirier.
For about 80 years, the blocklong Nativity scene at St. Anthony's has slowed the crowds on West Houston Street with its plywood barn, resin statues of lambs and angels, and spotlights that cast a golden hue on the hay. The scene was recently lent to ABC for the soap opera ''All My Children,'' church officials said.
The Jesus statue, which depicted the infant wrapped in a diaperlike white cloth, arms extended, was imported from Spain and has been used in the scene for about 15 years.
''It's the birth of our savior,'' said Brother Dominic. ''The outdoor crib was our way of sharing it.''
Adela Tapia, 40, looked from under her yellow umbrella yesterday at the empty spot in the Nativity scene. She shook her head.
''It's supposed to be a sign of hope,'' she said as her three children looked on. ''For somebody just to steal him like that is so sad.''
Two of the women whose purses were stolen yesterday expressed similar disbelief at the audacity of a crime in a place of worship. The parishioners were probably receiving communion when the thief sneaked into a back room and removed the purses from a closet, church officials said. Shortly after, Brother Dominic found the closet door open.
''It's bad enough that someone would hurt you,'' Ms. Recupero said. ''But to have it happen in a place where people go to worship, it attacks your faith and God himself.''
The church's pastor, the Rev. Simeon C. Distefano, noticed that the statue was missing as he walked around the block after morning Mass on Wednesday.
''He came running in and said, 'Someone stole the baby from the crib,' '' said Brother Dominic, 60. ''There's a lot of speculation about who did it. I think it's someone who's anti-Christmas, like Scrooge or the Grinch.''
Others said they thought it was a prank or a drunken joke.
''Remember, 'round here there are clubs that close up around 2 or 3 a.m.,'' said Father Distefano. ''I think it was just mischief. I don't think it was evil intent.''
The statue is worth $100, Brother Dominic said.
''But in spirit, it's priceless,'' he said. ''There's no baby here. Without him, the crib is not complete.''
