Five seasons in the N.F.L. and no playoff victories in three attempts had made Peyton Manning an easy target for criticism, jokes and even ridicule. He said that not only was there ''a monkey on my back,'' but that it was ''on there pretty tight.''
So, Sunday afternoon, in his sixth season and fourth playoff game, Manning began to peel off that extra load, decision after decision, pass after pass, touchdown after touchdown.
In a sparkling serving of technique, talent, will and showmanship, Manning became the first N.F.L. player to throw five touchdown passes in three games in one season. His fourth playoff appearance, this one against the Denver Broncos, produced an array of all that is special about Manning the quarterback and distinctive about Manning the competitor as Indianapolis toyed with Denver, 41-10, before 56,586 at the RCA Dome.
The Colts (13-4) advance to face the Chiefs (13-3) in a divisional playoff game next Sunday in Kansas City, Mo. Denver (10-7) ended its season in shambles largely because it confronted a quarterback ready for retribution and a team prepared to deliver an awesome day.
''I was just glad to have another playoff opportunity, that we weren't an 8-8 team and I was sitting at home,'' Manning said. ''The 0-3 thing in the playoffs was just a fact. I didn't run and hide from it''
No, he ended it with a wondrous 22-of-26, 377-yard, 5-touchdown game, and a perfect passer rating.
''That was a great game plan and it was executed as well as I've ever seen,'' Broncos Coach Mike Shanahan said. ''We came into a hornet's nest. Once he gets a beat on you, he is hard to stop.''
Tom Moore, the Colts' offensive coordinator, said: ''Peyton took the challenge. He made all the proper reads, didn't force anything. He had the type of game where you look at it and say, 'How did this happen like this?' And the answer is, I don't know.''
Perhaps Colts cornerback David Macklin, who made two interceptions of Denver quarterback Jake Plummer, had the answer.
''It's all or nothing in the playoffs,'' Macklin said. ''We got tired of the nothing.''
Edgerrin James outrushed Denver's Clinton Portis, 78 yards to 68 yards. Manning made Plummer (23 of 30, 181 yards, one touchdown, 2 interceptions) look average. Colts receiver Marvin Harrison grabbed 7 passes for 133 yards and 2 touchdowns while no Bronco caught more than 5 passes or gained more than 66 receiving yards.
End Dwight Freeney and tackle Montae Reagor each gained a sack. Linebacker David Thornton led in tackles with 10, and Denver did not score its touchdown until 7 minutes 4 seconds were left in the game.
The score was 31-3 by halftime and Denver was alternately outplayed and embarrassed. Manning torched Denver for four touchdown passes in the first half and set a franchise playoff record for touchdown passes in a game. (No Colt, including Johnny Unitas, had thrown for more than two scores in a playoff game.) With 7:28 left in the half, Manning had connected on 11 of his first 12 passes and was only 9 yards short of 200.
''It was really awesome to see from the sideline,'' Colts Coach Tony Dungy said. ''I hope people think this was a big game because I've heard about him not being able to win big games.''
By halftime, Manning's numbers were startling -- 16 of 18 for 327 yards with 4 touchdown passes and no interceptions and a highest-possible passer rating of 158.3. That rating would last the entire game, and it was only the fourth one accomplished in a playoff game.
Indianapolis was making its fourth playoff appearance in the last five seasons, and Denver was playing in its second game here in three weeks. On Dec. 21, Denver strutted in here and smothered Indianapolis, 31-17. And everyone around the league remembered that last season the Colts played the Jets in a first-round playoff game and were bullied, 41-0.
But on Sunday, Indianapolis buried all doubt early. Denver looked like a team that had played a listless regular-season finale at Green Bay, where it lost, 31-3, only to suffer a severe hangover.
''It's our second year with Coach Dungy, our second year in his scheme, and he just told us to go do what we do,'' Freeney said. ''Our offense pretty much opened the gates for us.''
The Colts' scoring spree began only 3:05 into the the game when Manning found receiver Brandon Stokley running free deep across the field for a 31-yard touchdown pass. Indianapolis set up the play with 3 passes for 28 yards to James. As the Denver defense crept forward to negate James, Manning and Stokley took advantage.
Manning was 4 for 4 on his initial drive and Plummer responded with a 5-for-5 first drive that resulted in a 49-yard field goal by Jason Elam. Although Denver stalled at the Indianapolis 30, the Broncos felt good about getting points and letting the Colts know that this game could easily become a back-and-forth scoring affair.
But those were the only points Denver would score in the half. And while the Broncos stalled, the Colts rolled.
Indianapolis's second touchdown of the first quarter helped set the stage for Denver's free fall. In an embarrassing play for Denver, Harrison caught a third-and-8 pass on a post pattern for 16 yards, leaping and falling to the ground. That play was special enough.
But then three Broncos -- cornerback Kelly Herndon, safety Kenoy Kennedy and linebacker Al Wilson -- stood circling Harrison in disgust over the completion. None of them bothered to touch Harrison while he was on the ground to ensure that the play was over. So Harrison got up and ran the final 30 yards into the end zone, untouched on the play from beginning to end.
That freaky 46-yard touchdown catch with 24 seconds left in the first quarter gave Indianapolis a 14-3 lead.
''They just assumed the guy was down,'' Shanahan said. ''Very embarrassing.''
It was all downhill, full speed, for Denver after that. Stokley burst behind the defense for an 87-yard touchdown with 7:28 left before halftime. With 55 seconds left, Macklin intercepted a Plummer pass and returned the ball 21 yards to the Indianapolis 42-yard line. Manning drove the Colts closer and, as time expired in the first half, Mike Vanderjagt kicked a 27-yard field goal, his 42nd straight, and the rout was in full bloom.
Manning looked much like the most valuable player of the season, an award he shared last week with Tennessee quarterback Steve McNair. Manning attacked the Broncos fearlessly in the same manner the entire Colts team did in a dominating half that led to a dominating victory.
''I hope we convinced everyone and that Peyton did, too,'' Freeney said. ''But if we didn't, that's all right. We have another chance to now.''
PRO FOOTBALL
