The satellite retransmission industry hopes to push the popularity of high-definition television by taking a page from the shopping mall playbook.
On Jan. 1, PanAmSat, a satellite operator that beams programming to local cable operators for transmission to their customers, switched many of its HDTV channels to a new satellite that the company is positioning into something it calls an HDTV neighborhood.
Trading on a successful marketing approach used for analog television since the 1980's, the company, which is owned primarily by Hughes Electronics, says it thinks that cable operators will be more likely to offer HDTV programming if they, like shoppers who go to a mall, can find the good things all in one place.
PanAmSat operates a worldwide network of 30 satellites, which it uses to transmit programming to cable operators and broadcasters, and directly to consumers.
The company's newest satellite, Galaxy XIII, has started to carry the HDTV feeds of popular networks like HBO, Cinemax, Starz Encore and HDNet. Additional HDTV programming will migrate to it and to PanAmSat's next HD-oriented satellites, Galaxy XIV and XV, when they launch in 2004 and 2005.
Joseph R. Wright Jr., the company's president and chief executive, said he thought that in the future, smaller programmers will want to use the Galaxy satellites to transmit their HDTV feeds, because of the presence of programming anchors, like HBO.
The satellites use the company's Power of Five marketing approach, created for analog program transmission in the early 1990's. Under this system, cable operators will be able to receive programming from all three satellites with only one dish, eliminating the costs involved with multiple receiving equipment.
''For HDTV to succeed, you need to make its transmission efficient,'' Mr. Wright said. Each of Galaxy XIII's 24 transponders can carry two HDTV feeds, or 48 high-definition programming channels per satellite. Some transponders will be used to transmit standard-definition programming.
The satellite's signal can reach cable operators serving 80 percent of the nation's subscribers. Because a large amount of HDTV programming is carried on one satellite, it is possible that economies of scale will eventually reduce transmission fees, Mr. Wright contended.
PanAmSat predicts the growth in HDTV programming and the lower price of high-definition sets will fuel consumer demand for the new technology.
''The timing was right for us to launch this new HD-ready satellite,'' Mr. Wright said. ''The value of HDTV to the consumer, the program provider and to the cable system operator are now starting to merge.''
