After three consecutive years of dismal fiscal news at the state level, officials are beginning to detect signs that the worst may be over. But state budgets will continue to be stressed by slow job growth and rapidly rising health care costs, and battles in state capitals over taxing and spending will continue to rage, analysts say.
The growing national economy and the rising stock market have begun to be felt in the states; tax revenues in most states rose slightly in the second half of last year for the first time since mid-2001.
Governors, legislatures and budget directors welcomed the news after three years in which state officials had to contend with a cumulative $200 billion in budget shortfalls. But officials warned that many states were entering the new year and preparing for next year still facing substantial budget deficits.
Over the past three years, total spending at the state level rose, at most, by one-half percent, a marked change from the record of the previous 25 years, in which spending growth averaged 6.5 percent a year.
''In quite a large number of states, budgets will be smaller in actual dollar amounts than they were two or three years ago,'' said Scott Pattison, executive director of the National Association of State Budget Officers, based in Washington. ''That's pretty unusual and significant. The good news is it appears most states have hit bottom and are slowly climbing out, but boy, the bottom was deep. It's going to be hard coming out of that.''
States have responded by greatly cutting spending and raising fees on all kinds of services, from fishing licenses to divorce filings. Sales taxes rose in 17 states, while 10 states, including New York, increased income taxes, although most made the increases temporary. Many states resorted to one-time remedies to raise revenue, including accelerating tax collections in Michigan and deferring salary payments into the next fiscal year in Virginia. States have borrowed against pension funds and tobacco settlement payments and offered amnesty to delinquent taxpayers to encourage them to make overdue payments.
In California, state general fund spending in the current fiscal year, which began July 1, is projected to fall to $73 billion from $78 billion the previous year. This week, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger will present a budget for the coming fiscal year that must address a projected shortfall of at least $14 billion. Governor Schwarzenegger has vowed not to raise taxes, and the success of his plan hinges on a March referendum approving the sale of $15 billion in bonds to cover the deficit.
California has coped with its fiscal crisis with one-time budget gimmicks and deep cuts in spending on higher education, health care and numerous programs, from parks to the arts. The fiscal crisis has also had profound political implications, leading at least in part to the recall of former Gov. Gray Davis, a Democrat, and the rollicking election that brought Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, to power in November.
States from coast to coast are facing similar fiscal problems and the political fallout that accompanies them. In Alabama, a conservative Republican governor, Bob Riley, who said he had never voted for a tax increase in his three terms in Congress, proposed the largest tax increase in the state's history to cover a deep budget deficit.
Mr. Riley devised the $1.2 billion tax package to protect the state's poorest citizens, but opponents seized on provisions like a tax on services like car repairs to build public sentiment against it.
Voters roundly rejected the tax increase in the fall, and now cuts have begun. Five thousand nonviolent offenders are being paroled early from prisons, troopers have gone to a four-day workweek, and schools have run out of money for textbooks and computers.
In Oregon, Gov. Theodore R. Kulongoski, a Democrat, negotiated with Republicans in the State Legislature to win passage of an $800 million package of tax increases to address a projected $1 billion budget shortfall. The plan included a temporary increase in the state income tax and new taxes on tobacco and businesses. Oregon does not have a sales tax.
But antitax forces in the state, including members of the Libertarian Party and conservative Republicans, collected more than 50,420 signatures to put the governor's plan before the voters in a February referendum. Even the plan's supporters expect it to be rejected, which would force Governor Kulongoski to cut spending by $800 million.
Defeat of the tax plan would ''end the Oregon Health Plan as we know it, cutting it by hundreds of millions of dollars, and cause deep cuts in K-12 education, as much as $400 million or $500 million,'' said Peter Bragdon, the governor's chief of staff.
Like several states, Oregon broadened medical coverage in the boom years of the late 1990's. Now, with budgets shrinking and health care costs rising at double-digit rates, states are cutting back severely by raising eligibility requirements and eliminating coverage for hundreds of thousands of people.
According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a nonprofit research group in Washington that tracks the effects of government policies on low-income people, 34 states have cut spending on Medicaid and the State Children's Health Insurance Program over the past two years.
Missouri, for example, lowered the income limit for eligibility for Medicaid to $11,750 from $15,260 for a family of three, and tightened the requirements in other ways, eliminating benefits for as many as 42,700 people. Florida has stopped granting children's health benefits to new applicants, putting them on a waiting list instead; this has affected 44,000 children. Texas increased monthly premiums for the children's health program and imposed an asset test for families. Those and other changes will drop as many as 494,000 Texans from the ranks of the insured.
In all, the center estimates, 1.2 million to 1.6 million poor people have lost their health benefits as a result of cuts at the state level.
The last time states faced such difficult fiscal conditions was after the 1990-91 recession. But the response to the current slowdown has been vastly different, said Arturo Perez, a senior fiscal analyst in Denver for the National Conference of State Legislatures.
He said that in 1991, states raised taxes by $15.4 billion, about 5.4 percent of the previous year's tax collections. In 2003, by contrast, states raised taxes by $7.8 billion, or 1.5 percent of revenue from the year before. Mr. Perez said that politicians have become tax-shy in the past decade.
''Look what happened to Florio and Cuomo and others who supported tax increases in campaigns after that period,'' Mr. Perez said, referring to two former governors, James J. Florio of New Jersey and Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who lost to rivals who campaigned against unpopular tax increases. ''That lesson hasn't been lost.''
Widespread opposition to tax increases prompted officials to compensate by raising excise taxes on alcohol and tobacco and a variety of charges for state services, calling them user fees rather than taxes.
Alaska raised fees on rental cars. Arkansas imposed a 3 percent excise tax on beer and doubled, to $150, the fee for reinstatement of drivers' licenses revoked for drunken driving. Georgia tripled the cigarette tax to 27 cents a pack. North Carolina increased the fee the state charges for analyzing pap smears. Ohio raised the elevator inspection fee. Texas is erecting tollbooths on state highways, raising college tuitions and imposing a $1,000 surcharge on drunken driving convictions.
Massachusetts raised the fee for a marriage license to $50 from $4. New Jersey raised the divorce filing fee to $250 from $200.
Last spring, the New York State Legislature voted to raise taxes and borrow about $4 billion to avoid deep cuts to education and medical services for the poor that Gov. George E. Pataki had proposed to close an $11.5 billion budget gap. The governor vetoed most of the Legislature's plan, but lawmakers from both parties overrode him.
A reluctance to raise taxes or cut spending was among the chief causes of the current fiscal fix, said Ray Scheppach, executive director of the National Governors Association, based in Washington. Federal tax policy, unfinanced mandates for programs like domestic security, and ever-rising Medicaid costs all contributed to what will be long-term fiscal problems, no matter how the economy performs over the next 12 months, he said.
''I think we've bottomed out and it's going to get better,'' Mr. Scheppach said, describing the states' fiscal plight as the worst since World War II. ''But not a lot better.''
