The Manhattan district attorney's office has searched the New York office and apartment of a Parmalat lawyer in connection with the fraud investigation of the company, according to someone close to the investigation.
A spokeswoman for Robert M. Morgenthau, the district attorney, would not confirm yesterday that a search had been done.
The office and apartment, which were searched on Friday, belonged to Gian Paolo Zini, a Parmalat lawyer detained in Milan in connection with the Parmalat investigation, said Ansa, the Italian news agency, quoting people close to the case in Parma, where Parmalat is based.
Italian officials called the documents found in the search, the contents of which were not described, ''interesting'' and ''useful,'' AFX News, an economic news service, reported, quoting Italian newspapers.
On another front of the investigation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, which filed a complaint against Parmalat on Dec. 30, acknowledged yesterday that any inquiry it conducted would include scrutiny of investment banks that issued the company's bonds or stocks to investors.
Lawrence A. West, an associate director in the S.E.C.'s enforcement division, would not confirm reports in Italian newspapers saying that three American investment banks were the subjects of an investigation.
''In any case like this, it's obvious that we're going to be looking at anybody involved in the issuance of securities that were involved in the fraud,'' Mr. West said.
In its complaint, the S.E.C. asserted that Parmalat sold nearly $1.5 billion in notes and bonds to United States investors from 1998 through 2002, but it did not assert fraud in connection with those offerings.
Still, Mr. West disputed reports that an inquiry into the investment banks would represent a widening of the S.E.C.'s investigation. ''When we say our investigation is continuing, which we said in the litigation release, that obviously refers to the possibility that there are other parties that are involved in the lawsuit,'' he said.
Challenging reports that Parmalat was asking for more bank loans to continue its operations, a person close to the company's situation said that it had ''no urgent need for funds.''
Because the company is in the Italian equivalent of Chapter 11 bankruptcy, loan and interest payments have been suspended, reducing Parmalat's day-to-day cash needs substantially. The money the company is generating is sufficient to meet its daily obligations, this person said.
The same person said most of the company's biggest creditor banks were eager to lend it money and have expressed a willingness to do so. Under Italian law, any lender to a company that has filed for bankruptcy protection receives privileged creditor status, meaning it will be paid back first.
Parmalat, one of Italy's largest food companies, sought protection from creditors last month after a string of accusations regarding fraudulent accounting. Investigators are looking at current and former Parmalat employees as well as outside auditors.
Enrico Bondi, the turnaround specialist who has been selected to run Parmalat, is expected to concentrate this month on a detailed examination of the company's units and finances.
On Saturday, Calisto Tanzi, Parmalat's founder, offered to forfeit his stake in the company as well as some of his personal assets. He did not say whether the holding represented the whole of his family's 50 percent share of the company.
A Bloomberg News report said Mr. Bondi had rejected the offer yesterday.
In Ecuador, Reuters reported that Judge Guido Salvini told the newspaper El Comercio that Ecuadorean courts would investigate the company's activities there because Mr. Tanzi had visited the country shortly before his arrest last month.
