JUST when some federal courts seemed unwilling to find fault with a controversial type of pop-up Web advertising, a federal judge in New York has called at least a temporary timeout on one version of the advertisements.
Late last month the judge, Deborah A. Batts of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, issued a preliminary injunction that bars the advertising software company WhenU.com from displaying pop-ups and other types of online advertisements for VisionDirect.com when visitors go to 1-800 Contacts.com, a competing Web site.
The decision is the latest twist in a battle between WhenU and more than a dozen companies that object to its advertising techniques. Many more companies are closely watching the fight to determine whether they, too, should sue WhenU and its closest competitor, the Claria Corporation, or simply sign up as advertisers.
Opponents of WhenU's and Claria's advertising approach compare it to hijacking customers after they have entered a store. The techniques differ from the conventional pop-up advertisements, as when the travel company Orbitz.com pays publishers to have its ads pop up on readers' screens.
With WhenU's and Claria's services, for example, Orbitz would pay to have its ads pop up with Web surfers visiting the competing site Expedia.com -- as in fact happened last week when visitors arrived at Expedia.com.
In such a case, Orbitz has an opportunity to lure a prospective Expedia customer from Expedia's own site. For this to work, WhenU and Claria must have the Web surfer's complicity. Each company has distributed its software to more than 30 million Internet users. The free software helps users accomplish various tasks online, whether it be filling out address forms or checking weather forecasts.
In exchange for these free services, users agree to let a piece of software track their activity as they surf the Web. (In some cases, this software is bundled not with software from WhenU or Claria, but with free software from other companies, like the file-sharing service providers Kazaa and BearShare.) It it this tracking software that enables WhenU or Claria to display a competitors' ads when users visit various sites.
Online companies have fought WhenU and Claria in the courts for the last three years, usually claiming that their pop-up ads violate federal copyright and trademark laws by disrupting the display of the plaintiffs' Web sites and by unjustly using their trademark to sell advertising, among other complaints.
But WhenU registered several legal victories in the second half of 2003, beginning with a decision in July by a federal district court in Virginia. In that case, the court rejected the argument of U-Haul that WhenU's ads on behalf of its competitors infringed U-Haul's copyrights and trademarks.
In October, Internet retailers Overstock.com and TigerDirect.com dropped suits against WhenU. In November, Federal District Court Judge Nancy G. Edmunds, in Detroit, denied Wells Fargo's request for a preliminary injunction in its suit against WhenU. Judge Edmunds ruled that Wells Fargo was not likely to prevail on its claims of copyright and trademark infringement.
The judge said that WhenU did not use Wells Fargo's trademark, per se, in its advertising, since the pop-ups themselves did not display those trademarks. No trial date has yet been set for the case.
Judge Batts, in New York, made a different judgment in issuing her preliminary injunction against WhenU. She noted that WhenU places the 1-800Contacts.com Web address in an internal database that is used to trigger the display of competitors' ads. That, she wrote, violates the Lanham Act's trademark protections, because WhenU has used the trademark of 1-800 Contacts in a way that is likely to cause consumer confusion. Specifically, Judge Batts wrote, consumers could be confused about the connection between the advertisement and 1-800 Contacts.com, and VisionDirect.com could gain ''initial credibility'' with consumers amid such confusion.
While the case will go to trial and could ultimately yield a different outcome, Judge Batts's initial ruling is important to the Internet advertising industry, said Jeffrey D. Neuburger, who specializes in Internet law for Brown Raysman Millstein Felder &amp; Steiner.
''It will breathe some life into the hopes of people who are upset about WhenU and similar companies,'' Mr. Neuburger said. ''It's at least creating a split in the courts that could make the issue ripe for review by a higher level.''
Indeed, many industry executives and analysts predict that the issue will reach a federal appeals court this year, and maybe eventually the Supreme Court. In addition to the Michigan and New York federal cases pending against WhenU, Claria is fighting about a dozen plaintiffs in one case being heard by the federal district court in Atlanta.
More lawsuits could be in the works. Terence P. Ross, a lawyer who represents Claria's and WhenU's opponents in the current federal suits, said that since Judge Batts's ruling against WhenU, he had received three inquiries from companies considering suits.
One e-commerce executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: ''This ruling absolutely gets us thinking about bringing suit. We've finally found a chink in the armor.''
Avi Naider, the chief executive of WhenU, which is based in New York, said he remained confident that Judge Batts would ultimately rule in his company's favor. He noted that the judge had rejected the copyright claims made by 1-800Contacts.com in its motion for a preliminary injunction.
Mr. Naider said he did not yet know whether Judge Batts's decision would cause prospective advertising clients to think twice about doing business with him. He said that clients usually exhibited ''a lot of hesitancy'' before signing on, partly for fear of litigation, and partly from the stigma attached to companies like his. (While clients refer to WhenU and Claria as ''adware'' companies, opponents refer to them as ''spyware,'' and other, less printable, epithets.)
In arguments before Judge Batts's ruling, Mr. Naider said a preliminary injunction could cost the company up to $10 million in lost clients. But in an interview last week, Mr. Naider said he hoped word-of-mouth advertising among his clients -- which include Priceline, Hotwire, Panasonic and Sprint, among others -- would sustain the company's current annual growth rate of 50 percent.
Nate Elliott, an analyst with Jupiter Research, says that advertisers that have used WhenU's or Claria's service tend to like it. ''It provides them a level of targeting that not many other online advertising methods offer right now,'' Mr. Elliott said.
But he said consumers were not as happy. ''They're concerned about what information might be collected,'' he said, ''and how the software got into their machines.''
WhenU and Claria say they do not collect personally identifiable information, and they say users must agree that they have read explanatory material before downloading their advertising software.
Meanwhile, 1-800Contacts executives are hoping Judge Batts's reasoning holds sway with other federal courts.
Joe Zeidner, the company's general counsel, said that during the several months when WhenU's VisionDirect.com ads ran, sales on his employer's site declined. ''We don't know how this is going to end up,'' Mr. Zeidner said, ''but we really felt like this was a serious threat to the business in the long term.''
E-Commerce Report
