IT should have been the greatest day of the college football season, and in some ways it was. A grueling four-month-long schedule ended last night with the crowning of a national champion. Louisiana State came from nowhere -- at least in the voters' view -- to win the Bowl Championship Series. Thousands of miles from here, fans in Southern California are calling U.S.C. the people's champion.
Instead of celebrating, we're in the throes of a furor over something that was supposed to be beyond debate: Who is really No. 1?
If I voted, my ballot would have gone to Louisiana State. The Tigers would have given the Trojans a game they would have never forgotten. Southern Cal has an outstanding passing game, but there is no way the Trojans would move against L.S.U. the way they did against Michigan.
But we'll never know, and that's really the point.
I've braced myself for this day ever since the final regular-season rankings came out and Southern Cal was robbed. The Trojans were ranked third in the B.C.S., but first by the news media and the coaches.
Sometimes things don't work out. But still, throughout the Sugar Bowl, I kept thinking about Southern Cal's receivers against L.S.U.'s outstanding secondary.
The other thought was that this should never happen again.
Division I-A college football has the most embarrassing coronation process in sports. A national audience watched Oklahoma and L.S.U. last night in a game that was supposed to be for the national championship, yet the prevailing sentiment, perpetuated by voters in the college football polls, is ''don't believe your lying eyes.''
The system is flawed. Now we face the age-old conundrum: Do you participate in a flawed system and attempt reform, or do you create a new system? I say go for the new.
The first step toward a new construction is for the news media to pull out of the voting process. Get the computers, including The New York Times's, out as well. If coaches want to vote, let them, although I'll bet that voting is one task they could do without. Listen to Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops describe his voting routine: ''It's hard. I make all my own votes, but I get back from a night game, we're flying home from an away game in Iowa State, I get home at 3 in the morning, then I've got to sit there for an hour and see who won and how they won. It's tough.''
The most recent ESPN/USA Today coaches poll put Southern Cal at the top; after last night's game, the coaches are obligated to vote for the Sugar Bowl winner. Someone asked Stoops if he would be offended if one of his colleagues voted Southern Cal as the No. 1 team, despite being required to vote for the Sugar Bowl winner. ''They won't,'' he said, ''because the winner of this game is going to be the national champion in the B.C.S. poll.
''I think that's what frustrates you guys,'' he said, referring to the news media. ''You can't control it. You guys can control what people want to read, but you can't control how coaches and administrators are going to conduct college football.''
There has to be a playoff, and there will be. For all their public protests, college presidents, at their core, are politicians and fund-raisers. When they realize the millions of dollars being left on the table, they will reconsider.
There is no perfect system, but some systems are less dysfunctional than others. After hearing all sides, all season, I've come up with a plan for a Division I-A system that provides closure, dollars and a chance for colleges that are now outside the B.C.S. to play for the national championship. My system also keeps the so-called bowl system intact. There are 28 bowl games, and 13 of them can be incorporated into this system.
Here's how the new system would work:
1. Each of the six B.C.S. conferences will hold a title game at a bowl to crown its champion. Even Stoops likes this idea.
Last season, Ohio State and Iowa were co-champions of the Big Ten. Under the new system, Ohio State and Iowa would play for the Big Ten championship. ''You don't think that would be exciting?'' Stoops said. ''Wouldn't that have been a heck of a game to watch? It's another step they have to clear to get into a national championship game.''
2. The six conference champions meet: Big Ten vs. Pac-10 in the Rose Bowl, for tradition's sake; Big 12 vs. Southeastern Conference; and Big East vs. Atlantic Coast Conference. Two at-large teams -- one from a B.C.S. conference, the other from outside the B.C.S. -- would play in a fourth game in what would become, in effect, the national quarterfinals.
The at-large teams would play each other to keep alive the prospect of a startling upset -- unlike the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament, in which a low-seeded team is sent to slaughter against a powerhouse right off the bat.
3. The Big Ten/Pac-10 winner plays the Big 12/S.E.C. winner, and the Big East/A.C.C. winner plays the at-large winner in the national semifinals.
4. The winners of those two games play for the national championship.
As for the remaining bowl games -- play them. They can't be any more irrelevant than they already are. Let the presidents and the athletic directors and their hangers-on have their junkets.
My first priority is to take the news media out of the voting. Immediately. There is a reason the press box is high above the playing field; the news media are supposed to be above the fray. Today we find ourselves in the midst of the madness.
Sports of The Times
