AS soon as the coin bounced up ''heads'' and the Seattle Seahawks had won the toss for the overtime, quarterback Matt Hasselbeck barked at Referee Bernie Kukar, saying, ''We want the ball and we're going to score'' -- words that could be heard by anyone watching the Fox telecast yesterday.
When running back Ahman Green, who had been out there representing the Packers at the coin toss, returned to the sideline, he told Brett Favre what Hasselbeck had said. ''I thought that was pretty bold, but we hadn't stopped them yet,'' Favre said after Green Bay's 33-27 shootout victory in overtime on cornerback Al Harris's 52-yard interception return. ''That's a pretty bold statement. I never would've said that. He probably wishes that wasn't heard by everyone.''
Not that Brett Favre wouldn't have thought it.
Of all the quarterbacks in the National Football League, he is the best. Others may be on the way to being the best someday -- Peyton Manning, Steve McNair, Donovan McNabb, Tom Brady, Michael Vick -- but as these Super Bowl XXXVIII playoffs continue, Brett Favre is the best. And at 34, he is better than ever.
In yesterday's classic duel with Hasselbeck, once his backup on the Packers, Favre could not afford to make a mistake, and he did not. Hasselbeck made only one, the interception that ended the game.
Favre is even better despite a burden -- the death of his father, Irvin, the popular patriarch of his Kiln, Miss., family who was Brett's high school coach. Big Irv was driving home around 6 o'clock in the evening on Dec. 21 when he had a heart attack or a stroke. But in three games since, Brett Favre has been better than ever. And cooler than ever.
''Maybe I handle things differently than other people,'' he was saying in the Packers' interview area, ''but that doesn't mean I don't get excited, that I don't grieve. There haven't been too many games I've lost that a tear hasn't come out of my eyes because it means that much to me. I take things hard.''
In a gray sweatshirt and jeans, Favre still resembled the backwoods kid from Kiln, but he has turned into a saddened statesman of the sport.
''One thing I took for granted was life,'' he said. ''I was always one of those people who would say I hope that never happens to me. It's over now. I miss my dad, but my obligation is to this team. It's tough, but this is different. You get paid a lot of money to do this. What makes it feel better is being around a bunch of guys like this.''
As what amounts to a cortege for Big Irv moves to Philadelphia next Sunday for a National Football Conference divisional showdown with the Eagles, do not try to tell Favre's family that Big Irv is not merely looking down on his 34-year-old son; he is also making sure the Packers win.
In the Monday night game at Oakland about 24 hours after Big Irv's death, it was as if he glued Brett's lofted passes into the receivers' hands as Favre threw for 4 touchdowns and 311 yards in the first half to detonate what turned into a 41-7 rout.
When the Packers needed a Minnesota Vikings loss to qualify for the playoffs after a 31-3 victory over Denver in their season finale, it was as if Big Irv helped wide receiver Nathan Poole grab the Arizona Cardinals' touchdown pass on the final play for an 18-17 triumph.
And yesterday, with the Favre clan watching from a Lambeau Field suite, it was as if Big Irv made sure that Brett completed 26 of 38 passes for 319 yards and a touchdown, a 23-yard dart to tight end Bubba Franks, with no interceptions, no fumbled snaps, no botched handoffs.
''Once a year they all come up for a game,'' Favre said of his family. ''My mother hates the cold, but I don't know why she's concerned. She's up in a box.''
At game time, the temperature was 20 degrees and the wind was swirling and gusting to 20 miles an hour, creating a wind chill of 7 degrees. But this was what is known here as Packers weather. Their fans, who set a refurbished Lambeau Field record with a ''Go, Pack, Go'' assembly of 71,457, know how to dress for it. As if they were on an Arctic expedition. And one fan's sign said it for all of them:
Breaking
Records
Every
Time He
Throws
But when Favre was asked if yesterday's tension had been nerve-racking, he shrugged.
''Not very,'' he said. ''There's only so much you can do.''
And despite his burden, he is doing it. Favre is now 7-1 in playoff games at Lambeau Field. He has a 36-1 record here when the temperature is 34 degrees or lower. He set a career postseason record for consecutive games with a touchdown pass, 14. And with 31 touchdown passes in the playoffs, he is third on the career list, behind Joe Montana's 45 and Dan Marino's 32.
When your name is up there with Montana's and Marino's, you do not have to predict your team will score in overtime. You just have to think it.
Sports of The Times
