A governor of the Federal Reserve Board, Ben S. Bernanke, argued Sunday that the central bank was correctly holding down interest rates in order to nurture an economic recovery in which the inflation rate ''is very nearly at the bottom of the acceptable range.''
The recovery is raising concerns among some Wall Street investors and forecasters that growing demand will soon cause inflation to rise unless the Fed begins to raise interest rates to dampen activity. Addressing this concern, Mr. Bernanke agreed that the Fed's interest rate policy was ''unusually accommodative in historical terms'' for this stage of a recovery.
But, speaking here at the annual meeting of the Allied Social Science Associations, he said, ''That accommodation is justified, I believe, by the current very low level of inflation, and by the productivity gains and the weakness in the labor market, both of which suggest that inflation is likely to remain subdued.''
Mr. Bernanke, an economist who came to the Fed from Princeton University, has built a reputation as an influential policy maker. His preference for keeping down interest rates for the time being paralleled the views of Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, which he made in his speech here on Saturday.
While the recovery is about six months old, Mr. Bernanke said, the inflation rate is low -- 1.1 percent by one measure. Growth in productivity is rising, lowering production costs and inflationary pressures. With new hiring still weak, true unemployment is probably greater than the official national rate of 5.9 percent suggests, the result being that wage pressure is close to nil.
''Core inflation rates in the United States,'' Mr. Bernanke said, ''are as low today as they have been in 40 years, and they have been trending downward.'' The core rate as measured by the Consumer Price Index fell to 1.1 percent in November from 2 percent in the year-earlier month.
Mr. Bernanke said that ''some remain unconvinced that the Fed is pursuing the right course'' in holding the federal funds rate -- the interest rate at which banks lend to each other overnight that influences rates on many business and consumer loans -- at only 1 percent.
Low inflation ''is of utmost importance to the nation's economic health,'' he said, offering reassurance to the markets. But concerns over the inflationary potential of a weakening dollar and rising commodity prices are misplaced, he said.
The recent movements in commodity prices, he said, ''are in fact quite normal for this stage of the business cycle'' and secondly, he added, ''the direct effects of commodity price inflation on consumer inflation are empirically miniscule.''
As for the dollar's decline, that has been mostly against a few major currencies, particularly the euro. But measured against the currencies of America's important trading partners, China and India, for example, the decline has been much less. And rather than pass on to American consumers the rising cost of imported merchandise, Mr. Bernanke said, foreign producers ''tend to absorb most of the effect of changes in the value of the dollar.''
