The board of Hollinger International repeatedly approved deals benefiting the company's chairman and chief executive, Conrad M. Black, and other executives without independent analysis, fairness opinions or extensive discussion of the rationale for such decisions, according to a lawsuit filed by a major Hollinger shareholder.
In numerous instances, the lawsuit says, the agreements were costly to Hollinger International, but the board agreed after Lord Black and other company executives recommended the deals without any independent confirmation.
The suit -- filed in Delaware Chancery Court in early December by the hedge fund Cardinal Value Equity Partners but unsealed late Friday -- accuses the board of letting Lord Black and his executives ''line their pockets at shareholder expense.''
The Hollinger board had many prominent members in the time covered by the suit including Henry A. Kissinger; A. Alfred Taubman, who remained a director even while serving a prison sentence related to his role in a price-fixing scheme as chairman of Sotheby's; Marie-Josée Kravis, an economist married to the financier Henry Kravis; and Barbara Amiel Black, Lord Black's wife. Neither Ms. Kravis nor Mr. Taubman is now on the board.
The suit said that there were transactions where the board rubber-stamped sales of Hollinger assets to companies controlled by Lord Black and Hollinger executives, paid them noncompete fees or raised their compensation without question in a series of deals that cost Hollinger $300 million or more.
The suit, filed against present and past Hollinger directors as well as two separate companies controlled by Lord Black, seeks damages as well as a court order to prevent the company from making any deal beneficial to its management. It had been under seal because many of the accusations were based on notes from board meetings that Cardinal Value Equity had obtained.
Hollinger, which owns The Daily Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post, has been embroiled in a series of revelations regarding payments to executives including Lord Black, who has resigned as chief executive.
On Wednesday, Lord Black failed to make an initial $700,000 payment that was due as part of the $7.2 million that he had agreed to repay Hollinger by June, according to a person close to the company. The $7.2 million was part of $32 million paid out to Hollinger corporate executives in noncompete fees that were not authorized by the board.
A spokesman for Lord Black said: ''He has yet to complete his inquiry into the facts underlying whether the payment was in fact authorized. He is working with the company's special committee to answer that question.''
The special committee, which was established under the leadership of Hollinger's new chief executive, Gordon A. Paris, has hired Richard C. Breeden, a former head of the Securities and Exchange Commission to review actions by management and the board.
The company and Cardinal have asked that the lawsuit not proceed until the committee has completed its work.
The suit has a litany of examples of what it says was a quiescent board. For example, at a 2001 meeting, the board's audit committee -- which included James R. Thompson, the former governor of Illinois; Richard R. Burt, a former ambassador to Germany; and Ms. Kravis -- approved the sale for $1 of two publications to Horizon Publications, a company controlled by Lord Black and David Radler, Hollinger's former chief operating officer.
The explanation of the sale of the properties, which had negative cash flow, was that their fair market value was obtained. But there was never an independent valuation or a fairness opinion. Nor did the committee even discuss, the suit says, why a company controlled by Lord Black should sell properties for so little, if a second company controlled by Lord Black obviously believed they could be profitable.
At that same meeting, the committee also agreed to raise the annual management fees paid to Ravelston, a company controlled by Lord Black more than 7 percent over the 2000 fees of $24 million.
But according to the suit's description of the minutes of the meeting, there was no independent analysis of the payments, no review of their propriety or discussions of whether those services could be obtained for less money from other companies. The meeting, which took half an hour, also approved raises for the fees paid to board members without any explanation or review of the propriety of the raises.
Cardinal Value Equity is affiliated with Cardinal Capital Management, which holds 1.869 million Hollinger shares, making it the company's seventh-largest investor.
Lord Black and Ms. Kravis declined to speak about the lawsuit and Mr. Burt did not return phone calls seeking comment. Mr. Thompson, however, did offer a comment. ''Just because someone alleges something in a lawsuit does not mean it is true,'' he said.
In another deal struck in 2000 with little board oversight, the suit says, Hollinger agreed to swap profitable newspapers that it owned for less profitable papers that belonged to a company owned by Lord Black. According to the suit, Lord Black's company, Horizon Publications, did not yet own the newspapers it planned to swap.
As to why Hollinger would swap profitable papers for less profitable papers, the company argued it would have room to improve the performance of the less profitable papers. The entire transaction, the suit said, was done on the recommendation of Mr. Radler and Jerry Strader, a Hollinger employee.
Since Mr. Radler was involved with Horizon, he could benefit from the deal, for which the board never got any independent evaluation.
After some shareholders had already raised objections about corporate spending on Lord Black, the board was informed by Hollinger's accounting firm, KPMG, that it was difficult to assess whether Lord Black's use of a corporate jet was personal or business reasons.
Nevertheless the audit committee agreed to continue to pay for the jet for security reasons. The audit committee also approved 300,000 Canadian dollars (US$231,428) that had been spent to staff one of Lord Black's homes and previously undisclosed payments to Ms. Amiel (referred to in the suit as ''Mrs. Black'').
