Every day, Terry Diaz faces the same choice: Should she suffer through the severe pain in her left knee? Or should she take medication and stay in bed?
Most days, the choice is made for her. After all, her children have to get to day care and she has to go to her job training program. So she skips the pill. She endures the pain, because her family depends on her for survival.
Ms. Diaz, 28, has a severe meniscus tear, an injury to the cartilage in her left knee, that she received in a car accident in March. Her doctor recommended surgery, but she resisted because she had no one to care for her children while she recovered.
Ms. Diaz has made some poor choices and has had to make some tough decisions, like leaving two of her four children in her father's care, but she has been accepting responsibility and doing the best she can to provide for her two daughters. She had her first child, John, when she was 16. Her son Dayvon was born two years later, in 1993. She dropped out of high school and took odd jobs to help provide for them while the family lived with her father. ''It was just a mess,'' she said.
She went to HeartShare Human Services of New York, which signed her up to receive welfare benefits. In 1999, at 24, she left her father's house, moving to an apartment in Brownsville, Brooklyn, but leaving her sons behind.
Soon after the move, Ms. Diaz became pregnant with a girl, whom she named Destiny.
''When I got pregnant with Destiny,'' she said, ''I decided I had to get my life straight.''
She tried. She worked for a time before and after Destiny was born but was laid off and forced to seek help again. That led her to the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. She went to the bureau's East New York Family Center, which helped her with counseling and money for food.
''If it wasn't for them, I don't know where I'd be right now,'' she said. ''I'd be lost in the sauce.''
In 2001, Ms. Diaz moved to an apartment on the edge of Bedford-Stuyvesant. Soon after, her daughter Kathleen was born. Ms. Diaz went to the Brooklyn Bureau's Bedford-Stuyvesant Family Center and met a caseworker, Jessie Kaufman.
When Kathleen was 6 months old, she and her sister were enrolled through welfare in a day care center in their neighborhood. Ms. Diaz was required to begin a job training program and to receive family counseling through the Brooklyn Bureau. She began training to become a home health worker for the elderly. Again she hoped to get her life straight.
But last March, Ms. Diaz was returning from a job interview with a friend when their car was struck from behind. Ms. Diaz was shaken up and felt only minor pain initially. But the next morning, she awoke to excruciating pain in her left knee, she said, and went to the hospital.
Ms. Diaz was told that she had a meniscus tear and was prescribed physical therapy and a pain medication that causes fatigue. Because she could no longer attend the job training program, her daughters were forced to leave day care. They were with her at all times, in constant motion and in need of attention. And the other constant was the pain.
These days, the pain is lessening, though slowly, she said. And she is trying, once again, to get her life straight.
''I think what's incredible about her is she had a couple of months of just feeling down, but then she got back on track,'' Ms. Kaufman said. ''She wants a better life for her kids.''
Ms. Diaz receives food stamps and $215 in rental assistance each month through welfare. The rest of her $875 rent is covered by a Section 8 subsidy. In October, she was given $243.81 from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund to buy Destiny and Kathleen winter coats, hats, gloves and day care uniforms.
And with the girls back in day care, Ms. Diaz has been able to return to the elder-care training.
''I like to help others,'' she said. ''I'm a people person.''
Her two sons still live with her father, and Ms. Diaz keeps in touch with them.
Her walk to the day care center is tough. Though just a few blocks, it seems vast. Still, she goes.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,422,350.21  Recorded Wednesday: 215,206.02  Total: $5,637,556.23  Last year to date: $5,985,811.29
