The party started in earnest 47 seconds into the second half when a 6-foot-4, 297-pound defensive end named Marcus Spears was as delicate as a ballerina as he twinkletoed 20 yards into the end zone after an interception.
The Heisman Trophy-winning quarterback, Oklahoma's Jason White, had just turned a second-and-13 on his 17-yard line into a 21-7 Louisiana State lead by drilling a pass into Spears's hands.
The party really exploded 29 minutes 13 seconds later when time finally ran out on an often ugly and mistake-prone game, but one that offered the Tigers' faithful the beautiful sight of the Sugar Bowl scoreboard -- L.S.U. 21, Oklahoma 14 -- and partial claim to the national championship.
All that was missing was a Zydeco band as the purple-and-gold-beaded and boa-wearing L.S.U. fans who dominated the crowd of 79,342 greeted the Tigers' first national title since 1958 with nifty dance steps and a full-throated roar.
It didn't matter that their beloved Bayou Bengals had turned the ball over three times -- twice when it looked as if they were about to score -- and had to take 3 points off the board when two penalties nullified a Ryan Gaudet field goal.
It didn't matter that out west in the Rose Bowl the Southern California Trojans (12-1) looked far slicker and more impressive in defeating Michigan, 28-14, on Thursday and won the No. 1 ranking in the Associated Press news media poll.
Fans for L.S.U. (13-1) will take their Bowl Championship Series title, especially after sweating out a late charge by the Sooners (12-2).
''Every time we stumbled, the defense was there to pick us up,'' said L.S.U quarterback Matt Mauck, who was 13 of 22 passing for 124 yards but threw 2 interceptions.
The coaches had agreed that the winner of this game would be the B.C.S. champion, even though U.S.C. was No. 1 in the final regular-season coaches poll.
Even a share of the national championship came with great rewards for L.S.U. His contract says that if he won a national championship, Saban was guaranteed $1 more than the highest-paid college football coach -- Oklahoma's Bob Stoops, as it turns out, at $2.3 million. Saban earned about $1.5 million this season.
This was not a pretty game. The teams combined for 19 penalties and seemed to be moving backward even when the yellow flags were not flying. White and Oklahoma, which came into this game with the nation's highest-scoring offense at more than 45 points a game, were stifled by the Tigers' defense.
The Sooners were held to 154 yards and White, who had thrown for 40 touchdowns, was an anemic 13 of 37 passing for 102 yards and threw 2 interceptions.
L.S.U. was playing a virtual home game at the Superdome, about 90 minutes from its campus in Baton Rouge, and what the Tigers' fans witnessed was L.S.U. executing to perfection the stop-Jason-White-plan designed by L.S.U.'s defensive coordinator, Will Muschamp.
The Tigers' front seven muscled, slashed and punished White from all angles, sacking him twice and burying him in the turf another half-dozen times after he let the ball fly in the first half, which ended with L.S.U. leading, 14-7.
White knew he was in for a brawl on the first series when L.S.U. defensive end Marquise Hill sent him perpendicular with a devastating hit.
On White's first pass, a 50-yard attempt from his end zone, the all-American cornerback Corey Webster and safety Jack Hunt were all over wide receiver Will Peoples. Hunt batted the ball and Webster pulled it in and returned it 18 yards to the Oklahoma 32-yard line. It took the Tigers' Skyler Green barely a minute to take a flanker reverse 24 yards to the end zone, and L.S.U. led by 7-0.
L.S.U. Coach Nick Saban had worried about keeping Oklahoma's special teams at bay. His worries were well founded, as the Sooners bounced pack in the second quarter when Brandon Shelby broke through the line to block a punt attempt by L.S.U.'s Donnie Jones and Russell Dennison smothered the ball on the Tigers' 1-yard line. It took three tries, but Oklahoma running back Kejuan Jones finally got in the end zone and the score was tied, 7-7.
But Mauck rolled the Tigers 80 yards on nine plays in a ball-control drive that showed all of L.S.U's weapons. When Justin Vincent scampered 18 yards for a touchdown and a 14-7 lead, L.S.U seemed to have shaken off the early jitters that were embodied by Mauck's mishandling of the snap at the Oklahoma 1-yard line on the opening drive. When the Tigers were not turning the ball over, they controlled it all and amassed 312 yards.
''We did what we needed to do on offense,'' Saban said. ''I think the real turning point of the game was when they blocked the punt, we went 80 yards to score and answered the bell.''
When Spears took White's interception into the end zone, the L.S.U. fans sensed they were on the verge of a title. Still, Oklahoma's Brodney Pool intercepted Mauck's pass and returned it 49 yards to the L.S.U. 31. The Sooners finally got on the board in the second half when Jones barreled into the end zone from a yard out to narrow the score to 21-14.
Now, the Tigers had to persevere through two harrowing last-gasp drives from Oklahoma. The first was aided by one L.S.U. penalty after another all the way to the Tigers' 12. With 2:52 remaining, Oklahoma faced fourth-and-10.
White dropped back, shuffled his feet as he surveyed the field and then fired a bullet to the middle of the end zone, where Mark Clayton appeared to be streaking to an opening. But L.S.U defensive back Jessie Daniels deflected enough of the ball to send it ricocheting into Clayton's stomach, and he was unable to hang on.
Still, the L.S.U. offense was stuck in neutral and had to punt the ball away, giving the Sooners one last chance to tie the score. With a little over two minutes remaining, Oklahoma had the ball at its own 49.
The Sooners stayed there as White failed to complete pass after pass, leading to another all-or-nothing fourth-and-10. Fittingly, the Tigers' defense finished the game as it started it, by burying White. Middle linebacker Lionel Turner barreled through the middle of the line and crunched White on his 40-yard line.
The Tigers defense forced White into eight straight incompletions to finish the game. In the bowels of the Superdome, that was enough for a championship, even it must be split with U.S.C.
''I don't know how you can't consider us a national champion,'' Mauck said.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
