The road that led Vadim Perelman to the job of directing the highly praised drama ''House of Sand and Fog,'' his first movie, was not exactly traditional in film circles.
It did not, for example, lead through film school. (He dropped out.) It did not even lead through high school. (He earned an equivalency degree.) And until relatively recently it did not lead to Hollywood. (He was born in Kiev in the former Soviet Union, ended up destitute with his mother outside Rome and lived on the streets of Edmonton, Alberta, as a teenager.)
But the road did lead Mr. Perelman to many places in his life he can now say -- with the benefit of time and distance -- that he is glad he went. Like the dishwashing jobs, the nights spent pumping gas for tips at self-service gas stations. Or the time he was arrested in Canada, accused of robbery, and a police officer threatened to deport him, the most frightening prospect he could imagine. ''Please don't mention it,'' he said the other day, laughing, able to do so at age 40. ''They might reopen the case.''
Mr. Perelman said he considered himself lucky because if he had not experienced such fear and pain in his youth he would have probably never made the movie he managed to make. Based on a best-selling novel by Andre Dubus III, ''House of Sand and Fog'' tells the story of a troubled California woman who loses her house to an Iranian ex-colonel, who buys it to try to give his family a foothold in America. The battle that ensues between the characters, played by Ben Kingsley and Jennifer Connelly, is often hard to watch -- a kind of Greek tragedy played out on the real estate pages, one of the worst settings for tragedy.
In many ways, the parallels between Mr. Dubus's story and Mr. Perelman's life are extraordinary. The ex-colonel's fierce determination to adapt to a new culture without losing his identity and self-respect echoed loudly for Mr. Perelman, whose father died in a car accident when he was 9, leaving him and his mother to try to seek a better life in another country.
In one scene, Mr. Kingsley's character, who works part time at a gas station, is threatened with deportation by an angry police officer, just as Mr. Perelman was. In fact, Mr. Perelman even modeled Mr. Kingsley's wardrobe on that of his step-father, a proud, stubborn Russian immigrant whose demands drove Mr. Perelman to leave home for good at 17 in Edmonton. (He lived for a while in the basement of a house owned by a friend's grandmother, who collected welfare on him. ''It was total welfare fraud,'' he said. ''She sat there all day drinking vodka and screaming at us. 'Shut up!' she used to say. 'I'm watching my stories.' '')
In a late-afternoon interview in the plush lobby of the Royalton Hotel in Manhattan, Mr. Perelman said he became obsessed with Mr. Dubus's book when he first read it on an airplane -- interestingly, on a flight from Rome to Canada, the same trip he made as a teenager with $28 in his pocket. By the time he read the book, he had become a successful director of television commercials but was yearning to do something more meaningful. On the plane that day, he devoured the book, cried as he read it and started making calls to try to buy the film rights before he had even left the terminal.
''I said: 'This is it. I've finally found something to do with my life,' '' he recalled.
He phoned Mr. Dubus, who had turned down dozens of similar offers, and spent two hours on the phone making his case. ''I told him about my life,'' he said, ''the same way I'm telling you. I also told him that some people would probably take the book away from him, this child he had worked on for four years, and try to raise it in their own way, with their own morals. Maybe they'll even try to chop off an arm. I said, 'I promise you, Andre, I will die for this.' ''
At the end of the conversation, their first, Mr. Dubus told Mr. Perelman that he had the job.
In making the movie, Mr. Perelman said, his obsession often made him difficult to work with. Mr. Kingsley has described him, admiringly, as a World War II tank. In a recent profile in Newsweek, Mr. Perelman was portrayed, much less admiringly, as being nearly as destructive as a tank, alienating agents and stars. But he argues that he does not deserve such a reputation and does not want it.
''I think sometimes people mistake exuberance and enthusiasm for something else,'' he said.
''If anything,'' he added, ''it's because it's my first time. I didn't quite know the protocols.'' (In the Newsweek article, he jokingly describes Harvey Weinstein, the co-chairman of Miramax Films, as looking like Jabba the Hut from ''Star Wars.'')
Michael London, one of the movie's producers, said that without almost unbending determination Mr. Perelman never would have been able to take a dark, violent, less-than-commercial story, one he loved, and actually see it onto the screen with major stars and the backing of a studio, DreamWorks.
''I think you can safely say it just doesn't happen,'' Mr. London said.
''Vadim is a bull in a china shop, no doubt about it,'' he said, adding that Mr. Perelman's determination to make the right movie ''pushed everyone around him to the brink.'' But ultimately it was all in service of a worthy goal.
''He had a completely single-minded focus on making this movie live forever,'' Mr. London said. ''And whatever happened to Vadim after that I think he really didn't care.''
The afternoon Mr. Perelman was interviewed, Mr. Kingsley had just been nominated for a Golden Globe award for his performance, beginning the inevitable speculation about whether the movie could also earn Oscar nominations.
Mr. Perelman, almost convincingly, said that he did not care much one way or the other. He said that he had already pleased the only other people besides himself that he ever really wanted to please with the movie -- Mr. Dubus and his own mother.
He recalled a time in his early teens when he and his mother, poor and desperate in Canada, were walking in the bitter cold together at Christmas time. His mother looked into the windows of houses, where she could see families celebrating and laughing, and she began to cry.
''And I said, 'Mom, one day there will be a holiday on our street, too,' '' Mr. Perelman recalled, his eyes filling with tears. ''She reminds me of that a lot these days.''
