Separated by a dozen lockers, Eddie George and Steve McNair buttoned their suits slowly Saturday night after a rugged evening of having their muscles and joints rearranged by the Baltimore Ravens.
They walked out of the locker room believing they had limped over their toughest mental and physical hurdle with a 20-17 victory over the Ravens and could look ahead to the remainder of the playoffs with unfettered faith.
''Our goal is to get a championship,'' said George, the Tennessee Titans running back who helped his team advance to an American Football Conference divisional playoff game against the top-seeded New England Patriots on Saturday in Foxboro, Mass. ''Not a lot of people believed in us. We just believed in each other.''
Of the remaining teams in the postseason, the Titans may be best equipped to handle the resistance they will face on the road to Super Bowl XXXVIII in Houston on Feb. 1.
Their 13-4 record, which includes a 6-3 mark on the road, is born of a robustness that seems immune to either pain or a loud environment (which New England's Gillette Stadium qualifies).
Inside the Titans' locker room is a blend of athletes yearning to create a legacy after falling short four years ago in a 23-16 loss to the St. Louis Rams in Super Bowl XXXIV and losing to the Oakland Raiders in the A.F.C. title game last season.
The Titans play their home games on the banks of the Cumberland River in Nashville, a city known for music, not professional sports.
The entire Titans franchise has adopted a renegade spirit that manifests itself in doling out punishment for any perceived slight.
''We play better with a chip on our shoulder,'' Titans safety Lance Schulters said. ''We like to go on the road because we have no pressure on us.
''The other teams have the pressure on them.''
The Titans will test this theory for the second time this season against the Patriots (14-2), who did not lose a game at home this season and defeated Tennessee, 38-30, on Oct. 5 in Foxboro. The victory began New England's 12-game winning streak to close the regular season.
In the first meeting, both teams moved the ball. Tennessee led, 27-24, with 4 minutes 40 seconds to play but could not hold on. New England cornerback Ty Law intercepted a McNair pass and returned it for a touchdown with just under two minutes to play.
New England was one of the few teams to find success on the ground against the Titans, who had the league's top defense against the run. The Patriots rushed 27 times for 161 yards, the most rushing yards the Titans allowed all season. Tennessee allowed an average of 75.6 yards in the other 15 games.
Since that game, the Patriots have been pounding their opponents. Gillette Stadium became an even tougher place for visitors when the temperatures dropped and the snow drifts rose.
New England Coach Bill Belichick was named the league's coach of the year for patching together a roster that, at a quick glance, looks unspectacular but meets each challenge with a determined efficiency.
For Tennessee, the health of its skill position players continues to be the central theme.
With McNair already nursing a strained right calf and a sprained left ankle that also has a cracked bone spur, add George (dislocated left shoulder) and cornerback Samari Rolle (mild concussion) to the list of Tennessee's beat-up starters after the wild-card victory over the Ravens.
George played through his injury and rushed for 88 yards.
He had a magnetic resonance imaging exam on Sunday, and The Associated Press reported that Fisher said George had much more flexibility in his shoulder and no structural damage.
It would be a shock if George sat out Saturday. He has not missed a game in his eight-year career.
''No doubt Eddie is a warrior,'' Titans defensive end Jevon Kearse said. ''He's not going to give up that easily.''
Brad Hopkins, the Titans' left offensive tackle, said: ''Eddie? The dude is a freight train.''
With Baltimore fading in their rear-view mirror, the Titans still have a perilous journey. If they can upend New England, a road game against either Indianapolis (13-4) or Kansas City (13-3) will follow just one step short of a return trip to the Super Bowl.
''We do better when people doubt us,'' said Rolle, an ice pack affixed to his back on Saturday night. ''We were a 12-4 team and you would have thought that Baltimore was the 12-4 team.''
Tennessee receiver Derrick Mason said: ''We are on the road. So be it. The accomplishment is going to come when we make it to the Super Bowl.''
PRO FOOTBALL
