TRAVELOCITY, the online travel agency that has lost substantial ground to Expedia and Orbitz in the last two years, hopes that a gallivanting gnome can help reverse its fortunes.
Travelocity's new advertising campaign borrows a conceit from the French film ''Amélie,'' in which a garden gnome stolen from its owner is lugged around the world and photographed in various iconic locales. In the rendition by Travelocity's advertising agency, McKinney &amp; Silver, a unit of Havas based in Raleigh, N.C., a gnome uses Travelocity to embark on adventures like cliff-diving in Mexico and cheese-eating in Quebec.
At $80 million, the campaign is the largest in the company's eight-year history. The success of the campaign is vital to the financial well-being of the money-losing Travelocity, a unit of Sabre Holdings.
Henry Harteveldt, principal analyst at Forrester Research, said, ''2004 will be the year in which Travelocity will defend its No.2 position or potentially lose that forever to Orbitz and become a perennial No.3. If that's the case, then Sabre has lost the game. Nobody remembers or cares about the No.3 player.''
Travelocity dominated the online-travel agency business two years ago. According to PhoCusWright, a travel research firm, Travelocity accounted for 32 percent of United States online travel agency sales in 2001; this year it is No.2, with 20 percent of sales. Expedia, which had 30 percent of the market in 2001, has jumped ahead and now generates 40 percent of sales, according to PhoCusWright.
Orbitz, which began operating in June 2001 and is controlled by a group of airlines, has climbed to a 17 percent share of the online travel agency market, from 8 percent in 2001.
Industry analysts attribute some of Travelocity's decline to its decision in 2000 to obtain hotel room inventory from Hotels.com, a consolidator, rather than through special agreements like those Expedia has negotiated directly with hotels.
Lorraine Sileo, an analyst with PhoCusWright, said Expedia's agreements allowed it to sell hotel rooms at a 15 percent to 30 percent profit margin.
She estimates that Travelocity's agreement with Hotels.com -- which ended last summer -- meant that its profit margins on hotel sales were roughly half those of Expedia because it had to pay Hotels.com a commission on sales. Travelocity began developing its own hotel program in late 2002.
Analysts also fault Travelocity for being slow to develop customized vacation packages combining flights and hotels and other activities. Expedia introduced this option in 2001, but Travelocity only did so last year.
The chief executive of Travelocity, Michelle A. Peluso, said the fact that the company trailed Expedia in offering its own hotel and vacation programs was not necessarily a disadvantage.
''Sometimes when you're not first to market, if you're smart about it you can develop a better product for suppliers and consumers,'' she said. ''That's what we did.''
Paul Keung, an analyst for CIBC World Markets, said Travelocity has also been hurt by a five-year, $200 million agreement it signed in 2000 to become AOL's exclusive travel reservations engine. Although the two companies share whatever advertising revenues AOL's travel channels generate, Mr. Keung said the agreement had not been as profitable as expected because of declines in AOL's subscriber base.
The results of these agreements have made a dent in Travelocity's bottom line. While Travelocity posted a net profit of $12.2 million in 2001, Sabre Holdings said the agency had an operating loss of $17.4 million in the first nine months of 2003, compared with an operating loss of $2.5 million in the first nine months of 2002. Sabre Holdings repurchased Travelocity in 2002 after spinning it off in 2000.
Travelocity's competitors, meanwhile, have used engaging and sometimes wacky advertising, as well as deal-making, to become profitable. Expedia, a unit of InterActiveCorp, has consistently been in the black since the first quarter of 2001. It had a profit of $66 million in 2002, and profits of $26.9 million and $41.3 million in the first and second quarters of 2003.
InterActiveCorp -- which bought a controlling interest in Expedia in 2002 and the remainder of the company last August, and which also owns Hotels.com and the discount online travel company Hotwire -- no longer breaks out Expedia's earnings. But its travel companies, of which Expedia is the largest, reported operating income of $80.1 million in the third quarter of 2003.
Orbitz, which raised $316 million in an initial public offering last month, posted a profit of $3.8 million in the fourth quarter of 2002 and a profit of $3.9 million in the third quarter of 2003, according to the offer's registration statement.
Travelocity executives hope the humorous new campaign can help the company attain those profitable heights as well.
''It's a concerted effort to help differentiate Travelocity from our competitors as a site for savvy travelers,'' said Susan McLaughlin, Travelocity's vice president for marketing and merchandising.
Although the new advertising begins today, the company introduced a teaser campaign in mid-December. This effort included small ads that described the missing gnome and listed the address of a Web site, www.whereismygnome.com, which in turn contains a pseudo-newscast featuring a television reporter who discusses the theft of the gnome. The newscast also ran as a TV spot during the broadcast of the Rose Bowl on Thursday.
''Because we only have one chance to relaunch the brand, we wanted to do it in a big way, with a teaser campaign,'' said David Baldwin, executive creative director of McKinney &amp; Silver, which replaced the Richards Group in Dallas as Travelocity's agency in October. ''It's all about generating conversation.''
Why a gnome? ''When we looked at the category, we found people had functional bonds to the sites but no emotional bonds,'' Mr. Baldwin said. ''One way to create this bond is through likeability, and the gnome is a very likable character.''
Ms. Sileo of PhoCusWright said customers' reactions to the traveling gnome would be critical because Travelocity's rivals also planned to step up their marketing efforts.
''Because travel is such a commodity, there are only two things that are proprietary to an online agency, its brand and its technology,'' Ms. Sileo said, adding that consumers who spend on travel on average shop around on three Web sites before they make a purchase. ''It's got to keep its brand out there, it always has to be top of mind.''
Ms. Peluso of Travelocity said her company had not started advertising its new products until now because they were under development.
''2004 is very different for us,'' she said. ''We have a better product than our competitors. We're very excited, and now we can scream it from the mountaintops.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
