With a victory over the Calgary Flames tonight at Madison Square Garden, the Rangers can tie the Islanders for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference.
The Rangers (16-14-5-3) recently concluded a successful trip, winning three of four games. But they still have to contend with their season-long struggles on special teams and Mike Dunham's inconsistent play in goal over the last two months.
After the Rangers' only loss on the trip, by 5-4 in St. Louis on Thursday night, Eric Lindros and Aleksei Kovalev called for Coach Glen Sather to have the Rangers practice the power play more. The next day in St. Louis, Sather responded, sort of.
He had the Rangers practice skating five on three.
The Rangers had no five-on-three opportunities in their 4-1 victory in Pittsburgh on Saturday and no power-play goals in four chances against the lowly Penguins, who are 28th in penalty killing in the N.H.L.
Over their last seven games, the Rangers are 3 for 31 on the power play, with one of the goals coming on a two-man advantage in St. Louis.
For the season, the Rangers are 21st in power-play efficiency, with 21 goals in 149 chances, a success rate of 14 percent. Kovalev, who scored 11 power-play goals last season, has not scored a power-play goal this season. Lindros has one.
On Thursday, the Blues, who are third in power-play efficiency at 21.9 percent, scored four power-play goals against the Rangers.
''That's because Dougie Weight moves around,'' Sather said Friday of the Blues' center, who recorded three power-play assists against the Rangers. ''It's also about getting to rebounds in front of the net.''
Sather said that he asked Lindros about his comments and that Lindros maintained he had been quoted out of context. ''He told me he said when we have some time, we need to work on some things,'' Sather said.
The Rangers -- the most penalized team in the N.H.L., averaging 19.6 minutes a game -- are 27th in the league at penalty killing (81.5 percent).
Then there is Dunham, who has been pulled from two of his last three starts. With a 2.72 goals against average in 27 appearances, Dunham ranks 42nd of 51 goalies with 10 or more appearances. Dunham (9-12-4) is 37th in save percentage at .906.
The Rangers, meanwhile, are 6-1-1 over the last eight games started by Dunham's backup, Jussi Markkanen.
Dunham will make $3.3 million this season. Should he continue to falter, Sather might make a bid for Phoenix goaltender Sean Burke, who will earn $4.5 million but could be available because of the play of Brian Boucher, who recorded his third consecutive shutout yesterday.
HOCKEY
