A 16-year-old whom an investigator described as an innocent bystander was shot and killed by a stray bullet from a gun battle as he arrived at a cousin's birthday party in Far Rockaway, Queens, on Saturday night. Another teenager, who was thought to have been involved in the gunfight, was also killed and a third was critically wounded, the police said.
Darrell Kelley, an uncle of the woman who was celebrating her 19th birthday at her home at 285 Beach 15th Street, said he had stepped out to smoke a cigarette when he saw two groups of unruly teenagers coming up the street.
Hearing shots, he said, he ducked back inside, and when the gunfire ended, other guests told him that his nephew Frank Francois Jr. had been shot. ''We were like, we didn't know Frankie was here,'' Mr. Kelley said. ''He never reached the party.''
The youth, shot once in the groin, died a few hours later at St. John's Episcopal Hospital in Far Rockaway. Rashard Peppers, 17, of the Redfern Houses in Far Rockaway, was also killed by a shot to his left shoulder, the police said. Another 17-year-old, whose name was not released by the police, was in critical condition at Jamaica Hospital Medical Center with a gunshot wound in his back.
Both Rashard and the wounded youth had arrest records, the authorities said. Rashard had been arrested on charges of robbery, trespassing and marijuana possession; the wounded youth on robbery and trespassing charges.
The police said that they did not know how many or what type of guns had been used in the altercation and that by last night, no arrests had been made. There was no indication that the shooting was gang-related, according to a police spokeswoman.
Sandra Green, whose daughter was celebrating her birthday, said another 16-year-old nephew had been outside the house during the party when the two groups of young men, dressed mostly in black, came by and demanded to know if there was a party in the house, According to the nephew, who would not give his name: ''They said, 'Is there a party going on here?' I said, 'No, there's no party.' I told them to go home.''
Ms. Green said the commotion died down and the party continued. She was greeting guests, she said, when the shooting began. ''He comes to our birthday party and he never makes it home,'' she said of her nephew who was killed. ''What am I supposed to say to my sister?''
At the Francois home in Queens Village, Frank Francois Sr. sat on the porch, crying and demanding to know why his son had died. The family said that the youth was a junior at Newtown High School in Elmhurst, played basketball and liked to draw.
''My son wasn't a troublemaker,'' Mr. Francois said. ''He was no pushover. He wasn't involved in any violence. He didn't hang out on street corners.''
At Rashard Pepper's home, a woman who identified herself as a cousin answered the door but said she did not want to talk to reporters.
