Here's a word of advice: If you or a friend are ever signed to a record label, and the company schedules your CD for release the first week in January, find another record label. With the offices of major record labels closed and no one around to promote the music, it means that your label just doesn't care whether you succeed or fail.
So rather than look at the week's meager new releases, below is a handful of CD's from last year that almost slipped by without notice. They range from rock to rap to soul to international music, but what they all have in common is that they are new and interesting takes on genres from previous decades.
'A Guide for the Daylight Hours'  Ballboy
Last year was a strong one for Scottish indie-rock bands. Belle &amp; Sebastian released ''Dear Catastrophe Waitress,'' their best album since ''If You're Feeling Sinister''; the Delgados released their most ambitious and orchestrated record to date, ''Hate''; and after a series of provocative EP's, Ballboy finally released its debut full-length album, ''A Guide for the Daylight Hours'' (Manifesto).
Ballboy fits squarely into a tradition of brainy, idiosyncratic, thick-accented bands that emerged from Britain in the 80's, such as the Wedding Present and Half Man Half Biscuit. Its ''Daylight Hours'' stands as one of the best indie-rock releases of last year. That CD's potency lies in the match of softly fuzzed-out guitars, string arrangements that take each song to a crescendo, and the wickedly dry wit of the singer Gordon McIntyre. In some of the band's best moments, Mr. McIntyre delivers spoken, conversational monologues over a swirl of cello-driven rock.
An elementary school teacher by day, Mr. McIntyre specializes in feeling the weight of the world, jilting the women who don't jilt him and not being as hip as people who work at record stores. And he is proud to be this way, stubbornly so. ''A fear of failure won't hold me back from hoping someday you'll be mine,'' he sings in ''I Wonder if You're Drunk Enough to Sleep With Me Tonight.'' With song titles like ''I Lost You but I Found Country Music'' and ''Sex Is Boring,'' this CD is clever and engaging at every turn.
'Deb (heart broken)'  Souad Massi
With a beautiful voice and a large palette of influences to draw from, Souad Massi is one of the most interesting new singers to come from North Africa. Influenced equally by shaabi music, French chanson, flamenco, 60's American folk and a variety of African traditional music, this Algerian guitarist and chanteuse (now living in Paris) makes music that is at once exotic and familiar.
The music on her second CD, ''Deb (heart broken)'' (Wrasse Records), is heavy with ache -- for love gone wrong, for lost innocence and for the plight of her home country. Yet underneath the gloom and homesickness, not unlike the music of the Cape Verde singer Cesaria Evora, the sun still shines and celebration is still possible. In nearly every song on this wonderfully arranged and beautifully sung CD, evil does battle with good. Evil seems to win every time, but the music stands as testament to a hope and spirit that cannot be dimmed, let alone vanquished.
Three CD's  Subtitle
A Los Angeles record-store employee by day, Subtitle (a k a Giovanni Marks) sits at the fringe of the hip-hop avant-garde. This year alone, he released at least three CD's -- ''You Won't See Me'' (Marks03 Recordings), the EP ''I'm Always Recovering From Tomorrow'' (Gold Standard Laboratories) and ''Lost Love Stays Lost'' (Marks03). The rap world equivalent of a low-fi rock band, Subtitle seems blissfully ignorant of recording quality and glitch-free vocals. Musically and lyrically, he prefers the world of the abstract rather than that of the streets and clubs. Though off-putting at first, his CD's reveal, on closer listening, a smart, lovable recluse who cares about hip-hop and responsible living. His newest release, ''You Won't See Me,'' is his most accessible work in terms of production, lyrics and samples, but it is still far from easy listening.
'The Wonder of Stevie'  DJ Spinna and Bobbito
''The Wonder of Stevie'' (Harmless) is a tribute album once removed. Its two CD's are a love letter to the countless covers of Stevie Wonder-related songs by jazz, soul, funk and Latin bands. The first CD is a mix by DJ Spinna and Bobbito, who lead an annual Wonder-themed party; the second presents the same songs complete and unadulterated. The superior disc here is the D.J.'s take on the songs, which boasts a near-perfect sequence and flow, mixing from Ray Barretto's hot ''Pastime Paradise'' jam into Sergio Mendes and Brasil 77's cinematic ''Superstition'' butchery.
New CD's
