Mike Tranghese, the coordinator of the Bowl Championship Series, said Sunday that the formula for creating a national title game had failed this season by leaving Southern California out of the Sugar Bowl. The Trojans were No. 1 in polls by the news media and the coaches.
''Never in our wildest dreams did we think we could have the No. 1 team in both the human polls not here playing for the national championship,'' Tranghese said at the Superdome before the B.C.S. title game between Oklahoma and Louisiana State. ''We've got to do something different.''
Tranghese, also commissioner of the Big East, said he would like to see a selection committee formed, much like the one used by the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament. That committee selects and determines seedings for the top 65 men's teams.
Such a committee might have overruled the B.C.S. computers, which determined that the Sooners and the Tigers, both 12-1, were the top two teams in the nation, primarily because they played a stronger schedule than U.S.C.'s. The Trojans were 11-1 at the end of the season and ranked No. 1 in the Associated Press and the USA Today/ESPN polls.
U.S.C. drubbed Michigan, 28-14, in the Rose Bowl, and will almost certainly remain the No. 1 team in the A.P. poll, but the winner of the Sugar Bowl will be designated the champion of the coaches poll.
Tranghese was uncertain whether the commissioners of the five other B.C.S. conferences -- Atlantic Coast, Southeastern, Big Ten, Big 12 and Pacific-10 -- would agree to a selection-committee arrangement.
''It could replace the polls and computer services, or it could be used in conjunction with them when situations like this arise,'' Tranghese said. ''We talked about it two years ago and it did not have much support. I don't know if what happened this year would change that.''
He said the conferences' commissioners would discuss several options for improving the system when they meet in April. Among them would be requiring a team to win its conference to qualify for the national championship game. The Sooners failed to do that; they lost, 35-7, to Kansas State in the Big 12 championship game. U.S.C. won the Pac-10, which does not have a title game.
Tranghese said he favored either scaling back or eliminating the number of computer services, which now stands at seven.
One of the reasons for the current controversy is what could be considered a blind spot in some of the B.C.S. computers. Some do not take into consideration at what point in the season a team loses a game. The Sooners lost in their final game before the bowl season.
Another issue for the B.C.S. involves conferences not affiliated with the series; they continue to push for greater access after being left out of the B.C.S. and the more than $90 million that it generates annually.
Tranghese said the commissioners would consider adding another bowl game and greater revenue sharing.
It is likely, too, that the B.C.S. name will be changed when the current contract expires after the 2005 season. Presidents of non-B.C.S. universities have said that their teams have been branded as second rate.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
