For the Nets, each visit to Madison Square Garden used to be a reminder of everything they lacked. Now it is a reminder of one crucial advantage they always enjoy.
The Knicks obviously have more banners, more fans and a more venerable arena than the Nets, their cross-river rivals. But they are still searching for a point guard, while the Nets could not be more secure in the hands of Jason Kidd. Once again last night, the Nets left the Garden thankful they are not the team playing musical point guards. Kidd conducts their concerto no matter what.
He has made a recent habit of starting slowly, then raising his play when it matters most.
After making only 5 of 19 shots through three quarters last night, he furrowed his brow and narrowed his gaze. Kidd scored 14 consecutive points in the fourth quarter, making six shots in a row and finishing with a season-high 35 points and 13 assists. The Nets rode him to a 95-85 victory, their 10th in 11 games against the Knicks, and celebrated wildly on the court.
''I didn't go gun-shy,'' Kidd said. ''It was do or die, time to stop playing around. It was time to make it tough on them.''
Kidd enhanced the degree of difficulty. He hit a fadeaway against three defenders, a layup against two and a pull-up jumper that left the Knicks on a swivel. When the score tied at 60-60, Kidd scored or assisted on 26 of the Nets' next 27 points, single-handedly sparking a 17-2 run that put the Nets ahead by 87-72. His former teammate Keith Van Horn, now a Knicks forward, said it was the best he had seen Kidd shoot.
After making 11 of 27 field-goal attempts, Kidd backed off and let his teammates finish. He kicked the ball out to Kerry Kittles for two 3-pointers that extended the lead to 85-72. The Knicks called a timeout, but Kidd responded by nailing Kenyon Martin with a length-of-the-court pass that set up a violent jam.
''Jason played inspired,'' Kittles said. ''He was looking to make plays but was smart enough to see what they were giving him. He was spectacular.''
When the Knicks and the Nets meet, Kidd shows how one point guard can outshine a handful of them. With the Knicks' new starter, Frank Williams, out with a strained left groin muscle, Charlie Ward started, but Moochie Norris played more. They had a tough assignment, as Kidd was already in the midst of his best stretch this season.
He had consecutive triple-doubles at Detroit and Indiana last weekend, had 23 points in 29 minutes against Golden State on Wednesday and upstaged LeBron James with 26 points Friday. He is making his trademark passes in the open court and looking for his shot more regularly.
''I've seen him being Jason Kidd, best point guard in the league,'' Coach Byron Scott said. ''He's playing with a lot of energy every single game and it gets everybody else going.''
Through the first month of the season, the Nets feared that Kidd's sore left knee would limit him for an extended period. After undergoing extensive treatment, he has regained full strength in the knee, and the rest of his game has subsequently healed.
Kidd tends to get an extra jolt at the Garden, using it as a personal springboard. In December 2002 he scored 39 points here, and last March he made three playground-style passes in the first quarter, setting up a blowout.
Kidd seems to take these meetings personally. When he came to New Jersey in 2001, he immediately pointed out that the Nets were the second-best team in the area, but he promised they would not be for long. Ever since, he has relished bus rides to Manhattan almost as much as playoff trips to Boston.
''If you can't get up playing in this building, you can't play anywhere,'' Kidd said. ''I've always enjoyed coming to the mecca.''
REBOUNDS
EDDIE GRIFFIN plans to join the Nets on Wednesday, and they will have to release one player and place Griffin on the injured list. Coach BYRON SCOTT said the rookie point guard ZORAN PLANINIC could come off the injured list because he has improved his approach to practice. . . . The backup center AARON WILLIAMS was set to play last night for the first time in more than two weeks, but he aggravated his pulled groin muscle in warm-ups and had to sit out again.
PRO BASKETBALL
