Before they went to Bam, before the huge earthquake left them bleeding and choking on thick dust, trapped under the wreckage of their mud brick guest house, Tobb Dell'Oro told Adele Freedman that he was not going to buy her a diamond ring to mark their engagement.
He seemed to change his mind in the pitch-black silence beneath the rubble, where the couple could not see each other or even move, where their only physical contact was touching the tip of one finger across the hours it took to dig them out.
''He asked what kind of ring I wanted, how big I wanted it,'' said Ms. Freedman, weeping Sunday in the Tehran hospital bed where she has spent the last eight days with fractures in her feet and ankles. ''I told him it didn't matter, just get us out of here.''
A rescue party organized by their energetic tour guide, Farzaneh Khademi, eventually extracted the couple. Ms. Freedman, 39, survived, traveling 600 miles in a series of nightmarish car rides and hospital stops that eventually landed her in one of Iran's best private hospitals.
Mr. Dell'Oro, 41, did not. The strapping 6-foot-2-inch engineer was speaking when they pulled him out, but was bleeding heavily from a wound in his upper chest, pierced perhaps by a ceiling fan. He died in an ambulance along the roughly 150-mile ride to the nearest functioning hospital in a town called Mahan.
Ms. Freedman, who expects to travel Monday to her family's home in Great Neck, N.Y., learned about her fiancé's death when her parents, Philip and Annamae, arrived here two days ago and told her. Ms. Khademi and the diplomats from the Swiss Embassy who handle United States affairs in Tehran had been too worried about the shock to tell her, suggesting instead that he had been lost in the post-earthquake bedlam.
It was all adventure travel run seriously amok, not what the couple anticipated when first drawn together by shared dreams of the exotic.
Lying in her hospital bed, Ms. Freedman whirled through all their fateful decisions. First was the decision to come to Iran after delaying it for many years. Then came the decision to stay in the little nine-room Akbar Guest House in the center of Bam, rather than the characterless modern hotel on the outskirts where they had reservations. Finally, there was Mr. Dell'Oro's insistence that they take the room with a window, just in case a fire erupted or something, rather than the room with no window that emerged unscathed.
''Oh, Mommy, I feel like we made so many bad decisions,'' Ms. Freedman sobbed, her mother rushing over to comfort her.
''You didn't make any bad decisions, Adele, it's not your fault at all, never think that,'' her mother soothed.
It started in June 1998, when the couple met at a party near San Francisco. She was living in Mountain View, working in a small corporate law firm; he lived in Redwood City, running a telecommunications market research company with his sister. Both of them had graduated from Cornell University in the mid-1980's, but never crossed paths.
They struck up a conversation about wanting to travel to Bhutan. Mr. Dell'Oro expressed amazement that he had met a woman who knew where Bhutan was, but did not ask for her number. He finally got in contact that fall, just as she was starting treatment for rectal cancer. She did not expect him to stick around. Instead, he would leave work to come lift her out of bed when she was too weak.
To celebrate the end of her treatment, they traveled. It was mostly exotic destinations -- Laos and Cambodia and Morocco -- but there were occasional romantic weeks in places like Bordeaux.
''We were always looking for a little bit of adventure, history and someplace where it wouldn't be expected to go,'' she said.
Walking down the Champs-Élysées in Paris in April 2000, they spotted an Iran Air office and Mr. Dell'Oro wondered aloud if that might be a destination. They went in to ask and were assured they could go, that Ms. Freedman just needed to add a scarf to the coat she was wearing and she would be within the rules for hejab, or modest dress.
Mr. Dell'Oro grew up in Saudi Arabia and had taken a couple of childhood vacations in Iran. He wanted to see it again.
''I was afraid it would be dangerous,'' Ms. Freedman said. ''I am Jewish, and I was a little afraid of that. I was a little afraid of the hejab and running afoul of those laws.''
After discovering that the clothing strictures were not so bad, she agreed. She thought they would at least be safe from bombings.
Mr. Dell'Oro was in his element in Iran. He hated the American view of the region, he told his fiancée, often writing his congressman to object to American policy there.
In the bazaars, he ran around with a little Persian phrase book and opened it at random to read the first sentence he found, drawing big laughs from the Iranians.
After reaching Bam on Christmas Day, they explored its ancient citadel that once dominated the Silk Road. ''You could close your eyes and imagine what life was like 2,000 years ago,'' said Ms. Freedman, smiling at the memory of what had been the largest adobe structure on earth.
The earthquake jolted the town at dawn, killing about one-third of the 97,000 residents.
Ms. Freedman tried to get out of bed but her legs were pinned on the floor by rubble, her face stuck in her pillow. Mr. Dell'Oro made it out of his twin bed and was coming toward her when the ceiling fell.
''The first thing he said was 'Help me Adele, help me,' and I should have known then he was really badly hurt because he wanted to save me, he wasn't the kind of person who asked for help,'' she remembered.
Eventually they heard Ms. Khademi, their tour guide, calling their names and Mr. Dell'Oro answered, ''Baleh, baleh'' -- yes in Persian.
Ms. Khademi had raced in from the hotel outside town but needed time to find volunteers to dig. The weight on the couple began to ease. Ms. Freedman said she screamed and hit the man pulling her out because of the pain in her legs.
Moved into a car, Ms. Freedman could not see without her glasses, but she could hear Mr. Dell'Oro saying the bleeding had to be stopped.
He was transferred to an ambulance, and she thought he was heading for surgery. Ms. Khademi was at his side in the emergency room in Mahan, telling the doctor she would give her own blood. The doctor lifted Mr. Dell'Oro's eyelids and told her gently that there was no point, Ms. Khademi said.
In the meantime, Ms. Freedman had been carried from one hallway to the next. A passing doctor saw her foot turned completely around and wrenched it back into place. She was again afraid to say she was American, but everyone she encountered offered what help they could, she said, emphasizing that everyone had treated them kindly.
The Iranian government has said it will pay her medical costs.
Ms. Freedman had hoped to travel home with Mr. Dell'Oro's body, or at least go to the morgue in Tehran to see him, touch him one last time. But the logistics proved too difficult.
''I felt like I did not say goodbye,'' she said through tears. ''I was just screaming at him not to die.''
