As a NASA spacecraft hurtled toward Mars at 12,000 miles an hour late Saturday night, space enthusiasts around the world waited nervously for word that the latest in a string of missions there had gone as planned.
Just minutes after piercing the Martian atmosphere, a robotic rover, called Spirit, bounced into a crater the size of Connecticut and radioed back to Earth that it was safe. About 11:35 p.m. Eastern time, live television images of jubilant flight controllers at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., shattered the fears of many that the mission, like some before it, might end in failure.
Of the more than 30 attempts to send spacecraft to Mars, only about a dozen have succeeded. The latest presumed casualty was the British-built Beagle 2, which tried to land on the planet Dec. 24 but has not been heard from since.
Jon Wiley, a founding member of the Mars Society, a space advocacy group, who was vacationing in Belize, devoted his attention to Mars television coverage on Saturday night. When the news came that Spirit had successfully sent a signal from more than 100 million miles away, he said it brought a moment of relief.
''When they got the tone I was looking at the screen and jumping up and cheering with the rest of the guys in the control room,'' said Mr. Wiley, a Web site designer from Austin, Tex. ''Sitting in Belize watching guys at J.P.L. listen to tones from another planet just made the entire solar system seem a little bit smaller.''
Like many space buffs still reeling from Beagle 2's disappearance, Dr. Kim Binsted, a computer science professor at the University of Hawaii, said she was rooting for a smooth landing but also quietly preparing for the worst.
On Saturday night she set up a projector near her hot tub and gathered some friends for a ''dive in'' screening of the NASA television channel. She brought out a bottle of Champagne, but also on hand, she said, was ''a decent malt whiskey to help us mourn in case of failure.''
After the craft landed, her thoughts turned to what Spirit's success might mean.
''A lot of people think that this will help pave the way for a manned mission,'' she said. ''The hope is that the president in the State of the Union address might call for a manned mission in the next decade. We're now much closer to Mars in terms of technology then we were to the moon when Kennedy called for it.''
Thousands of miles away, just minutes from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, a crowd of 2,000 scientists, astronauts and space travel aficionados tensely watched the NASA channel on a huge monitor at the Pasadena Convention Center.
The gathering was organized by the Planetary Society, a group based in Pasadena with 80,000 members. For Louis Friedman, one of the society's founders, the high turnout indicated an continued human fascination with Mars.
''This may sound corny,'' he said, ''but Mars is destiny. Are we going to be limited to Earth or are we continuing outward? We've spent all of human history wondering who we are and what is our relationship to the universe.''
Stacy Craft, a Web site designer, said she had surprised her husband, Lester, with tickets to the event. Holding a 4-year-old daughter who knew all planets' names, Ms. Craft said the night had been fascinating.
''Last night we were in Santa Barbara and looked at cave paintings made by the Chumash Indians of a solar eclipse in 1677,'' she said. ''Now here we are watching the rover land on Mars. It's so amazing.''
Robert Picardo, a 50-year-old actor perhaps best known for his role as a nameless holographic doctor on the television program ''Star Trek Voyager,'' was also at the gathering.
''We really should have a timetable to send a man to Mars,'' he said. ''The whole world felt a sense of accomplishment when we set foot on the moon. I keep remembering Tom Ridge saying to be vigilant and careful this holiday season, but maintain your travel plans. Well, Mars should be part of our travel plans.''
