The Rev. Raymond Graves came to this city and disliked it.
It was full of complacent and fearful people, he thought, particularly blacks who wanted better housing, jobs and treatment, but did not fight very hard for it. Meanwhile, Mr. Graves, an outspoken black minister, was still injured from protests in Birmingham, Ala. His kind of fighting meant marching forward while the riot police readied their attack dogs.
He had been here only two weeks when he talked to his wife about going back to the South. ''She told me to wait awhile, maybe there was something I could do,'' he said.
That was 40 years ago. He has been this city's chief advocate and antagonist ever since. He has preached against riots, the drug surge and controversial police shootings -- and he has survived four attempts on his life.
Last fall, he announced his retirement. He will finally make that journey back to the South when his church finds a replacement. ''He's probably the only one who fights for us,'' said Betty Tyson, who was wrongly convicted of murder in 1973.
In his younger years, Mr. Graves never thought he would be an advocate. His father was murdered by a man who the family suspected was a Klan member when Raymond was a baby. His mother ''fled North,'' while Raymond and his three older siblings went to live with their grandparents, poor sharecroppers. They lived on a plantation in Yanceyville, N.C., that was owned by an abusive man. ''All the horror was there,'' Mr. Graves said.
As a youth, he was something of a delinquent, often fighting with other kids and missing school. But there were signs of activism, too. When he was 16, he found the keys to a new school bus at the district lot and simply drove it to his poor, black school. Surprisingly, the superintendent let the school keep the bus, and other black schools started demanding new buses.
Shortly after graduation, he left home because he ''started killing'' the plantation owner -- his own expression for envisioning the man's death. So the former troublemaker decided upon college. ''No one believed it,'' he said. ''It was as if college was coming to an end if I was coming to it.''
He went on to earn his teaching credentials. After eight years teaching sixth grade in Virginia, he said, he was called by God to become a preacher. ''I didn't want to do it,'' he said. ''I liked my little sinful ways, and I didn't want to give it up.''
He was ordained by the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church in 1958. The ceremony happened to take place at the New Bethel C.M.E. Church in a poor neighborhood of Rochester. ''The bishop told me then, 'I'd like you to come back one day,' '' Mr. Graves said. But he did not take the bishop seriously. He went to work in Atlanta, taking part in civil rights demonstrations alongside the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Shortly before the bishop made good on his word and Mr. Graves was transferred back to Rochester in 1963, a police officer pushed him into a curb during one of those demonstrations, and his forehead was sliced open.
The wound was still infected when he and his wife, Pauline, moved here. ''I came here with my stripes, but when I got here, I was quite disappointed,'' he said. ''I couldn't accept the fear people in this community had of its power structure.''
Shortly after he arrived, a group of black ministers formed the Fight Organization. Its first project was calling attention to the city's slumlords, particularly those who demanded sexual favors from poor women. Next, the ministers persuaded the Eastman Kodak Company to hire 600 blacks and Hispanics for well-paying industrial jobs. ''The civil rights spirit was working here,'' Mr. Graves said.
A year later, in 1964, he found himself talking to a white friend about the race riots throughout the nation. ''He said: 'This could never happen in Rochester. It's ultraconservative,' '' Mr. Graves recalled. ''I said: 'It's going to happen here. I work the streets.' ''
That very night, riots erupted in Rochester. The next day, Mr. Graves found himself talking 30 young men out of setting fire to a packing company near his church. ''They were ready to drop another match,'' he said.
In 1973, he heard that a young prostitute and heroin addict that he knew, Ms. Tyson, had been charged with strangling a Philadelphia businessman. His faith in her never wavered, not even after she and another man were convicted. ''People said, 'You might as well forget it,' but I couldn't forget it.''
Mr. Graves was part of a network of supporters who struggled to prove her innocence. When an acquaintance told him that one of the witnesses said he had been coerced by the police, Mr. Graves persuaded him to come forward. The case caught the attention of the local newspaper, The Democrat and Chronicle, and a defense lawyer, Jon Getz.
Eventually, the district attorney unearthed an old police report that indicated that the witness had changed his story, which was initially that he had never seen Ms. Tyson with the victim. The report, which had not been turned over to the defense, gave the judge cause to overturn the conviction.
''There's a good chance that without him, Betty Tyson would still be in prison,'' Mr. Getz said, referring to Mr. Graves.
But Mr. Graves is known locally more for his outspokenness when a member of a minority is killed by a police officer. Of the nearly 20 people killed by officers in Rochester during his time here, he said, not one has been white. In those times, he can be counted on to hold news conferences and criticize the police, often before the facts are made public.
''He's predictable,'' said Mayor William A. Johnson Jr., who was once an organist at Mr. Graves's church. ''He's the loudest voice. He's the first voice out there, and that can be effective.''
However, the mayor added, ''there are always two sides to a story, and he's not interested in hearing the other side.''
In 2002, Mayor Johnson called Mr. Graves himself to explain the circumstances after a 14-year-old black youth was fatally shot when he positioned a stolen car to ram an officer. ''I may have well been talking to a deaf mute,'' the mayor said. A short time later, Mr. Graves held a news conference criticizing the officer. Later, in an interview with the local public television station, he said all the killings in his time here were unjustified -- prompted by either racial prejudice, ineptitude or poor judgment.
''My gut reaction is that he means well,'' said Mike Green, then an assistant district attorney who presented the case to the grand jury, which did not indict the officer. ''But on many occasions, he's made statements without having all the facts.''
Mr. Graves does not mind the criticism, saying that only the controversial cases capture the news media's attention, and that those do not fully represent his work. He encourages people to vote. He accompanies the poor as they sign up for welfare. He hangs out with drug dealers to try to connect with them. He said he had steered three people away from committing murder in the past few months -- a fact not so surprising considering that Rochester has the highest homicide rate per capita in the state.
For his life's work, he has not just been criticized -- he has been shot at on four separate occasions, though he has never been hit. ''People don't like you to disagree with them, and if you do, suddenly you're their enemy,'' he said. ''I can disagree with you 100 percent and still love you just as much.''
Nearly 900 people attended his retirement dinner last year, including the mayor and the police chief. As he prepares for his move to Hinesville, Ga., his feelings for the adopted city he is about to leave are still mixed. ''We love Rochester, but it's so different from other cities,'' he said. When there are problems, ''people say nothing, and that wouldn't happen anywhere else.''
