Standing on the hotel rooftop where his French guests had celebrated New Year's Eve, Amr Abdel Samie pointed out a small patch of Red Sea beach. He remembered how the vacationing families had splashed in the clear water and warmed their faces and shoulders in the sun before boarding the chartered jetliner that was supposed to take them home.
''They were there just relaxing and having a good time on the beach, snorkeling and diving,'' he said.
Divers are still scouring these waters, but they are not on holiday, nor do fluorescent fish or coral reefs distract them. Their sightings belong to a more morbid list -- sandals, souvenirs, life vests and shredded luggage -- as they work to recover the bodies of 148 people killed here on Saturday when a Boeing 737 crashed into the sea.
So far they have found the remains of 60 people in a deep underwater area known as ''Shark's House.''
''Everyone is talking about it,'' said Sameh Fathy, 26, who works at the reception desk at the Sheraton, which is close -- like most hotels here -- to the place where the plane hit the water. ''For us there's been a change.''
Indeed, the image here after dusk, with the divers and sailboats used in the recovery, is more like the negative of a holiday photograph. The purple mountains of the jagged Sinai are drained of their hue. The Red Sea is black. The carefree spirit of Sharm el Sheik seems sapped.
''The feeling here is grief,'' said Mr. Samie, the general manager of the Helnan Marina Sharm Hotel, where 41 of the 133 French tourists killed in the crash had just spent a carefree week.
But in the hours since the crash -- in which the French tourists, a Japanese woman, a Moroccan and a crew of Egyptians perished -- anxiety has also gripped this town.
The crash came at a time when security officials worldwide were especially sensitive to any possible echoes of the Sept. 11 attacks. In unrelated precautions, some British, French and Mexican flights to the United States have been canceled.
But Egyptian officials quickly said terrorism had no role in the crash.
''The incident is absolutely not the result of a terrorist act, but is linked to technical failures of the plane,'' said the Egyptian foreign minister, Ahmed Maher. Egyptian officials interviewed on Sunday held firmly to that belief, though details about why the pilot tried to turn back immediately after takeoff remained unclear.
''All primary indicators confirm it is an accident and not a terrorist act,'' said an official with the government's Aviation Ministry, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
American and European aviation investigators joined Egyptians on Sunday in trying to determine the cause, as they searched a four-square-mile area for debris, including the aircraft's flight recorder.
Flash Airlines, the private Egyptian charter company that operated the plane, parried accusations made against it by Swiss aviation officials, who insinuated that the airline was unsafe by revealing that Flash flights had been banned from Swiss airspace since October 2002.
''The plane would not have been permitted to take off if it hadn't been completely ready,'' Fouad Hadoon, the company's chief executive, told the Qatar-based satellite news channel Al Jazeera.
Regardless of the cause, the crash has dealt a painful setback to Sharm el Sheik, a beacon of the Egyptian tourism industry that is still suffering from a global travel slump.
''After Sept. 11, it was very, very hard,'' said a senior official with the government's Tourism Ministry, who added that the war in Iraq had also hurt tourism. ''There is an ignorance about geography -- people think Egypt is part of the Middle East.''
If anything, Sharm el Sheik feels like a cross between Las Vegas and the Casbah, with a Hard Rock Cafe, luxury hotels and casinos sharing a part-mall, part-bazaar setting with Arabs in robes and headdresses.
Since the town was returned to Egypt in 1980, after more than 10 years of Israeli occupation, more than 100 hotels have been built, including a Four Seasons and a Hyatt.
Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who was vacationing here when the plane crashed, paid his condolences to President Hosni Mubarak, who has a villa in town. Mr. Mubarak also received condolences from other world leaders, many of whom have spent time here during diplomatic gatherings.
President Bush was here in June, and President Clinton took a stroll on the greens of the local golf course in 2000. The year before that, Middle Eastern politicians and kings surrounded Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, as they reached a heralded, if fleeting, peace agreement.
The constant parading of powerful people means that the town is full of police officers and feels almost secluded from the rest of the country, like a fortified oasis. But the police presence did little to help the mood.
''There is a sense of sadness all over Sharm,'' said Mr. Samie, who said that he had repeatedly watched videotape of the New Year's Eve celebration. ''I feel like I have lost 41 of my friends.''
