RICHARD JEFFERSON rated the Knicks the other day as nothing more than ''our next opponent.'' Kenyon Martin called Madison Square Garden ''just another arena.'' Both lies, of course, but conveniently mouthed as a clear message to their cross-river rivals: you may have a new organizational deity whose middle name is Lord, but if you want our devout attention, see us come spring.
It's more than understandable that the Nets and especially their young forward cornerstones, Jefferson and Martin, would adopt a parsimonious posture in acknowledging the recent stirrings in New York. Jefferson has been to the N.B.A. finals in his only two professional seasons, Martin in two of his three. In that time, nothing of note has happened at the Garden save the unceremonious departures of various Knicks personalities and players.
''If you want a rivalry, it has to be because of what's happening on the court and in the standings, not because you live on the other side of a bridge from the other guy,'' Jefferson said before Jason Kidd and the Nets shifted into a gear the Knicks don't have and sped away to a 95-85 victory.
You can't blame him or Martin for bristling at how the metropolitan area spontaneously refocused on Broadway after the Garden boss, James L. Dolan, woke up and fired Scott Layden. Under Isiah Thomas's piercing gaze, the Knicks won four straight games during the holidays against lottery teams, and the news media snapped to attention as if it were time to deck the halls with playoff bunting.
''It was the way they were winning, dominating on the road,'' said Rod Thorn, the Nets' president and general manager. ''You'd look up and the game would be over by the third quarter.''
There is also a fair amount of wishful thinking involved, and not only on the part of the Knicks' huge fan base. There is a little Spike Lee in all of us. The Knicks play where the heart of the big town beats, and no one's idea of a major basketball event is defined by ample parking, by convenient access routes.
But there are also irrefutable tenets of N.B.A. life, and one of them, as the Nets reminded us with last night's 37-point fourth-quarter punctuation, is not to read too much into a week's worth of regular-season results. ''You make your assessments in segments,'' Thorn said. ''Sometimes your schedule is not too hard. It's how you play over a 15-game period. Things even out.''
Sure enough, Frank Williams, the Knicks' percolating second-year point guard, strained a groin muscle, and Allan Houston's creaky knee acted up. The Knicks lost here Friday night to the bodies in the uniforms that say Chicago Bulls, lowering the buzz last night. Then the Nets silenced everyone but the few hundred Nets fans or Kidd admirers with a 14-0 explosion of Kidd creativity and long-range shooting that made the Isiah Era seem to sag a bit under the eyes.
Don't get me wrong: I thought the anointing of Thomas as the Knicks' organizational go-to guy brought his cutthroat competitiveness and posted a radiant smile on what had degenerated into a faceless franchise.
It bought Dolan a new grace period with his fan base. Now all Thomas has to do is transform an aging team that is not terribly healthy or athletic and is bound by Layden's punishing salary-cap mess. Sounding more big-city savvy than his predecessor and setting out the disposable personnel will be Thomas's least taxing chores. We eagerly await his first signature transaction.
While Thorn has fumbled his most recent moves -- as Dikembe Mutombo's 10 blocked shots pointedly suggested -- and should have put his foot down and extended Coach Byron Scott's contract, his foundation-building after joining the Nets in 2000 was indisputably masterly. He didn't inherit a blank cap canvas, mind you, with major contracts for players who were infirm (Jayson Williams), inscrutable (Stephon Marbury) or inflated (Keith Van Horn).
Thorn's first draft produced Martin with the first overall pick, while many in the critics' chorus sang the praises of the now-floundering schoolboy Darius Miles. Thorn turned his second draft into a bonanza, trading Eddie Griffin for Jefferson, Jason Collins and Brandon Armstrong. Marbury for Kidd was the deal of the century.
One season after Thorn took over, the Nets doubled their victory total, from 26 to 52, and laid new Eastern Conference ground rules for accelerated growth potential, rules Thomas wants to play by. Easier said than done.
''I blinked and we were down 13,'' Antonio McDyess said after the Knicks dropped seven games under .500. ''I don't know what happened.''
What happened was a vigorous demonstration of why the Nets' ascension to Eastern Conference supremacy was no accident. Kidd, who had 35 points and 13 assists, was in full stride and in sync with Martin and Jefferson's unbridled athleticism. The East may be devoid of star centers to anchor 60-victory teams, but it is not the Ivy League either.
''It's a process, establishing yourself,'' Thorn said. ''No one took us seriously two years ago until the last 30 games.''
Across the river, it took a few declarative sentences from Isiah to rev up the engine to a Knicks bandwagon that by the end of last night's fourth quarter looked like a hayride, on a slow ride to another spring without playoffs.
Sports of The Times
