THE Washington State Bordeaux blends we tasted were an affable bunch. They were concentrated, limpid and lacking mystery (other than their high prices) -- in other words, fun to drink.
They are perfect candidates for pungent cheeses like Camembert, Fourme d'Ambert and Vacherin Mont d'Or. These wines tend to be sweet and soft, and that's the palliative you need with assertive cheeses.
It's not that these wines are meek. To the contrary, if you served a Washington red with sautéed chicken, it's likely to clobber it with intensity. I would lean toward red meats like duck, lamb and (organic) beef.
Season the meat with coarse sea salt and pepper, and roast it. Make a salad with arugula or watercress, something peppery and toothsome. Then focus on a flavorful side dish. If you'd like to stand by the stove, you might want to make a risotto with porcini, or the accompanying potato recipe. It's based on tartiflette, a Savoy dish. Waxy potatoes are simmered with white wine, onion and lardons, then smothered with a heady cheese like reblochon and baked until bubbly and brown. I varied mine, adding thyme and using an aromatic cow's milk cheese, Hooligan, from Cato Corner Farm's stand at the Union Square Greenmarket.
It was a Sunday night, and I had time. On a weeknight, I'd probably make the same menu, but instead of the potatoes I might whip up polenta and fold in grated pecorino Romano.
TARTIFLETTE  Time: One hour
Sea salt  2 pounds waxy potatoes, like fingerlings, peeled  1 tablespoon olive oil  1 small onion, thinly sliced
1/2 cup diced bacon (about 3 slices)  1 tablespoon chopped thyme
3/4 cup white wine  Butter, for buttering gratin dish
1/4 cup cream
1/2 pound fragrant semisoft cow's milk cheese.
1. Preheat oven to 450 degrees. Fill a large pan with water, season with generous amount of salt. Add potatoes, and bring to a simmer. Cook until potatoes are almost tender but still slightly firm in center, about 10 minutes. Drain and slice thickly.
2. Return pan to medium heat. Add oil, onion and bacon, and stir. Cook until onion softens and bacon begins to brown. Fold in potatoes and thyme. Cook for 5 minutes. Pour in wine, and reduce until almost gone. Season potatoes with salt, if needed. (If potatoes are not yet cooked through, place a lid on pan and cook over low heat until tender.)
3. Butter a medium gratin dish. Pour in potato mixture and spoon over cream. Cut rind from cheese, and slice into large, thin wedges. Lay cheese over potatoes. Bake until cheese is melted, bubbling and golden brown.
Yield: 6 servings.
PAIRINGS
