OF all the world's great powers, Russia is by far the most underrepresented culinarily in New York. The reasons for this seem obvious: Decades of dictatorship, along with the prevailing public image of a drab, pleasureless society, were not good restaurant marketing tools. Except for a few temples of czarist excess, the cuisine of Russia and its neighboring nations was largely restricted to banquet halls in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, where the primary purpose of the food was to make the vodka go down easier.
This is all changing rapidly. With the fall of the Soviet Union came a loosening on emigration, which provided the critical mass of cooks and mouths needed to open all sorts of new restaurants. Most, like the Uzbeki places that dot Kew Gardens and Forest Hills in Queens, cater to other immigrants. Few have made it into Manhattan.
One that has is Pop's Pierogi, a fascinating sort of cross-cultural experiment that opened in Greenwich Village in August. Pop's has the bright, artificial look of a typical fast-food outlet, if it were in Kiev: just a half-dozen small tables, with a few decorated eggs, samovars, nesting dolls and other bits of Russian folk art. It doesn't look at all out of place on Bleecker Street, sandwich board out front, trying to be noticed among the scores of cheap restaurants near Washington Square Park.
But instead of burgers and souvlaki, Pop's specializes in the innumerable variations on the dumplings that are street foods in Russia and in the surrounding countries in Eastern Europe and along the Black and Caspian Seas. The namesake pierogi ($5.49 to $5.99), little half-moon Polish boiled dumplings, come 12 to the order with stuffings including savory beef, cabbage sautéed until almost sweet and soft cheese that actually is sweet. I like the cabbage and beef best, especially with their topping of onions, cooked until translucent and amber, which provide just the right accent. Pelmeni ($5.99), carefully wrought little dumplings that look like a cross between tortellini and shiu mai, are even better. They are stuffed with a combination of beef, veal and pork, topped with dill, and served 20 to the order in a tall, colorful ceramic crock.
The pelmeni and pierogi account for the small dumpling portion of the menu. Other stuffed dishes are larger, more like empanadas than dumplings. I loved the fried kutabi ($2.99), a thin pastry skin stuffed with meat. An Azerbaijani specialty, it was beautifully spiced, with ground pomegranate seeds, I was told, and had a lovely smoky flavor. Samsa ($3.99), big, golden half moons filled with ground lamb, come from Uzbekistan, and their Middle Eastern, almost Indian spicing makes them seem like cousins to samosas. Both the kutabis and the samsas are superior to the deep-fried chebureki ($3.29) and the baked pirozhki ($1.99 to $2.99), both too bready.
Apart from stuffed foods, Pop's offers khachapuri ($3.99), an open-faced cheesy, salty tart that is a delicious variation on the well-known Georgian cheese bread, and a decent, thin borscht ($5.49), that is both sweet and tangy.
Naturally, Pop's has blintzes, the sole member of this filled-and-stuffed brigade to have made it into the American mainstream. I tried the sweet versions ($4.99), stuffed with sour cherries, apples or apricots, but they were served ice cold, and topped with wan chocolate sauce and whipped cream from a can. Other pastries, like the apple pirozhki ($1.99), were at least served warm but were not much of an improvement. I did very much like Kvas ($1.50), a malty Eastern European soda with a resemblance to root beer.
Unlike most fast-food places, Pop's is not strictly self-serve. You place your order at the counter in the rear, and somebody carries a tray to your table. While the pelmeni and pierogi are served in handsome crocks, most everything else arrives on plastic plates with plastic cutlery.
Boris Chernyy, one of the owners of Pop's, has big plans for his place. Mr. Chernyy, who manages an advertising agency by day, says he wants Pop's to do for pierogi and pelmeni what Taco Bell has done for tacos. Personally, I wouldn't wish that on those poor dumplings.
Whether or not Mr. Chernyy makes good on his dream, he has already lived the archetypal immigrant experience. Back in Ukraine, he was Boris Cherny. But administrative carelessness on the way to the United States gave him an extra ''y,'' and he kept it.
Pop's Pierogi  190 Bleecker Street (Macdougal Street), Greenwich Village; (212) 505-0850.
BEST DISHES -- Pierogi, pelmeni, kutabi, samsa, khachapuri.  PRICE RANGE -- $1.99 to $7.99.  CREDIT CARDS -- Visa and MasterCard.  HOURS -- Sunday through Thursday, 11 a.m. to 11 p.m. Friday and Saturday, 11 a.m. to midnight.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Narrow aisle; no restroom.
$25 AND UNDER
