Informed yesterday that his illegally registered vehicle would be towed and that he would have to pay $1,000 to get it back, the driver reacted typically. He paced the sidewalk, spoke angrily into his cellphone, and, finally, gathered his belongings from the front seat before his truck was towed from Queens to a lot in Brooklyn.
But this time the tables had turned. The driver himself was a tow truck operator, and his frustration drew snickers from some passers-by who had gathered on Main Street in Flushing. The onlookers said something about the shoe being on the other foot.
The towing, part of a citywide sweep, was not meant as payback, said Gretchen Dykstra, the commissioner of the city's Department of Consumer Affairs, but rather as a crackdown on the many tow truck operators who failed to renew their licenses with the new year.
Of the roughly 2,000 private tow trucks operating in the city, only about 530 had renewed by Dec. 31, Ms. Dykstra said.
On Friday, the city began towing and impounding tow trucks with expired licenses. On Monday alone, 13 trucks from 12 different companies were hauled away.
''These drivers knew months ago that there was a deadline, and they didn't take it seriously,'' the commissioner said.
Noting the $1,000 fines facing unlicensed drivers, she added, ''This is an expensive gamble for them.''
In response to a request, the department agreed to tell a reporter when and where the trucks were being towed. Yesterday afternoon, a city enforcement official drove his inconspicuous red minivan along Main Street in Flushing and pulled up to the illegally registered truck.
The official was Richard O'Hara, the Queens borough director of enforcement for the department, which licenses towing companies, tow trucks and their drivers. Mr. O'Hara said that the metal plaque fastened to the side of the truck was white, which meant that it had expired at the end of 2003. ''Sometimes they argue, but 90 percent of the time, they know they're wrong,'' he said.
The driver, a 37-year-old Flushing man, said doing business in the city had become too frustrating and that he would register his trucks on Long Island and have his company, M. G. Towing, do the bulk of its business there.
''It's not even the money,'' said the man, who spoke on the condition that his name not be printed. ''The city makes it too difficult to take care of all the licensing. There are just too many rules and fees.''
Other tow truck drivers have complained that they could not get appointments to have their trucks inspected because city inspectors were too busy by the end of the year.
Al Fiero, who owns Fiero and Mandero Collision Works in Brooklyn, called the city's fines exorbitant and said that many of its rules were unfair. He said that after 28 years in the towing business, he had decided not to renew the licenses on his fleet of five tow trucks.
Mr. Fiero also faulted city rules intended to keep tow trucks from racing one another to accident scenes.
But Ms. Dykstra said strict regulations were necessary for the towing industry, which, she said, draws more than 200 consumer complaints in the city every year.
''These are people taking away private cars and working in accident situations,'' she said. ''We want to be sure their emergency equipment is working.''
Tow truck operators must renew their licenses every two years, she said. It costs $600 for a company to have itself and one truck licensed, and $600 for each additional truck. Driver's license renewals cost $20.
Department officials sent renewal applications to towing operators in October and guaranteed that if they were submitted by Dec. 1, inspection appointments would be made by Dec. 31, she said.
The fees, Ms. Dykstra said, are calculated to cover the city's cost to administer the licenses. For comparison, she noted some other two-year license fees: $340 to operate an amusement arcade; $1,000 for a cabaret license; $110 to sell cigarettes.
Not that this might comfort the M. G. Towing owner. When a tow truck arrived from Solid Gold Towing in Brooklyn, its driver, Wilfredo Miranda, 35, matter-of-factly lowered his wheel lift under the M. G. truck's front wheels and fitted heavy brackets around them.
The M. G. truck was then lifted unceremoniously onto its back wheels and towed away.
It drew a few onlookers. Several of them chuckled, recalling how they felt when their own cars were towed. Said one, Charles Gros, 26, of Queens, ''It's good the city's doing something about these guys.''
