Pick a racial epithet and Shanta Rhodes has probably heard it. Rhodes is an African-American trying to make it in stock-car racing, a sport dominated by white drivers and white fans and with a glass ceiling that has been nearly impossible for minorities to break through.
''It makes you want to cry at times,'' Rhodes said of the comments he has been subjected to during 10 years of driving at the lowest levels of competition on tracks scattered throughout the Southeast.
For Rhodes and many minority drivers, the upper echelons of Nascar have largely remained closed for decades. Now, finally, that ceiling is breaking. And the demolition comes with the backing of Nascar.
Nascar is supporting Drive for Diversity, a program run by Access Market and Communications, a multicultural marketing concern. The program is aimed at minority and female drivers and crew members who will be financed, nurtured, developed and ultimately promoted through the ranks. The goal is to develop talent for the Nextel Cup Series, formerly called the Winston Cup Series.
Nascar's chief operating officer, George Pyne, heads its diversity council, too. ''We're doing it because we believe that, one, it's the right thing to do,'' he said. ''Two, we feel that we want to market our sport to all segments of society, and certainly by doing so we believe we'll grow our fan base, which will result in higher ticket sales, higher value of sponsorship, more people watching on TV, more people buying T-shirts and hats.''
The first step came this week, when 12 drivers and 28 crew-member candidates were evaluated in combines held in North Carolina. Six crew members will be placed with Nascar Craftsman Truck series teams this season. After a pair of test sessions Tuesday at Hickory Motor Speedway, about 50 miles northwest of Charlotte, the top four or five drivers will be selected and placed with teams competing in Nascar's Dodge Weekly Series for late models, the lowest level of Nascar competition.
Late-model cars have roughly half the horsepower of racecars in the Nextel Cup Series. They are run on smaller ovals at lower speeds. The best drivers at that level can move up to Nascar's Craftsman Truck Series, the Busch Series and eventually the Nextel Cup. Among those who learned to race at Hickory's famed oval are Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Dale Jarrett.
Stock-car racing has traditionally been embraced by white Southerners, and even today, Confederate flags are a common sight at tracks throughout the Southeast. Only two African-Americans have driven in Nascar's top series: Wendell Scott and Willy T. Ribbs; Ribbs was the last, in 1986. No minority drivers compete at the top two levels of the sport -- the Nextel Cup and the Busch Series -- and only one African-American, Bill Lester, is in the Craftsman Truck Series.
It is equally rare to see minority fans in the stands.
''I think traditionally it's because it was not an inviting environment,'' Lester said in a recent telephone interview. ''Confederate flags and pretty much a redneck population was not something that African-Americans wanted to be associated with. It was a very intimidating, unwelcoming type circumstance, and there was no reason for African-Americans to have to subject themselves to that when there are so many other forms of sport that we excelled in and we were welcomed in.''
It has been an equally tough sell to corporate sponsors, who have been slow to embrace minority drivers. Lester was supported for the past two seasons as part of Dodge's diversity program. But Dodge was unable to find co-sponsors for Lester and dropped the program after last season.
Lester, who is now with Bill Davis Racing, could only dream of a program like Drive for Diversity when he was working his way up. It is a godsend to drivers like Rhodes and Ricky Gonzalez of Hillsborough, N.J., and women like Allison Duncan of Charlotte and Samantha Weakley of Edwardsville, Ill., some of the drivers who were invited to attend the tryout here.
They have battled for years to find the money to race, in some cases starting their own businesses to support their driving careers on the side.
''To break into Nascar in general is very difficult, and when you're perceived to not be a racer because of your nationality, it makes it so much harder to break down that door,'' said Gonzalez, who is of Puerto Rican descent. ''It really shouldn't be about where you are born. It should be about, can you drive the car, can you represent the sponsors?''
Drive for Diversity and other programs will generate the sponsorship money needed to support minority drivers and place them with top-level teams and equipment, key factors in developing talent. It costs about $100,000 to $150,000 each year to drive in the Dodge Weekly Series.
Minority ownership has been an equally daunting challenge. Many have tried and given up, from Julius Erving to Jackie Joyner Kersee. Last year Sam Belnavis became the first minority owner to compete for a full season on the Winston Cup circuit. He is now with Roush Racing as the head of its diversity program and will be involved in ownership as well.
Tinsley Hughes, another African-American owner, will have a Nextel Cup team sponsored this year by the former N.F.L. quarterback Steve Young's company, which produces energy drinks like Jugular and YET. And another minority ownership group, Alex Haley Racing, will be managed by Roush Racing and begin in Nextel Cup perhaps by midseason.
Meanwhile, Bryant Stith, a former N.B.A. player, has purchased half of the race team owned by driver Hermie Sadler. Together, they will support one of the Drive for Diversity teams this season.
The push for diversity is coming from many quarters, but there is some question whether it will be welcomed in all quarters.
''There's going to be pushback from people on both sides of the equation,'' said Daryl Stewart, general manager of Access Market and Communications. ''No question at all. But if you don't start presenting solutions, how do you ever come up with conquering the problem?''
If this is the beginning of true integration in Nascar, it is drivers like Rhodes who will face that backlash as the sport moves slowly forward.
Rhodes knows what is coming. But as he said, ''I'll face it with a smile.''
AUTO RACING
