The board of the New York Stock Exchange expects to decide at a meeting on Thursday whether to pursue legal action against its previous board and Richard A. Grasso, the former chairman, over the size of his pay package.
In an interview yesterday, John S. Reed, the interim chairman, reiterated his stand that the $188 million that the former board granted to Mr. Grasso had caused serious harm to the exchange's reputation. ''We clearly believe there has been damage,'' he said. ''Now the question is what do we do about it. Do we sue the board, sue Mr. Grasso or begin to negotiate with him?''
Mr. Reed said that he and the board were close to deciding on what strategy to pursue, although he declined to say what that emerging consensus might be.
Mr. Reed also said that he was hoping a permanent chairman could be named in the next two to three weeks, saying the ideal candidate would be a former chief executive of an industrial company.
Mr. Reed has already named John A. Thain, the former president of Goldman Sachs, as chief executive of the exchange.
''Given that John comes from Wall Street, my own sense is that the appropriate model would be someone from an industrial company,'' he said. ''The skills that you pick up on Wall Street are different.''
He said that the current board had agreed with his assessment.
The board has a list of possible candidates. While Mr. Reed declined to go into specifics, former directors involved in the search for a chairman have mentioned candidates like Ralph S. Larsen, the former chief executive and chairman of Johnson &amp; Johnson, and John H. Bryan, the former chief executive of Sara Lee.
Over the last two weeks, the exchange has sent to current directors copies of an investigative report, compiled by Dan K. Webb, a former federal prosecutor, on the process that led former board members to approve the pay package for Mr. Grasso.
The board and Mr. Reed will now decide whether those directors, many of them from Wall Street's top firms, neglected their primary duty of loyalty to the exchange in awarding the pay package.
The Webb report may also show that certain directors violated their duty of care, which requires them to make thoughtful and informed decisions.
Mr. Reed said yesterday that he had hired Walter E. Dellinger, a partner at O'Melveny &amp; Myers, to advise the board on what legal avenue to pursue.
Mr. Reed said that one option for the board would be to ask Mr. Grasso to return as much as $150 million in salary that he received from 1999 to 2003.
He added that it was possible, after a decision by the board, that he would begin discussions with Mr. Grasso within days.
A lawyer representing Mr. Grasso, Kenneth C. Edgar Jr., did not return a call seeking comment yesterday.
The search for a permanent chairman has taken this long because of the difficulty in finding a candidate with the suitable corporate and boardroom experience but without current ties to Wall Street.
Herbert M. Allison Jr., the chief executive of TIAA-CREF and a member of the current board, has declined an offer to be chairman.
Mr. Reed said yesterday that months ago he had offered the job to Sir Dennis Weatherstone, the former chief executive of J.P. Morgan and another member of the board. But that was long before Mr. Thain's appointment.
Now, Mr. Reed said it was unlikely that any executive with Wall Street experience would be offered the job of chairman.
Alluding to the difficulty the board has had in filling the role, Mr. Reed said that just yesterday a board member had asked that he consider staying permanently. And while he has always made it clear that he has no plans to remain chairman, Mr. Reed did indicate that in the end he would do whatever was in the stock exchange's best interests.
''I don't want to do it,'' he said. ''I do have a number of commitments. But I did say that I wouldn't leave the stock exchange in the lurch. If I'm still here in five months, I'll quit kidding myself.''
Market Place
