BACK in the days when a seat in the second balcony of a Broadway play was $1.80, the theater district was filled with little French bistros in which a three-course dinner was $4.95. My first time around in New York, I sat in many second balconies and went to lots of those restaurants, where, at the time, canned peas were the green vegetable. A few, like Tout Va Bien and Pierre au Tunnel, are still with us.
When I walked in to Jubilee 51 for the first time, those places came immediately to mind, and not because it looked old and tired -- it certainly doesn't -- but because the woman who greeted us at the door was, well, so very French: the quintessential woman in the front of the house at so many little restaurants in mid-20th century France. She wore a suit, not a T-shirt; she was friendly, but I don't know her first name.
A cursory glance at the menu reinforced the impression: escargots, moules, omelettes, steak frites, tarte Tatin.
All around are the signs of a bistro: a pressed-tin ceiling; prints and cartoons with French captions on pink-tinted walls above black wainscoting. The lighting is soft and pleasing. The bar in the front of the dining room is dark and moody. The only thing missing is clouds of smoke.
But once I started to explore the menu, I realized Jubilee 51, an offshoot of Jubilee on the East Side, is very much a contemporary version of an old bistro. I certainly don't remember tuna tartare with miso seaweed salad or polenta from the days when dinner was under $5.
Generally the cooking is most successful when it sticks to traditional fare. But the miso seaweed salad added a nice sweetly sharp touch to the yellowfin tuna tartare. A chicken liver paté with port wine reduction could not have been better; sweet and creamy, it gives chicken livers a good name. Baked goat cheese with sun-dried tomatoes and prosciutto arrived above a sparkling salad of frisée. Putting snails with a classic garlic parsley butter in profiteroles makes them far more interesting than when they arrive in their shells; it even makes you forget they came from a can.
The simple green salad was bright and crisp, the vinaigrette nicely seasoned with shallots and thyme.
We all liked the veal paté en croute so much that the guest who ordered it complained that when it reached his place after being passed around there wasn't much left. And cheers for the straightforward bread (no sun-dried tomatoes, no raisins, no olives), with its excellent crust and lovely sweet butter, which is all too tempting.
Duck confit made shepherd's pie definitely worth ordering, the duck seasoning the mashed potatoes, a black chanterelle sauce pulling it all together. The crisp duck skin on top of the pie made it irresistible. Grilled lamb chops were tender and prepared as requested, medium rare; the accompanying sautéed artichokes provided that wonderful jolt that may spoil the wine but adds just the right contrast to the grilled flavor of meat. But someone forgot to put salt in the accompanying polenta; that works only when it is served for breakfast.
Prince Edward Island mussels come five ways at lunch and dinner, and, served with French fries or green salad, are a great bargain at $16, though the fries are limp. I suppose that at that price you can't expect large mussels, but how about something bigger than a thumbnail?
Curiously, the classic marinière version is without much flavor. The ones baked with garlic and parsley butter and those steamed in coconut milk with shallots and curry were a much better choice.
Even though the fish soup came with the classic rouille and croutons, even though it had the right deep salmon color, it was flavorless. Roasted chicken breast grandmère tasted as if it had been prepared by a forgetful grandmother who left it in the oven too long, or perhaps reheated it. It was bone dry and barely saved by a brown sauce. Medallions of pork suffered the same fate.
The kitchen tends to overcook things. The monkfish and the steak, ordered medium-rare, were dry. And I still can't figure out what happened to the vermicelli served with the nicely seared and sweet, tender scallops. Did the chef forget to cook it? Did he cook it twice? It tasted like dry sticks.
Desserts were also uneven. The crème brûlée was everything you could hope for: the texture silken and creamy, the crust thin and crackling. The gratin of pear poached in red wine and then gently baked in a warm topping somewhere between a crème brûlée, and a custard was nicely balanced with a red wine reduction.
Crème fraîche improved the overly sweet tarte Tatin but it needed a better crust. And a nougat glacé struck a single note: sweet.
The wine list, however, gets good marks for being well priced.
But one can't help wonder at the choice of pop rock piped in instead of Edith Piaf. O.K., not Edith Piaf, but something more appropriate for duck confit and crème brûlée.
One of my dinner companions, a psychiatrist, had an answer: the music isn't for the patrons; it's for the workers. It keeps them from falling asleep on the job.
I wish I could tell you how well the restaurant handles the pretheater rush, but it was not crowded before curtain on a matinee Wednesday or a Friday evening. Maybe its luck will change when the secret gets out -- you can have a nice meal at Jubilee 51, if you order carefully.
Jubilee 51  * [rating: one star]  329 West 51st Street, (212) 265-7575.
ATMOSPHERE -- Modern French bistro, spare and well-lighted.  SOUND LEVEL -- Quiet, with canned music.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Chicken liver paté, veal paté en croute (a special), duck confit shepherd's pie, grilled lamb chops, crème brûlée, gratin of pears.  SERVICE -- Professional.  WINE LIST -- Short and reasonable, with just a few at the high end.  HOURS -- Lunch, Tuesday through Friday noon to 3 p.m.; brunch, Saturday and Sunday noon to 3 p.m. Dinner, Sunday and Monday, 5 to 10:15 p.m.; Tuesday through Saturday, 5 to 11:15 p.m.  PRICE RANGE -- Prix fixe dinner, 5 to 7 p.m., $24.95, Tuesday through Saturday. Appetizers, $7 to $10. Entrees, $19 to $27. Desserts $6.50 to $7.50.  CREDIT CARDS -- American Express, Visa, Master Card, Diners.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Ramp available for outside stairs.
What the stars mean:
(None) Poor to Satisfactory  * Good  ** Very Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambiance and service with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
ON THE WEB
PAST REVIEWS from the New York Times, with additional capsule reviews by Times critics:
nytimes.com/dining
RESTAURANTS
