''That's where I was happiest, among my family,'' Yves Saint Laurent says early in ''YSL: His Life and Times,'' one of two feature-length documentaries on the designer (each with a separate admission charge) beginning a two-week exclusive run today at Film Forum.
The other is ''YSL: 5 Avenue Marceau, 75116 Paris,'' and though each has deficiencies, the works complement each other. There's also some wonderful film, new to American audiences, like a popping black-and-white animated 1960's piece and other period ads, and scenes depicting the designer's fixation on, and appropriation of, androgyny in fashion, influencing 70's glam sensibility.
Mr. Saint Laurent's solemn, thoughtful reflections have a graceful melancholy. As pictures of a happy, round-faced infant are shown (he was born in 1936) -- in contrast to the long, severe face with the slender glasses that many know -- he remembers that he was so loved that his father's last words were, ''Where's Yves?''
As Mr. Saint Laurent reflects on his boyhood, ''Times'' reminds us of the work of one of his idols, Proust. But while it blows through many major moments of its subject's life and is intriguing, the documentary is a truncated and somewhat standard-issue history, charting his precocity and startling rise with the speed bumps along the way that shook his trip. Except for the access the director, David Teboul, had to Mr. Saint Laurent's inner circle, ''Times'' wouldn't be out of place on A&amp;E.
Despite some fascinating anecdotes from his partner, Pierre Bergé, and his muses Loulou de la Falaise and Betty Catroux, ''Times'' doesn't thicken the stew. He does not touch, for example, on the fact that both Mr. Saint Laurent and Proust were connected to the Radziwill family. Lee Radziwill was one of Mr. Saint Laurent's first supporters after he was dropped from the running of Dior, and one of Proust's closest friends married into the Radziwill family. At one point, he is questioned by an interviewer in archival film reminiscent of a famous questionnaire Proust filled out.
The companion documentary, ''YSL: 5, Avenue Marceau, 75116 Paris'' -- also directed by Mr. Teboul, from his 2001 book of the same name -- is far more interesting because it focuses exclusively on process. The film details the creation of the artiste's last women's collection in 2001, and Mr. Saint Laurent is nearly a special guest star, stepping in to observe the meticulous work of dressmakers fitting models. There's a hint of unspoken terror as the ensembles are assembled, with attendant tinkering and second guessing.
His presence is an unvoiced threat in ''Paris,'' whereas his voice is distinctly a part of ''Times,'' and seeing the two together definitely creates a sum greater than its parts. A pair of stunning black living figurines are dressed in ''Paris,'' a moment of supplemental cool after hearing Mr. Saint Laurent speak of his admiration for black models in ''Times'': ''the way they hold their bodies, the colors on their skin'' (he was among the first couturiers to employ them).
Both films have additional soupçons of piquancy, capturing the end of their subject's creative life and coming only a few months after Tom Ford retired from Gucci, which brought about a rehabilitation of the YSL line. Neither Mr. Ford nor Hedi Slimane, his predecessor who had restored excitement to YSL, are mentioned in the documentaries. Nor is the free fall of the couture houses after the 1970's peaks -- the ubiquity of the branding that made the designers' mystique routine and overused; it is a subject that Mr. Saint Laurent can be quite eloquent about, since he led an assault that opened the markets to even his hated bourgeoisie.
Mr. Saint Laurent's narcissism and self-loathing are evident. But his soft-spoken forcefulness still has punch. ''Seduction has replaced elegance'' is still a potent shocker, and an intelligent assessment of Mr. Saint Laurent's approach.
YVES SAINT LAURENT  His Life and Times
Written (in French, with English subtitles) and directed by David Teboul; directors of photography, Philippe Pavans De Ceccaty and Hélène Louvart; edited by Annette Dutertre; produced by Christian Baute; released by Empire Pictures. At the Film Forum, 209 West Houston Street, west of Sixth Avenue, South Village. Running time: 77 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Yves Saint Laurent, Lucienne Mathieu Saint Laurent, Pierre Bergé, Edmonde Charles-Roux, Loulou de la Falaise and Betty Catroux.
YVES SAINT LAURENT  5, Avenue Marceau, 75116 Paris
Written (in French, with English subtitles) and directed by David Teboul; director of photography, Caroline Champetier; edited by Martine Giordano; produced by Christian Baute; released by Empire Pictures. At the Film Forum. Running time: 85 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Yves Saint Laurent, Anne-Marie Munoz, Loulou de la Falaise and Pierre Bergé.
FILM REVIEW
