Having conquered Broadway -- twice -- Matthew Broderick and Nathan Lane have now signed on to star in a new movie version of ''The Producers,'' Mel Brooks's hit musical based on his 1968 film.
The deal, first reported yesterday in Daily Variety, marks the latest incarnation of ''The Producers,'' which began as a film comedy starring Zero Mostel and Gene Wilder, was reimagined as a Broadway musical in 2001 starring Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick and is getting a third life as a musical film.
Simon Halls, the spokesman for Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick, confirmed that the movie would begin shooting early next year, probably in New York. Mr. Brooks will produce the film and write the screenplay with Thomas Meehan, who helped Mr. Brooks write the book for the stage version. Susan Stroman, who directed the Broadway show, will direct the film; Mr. Brooks directed the original version.
A second movie version of ''The Producers'' has been rumored since April 2001, when the Broadway version opened to rave reviews, with particularly lavish praise going to Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick for their comic timing and teamwork as Max Bialystock and Leo Bloom, respectively, two disreputable producers at the heart of the story. The show won 12 Tony Awards, the most ever, and, propelled by torrid sales and a record $480 ticket, earned back its $10.5 million capitalization in seven months, remarkably quick by Broadway standards.
But after Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick left the show in March 2002, sales dipped significantly as a series of lesser-known actors took over the roles.
That decline was at least temporarily stemmed on Dec. 30, when Mr. Lane and Mr. Broderick returned to the production and to a rapturous reception from fans and a record take at the box office: ''The Producers'' grossed $1.6 million for the week ending Sunday, the highest weekly take in Broadway history and the highest ever at the St. James Theater, according to the League of American Theaters and Producers.
The stars are earning $100,000 a week for their 14-week return engagement and are expected to receive several million dollars each for their appearances in the film. Ms. Stroman, meanwhile, will be making her feature film debut as a director of a musical for which she won two Tonys, one for directing, one for choreography.
Mr. Halls said that the timing of the film announcement -- just days after the stars' return -- was coincidental and unconnected. ''Nathan and Matthew always wanted to come back to the show,'' he said. ''The movie was a separate issue.''
Even so, the producers of the show could expect to benefit from a movie version, depending on how quickly the film could be made and released. The Broadway revival of ''Chicago,'' for example, received a big boost at the box office after the success of last year's film version, which won the Academy Award for best picture.
The new film of ''The Producers'' could be released by Christmas 2005, said Michael Moses, a spokesman for Universal Pictures, which has acquired domestic distribution rights for the film.
The movie would presumably include some of the new songs that Mr. Brooks wrote specifically for the stage. The original film featured only two, ''Springtime for Hitler'' and ''Prisoners of Love''; the Broadway score, for which Mr. Brooks won a Tony in 2001, features 20.
