IN New York City, a district attorney's passing the baton is as rare as a rent-stabilized apartment's changing hands. The granddaddy of the city's five, Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, has served since 1975. And until this New Year's Day, the most junior was Richard A. Brown of Queens, who took office 12 years ago.
In Staten Island, things have been no different. William L. Murphy served for 21 years before deciding not to stand for re-election last fall.
The election of his successor, Daniel M. Donovan Jr., heralds a change in style. Mr. Donovan, a tall, blue-eyed bachelor whose blond hairline is slightly past its prime, is the first Republican elected to the office in more than half a century, beating out David W. Lehr, who had been Mr. Murphy's No. 2 prosecutor. Mr. Donovan comes from the political environment of Borough Hall, where he served most recently as deputy borough president to James P. Molinaro. Where Mr. Murphy kept a low profile, Mr. Donovan has been eager to meet with reporters.
Standing outside what was formerly Mr. Murphy's ninth-floor office, with its view of the harbor, Monica Brown, who handles public relations for the district attorney, says, ''I think I'll have a little more work to do.''
Mr. Donovan, 47, was sworn into office just in time to handle a firehouse brawl and what officials have called a subsequent cover-up. On Monday, he boldly took charge, asking the Fire Department not to interview its personnel until his own investigation is complete (such interviews could mean limited immunity for the firefighters involved).
His sally was reined in by the mayor: by the end of the day it was agreed that the city's Department of Investigation would run the inquiry -- in cooperation, of course, with Mr. Donovan's office.
It is understandable if that arrangement is disappointing to Mr. Donovan. Staten Island, with only three police precincts and fewer than 50 prosecutors, could not be expected to generate a terrific number of meaty cases. One of the meatiest, the crash of the ferry that killed 10 people, has been yielded to the United States attorney. Mr. Donovan is careful to say that had he been in Mr. Murphy's position at the time, he might have agreed that the ferry case would be more easily prosecuted under federal law. But he does not agree with those who suggested he was better off not tackling such a big case right off the bat.
''I was not relieved,'' he says.
MR. DONOVAN was born in Staten Island and seems to think of little else but New York City. His recent reading list includes ''Leadership'' by Rudolph W. Giuliani, ''Forgotten Son'' by Bernard B. Kerik, the former police commissioner, and ''City for Sale,'' about municipal corruption during the Koch administration.
Daniel M. Donovan Sr. was a longshoreman, a dyed-in-the-wool Democrat who never finished high school. He was one of 13 children, his wife one of six. But Mr. Donovan Jr. is an only child. ''I guess my parents decided they wanted to be able to use the bathroom,'' he says.
Although he has spent the past seven years at Borough Hall, chewing over capital plans and the closing of Fresh Kills, the bulk of his career has been spent in law enforcement. He worked as an investigator for the Brooklyn district attorney, then as the deputy director of a juvenile jail in Newark. When he was 27, he began attending the Fordham School of Law at night, and soon got a taste of the high life at a white-shoe firm. After graduation, he joined the firm of Olwine Connelly, hoping to pay off his loans.
''I was living on Sutton Place and working on Park Avenue, and I didn't like either,'' he says.
He became a narcotics prosecutor for Mr. Morgenthau. ''The most interesting law anyone can practice has to be criminal law,'' Mr. Donovan says. ''The issues are more interesting. They have a direct effect on people's lives -- the victim, the defendant and society as a whole. In the law firm, we had a pile of money and we were just trying to figure out who it went to.''
He adds: ''I got a buddy in Darien, Conn., who's a patent lawyer. He'll talk about a Bic lighter like he's talking about a woman. And he finds it very interesting. I just don't see it.''
In 1995, Mr. Donovan went to a service for an undercover narcotics detective killed in the line of duty, and there met Guy V. Molinari, the powerhouse of Staten Island politics. Soon, Mr. Donovan was invited to Borough Hall to talk about ways to keep young people off drugs. A few months later, when he was on the brink of taking a job as a deputy for Mr. Kerik, who was then the Correction Department commissioner, he was invited to Borough Hall again, for unspecified reasons. At the end of the conversation, he had agreed to go to work for Mr. Molinari, the borough president.
''I was told afterward that after I had left, he came out and told his executive assistant and his director of administration, 'I just hired a chief of staff,' and they were saying, 'Who was that guy?' '' Mr. Donovan says.
The new job placed him squarely in the city's power circles, and he found himself watching basketball games at Gracie Mansion.
''But you realize,'' he muses, ''if I had taken that other path -- Bernie became the police commissioner. I could have been the first dep. Right now I could be at Giuliani Partners making a million dollars a year.''
PUBLIC LIVES
