Rutgers may not play a more inspired 40 minutes of basketball this season. One of the nation's elite teams was in town Tuesday night and the Scarlet Knights responded to the electricity shooting through the packed Louis Brown Athletic Center. They hustled, made some clutch shots and gave the more talented team fits through every dramatic minute.
Rutgers held a 5-point lead at halftime, an 8-point lead early in the second half and a 2-point lead in the final five minutes. But when it was over, No. 1 Connecticut showed just enough toughness and determination to escape with a 75-74 victory.
''They keep telling me I shouldn't say this, but we are pretty good and Rutgers gave us everything we could handle,'' UConn Coach Jim Calhoun said.
Ricky Shields hit two free throws with seven seconds remaining to cut the Knights' deficit to 1, but time ran out before they could foul a Connecticut player to stop the clock.
Free-throw shooting hurt Rutgers, which shot 13 for 28 from the line.
''You get to step up to the line and make free throws,'' Rutgers Coach Gary Waters said. ''That literally beat us.''
But no one could fault the Knights' effort. Expected to struggle through most of the Big East portion of the schedule, they nearly knocked off what may be the best team in the country.
''This was a very disappointing loss because I think we outplayed them, and I don't think they deserved to win tonight,'' Waters said. ''I don't want to say we weren't smart, but we made some mental errors out there and that hurt us.''
The Huskies sprinted to an 8-2 lead, but Rutgers answered with a 10-0 run and played with tremendous intensity through much of the first half. When Juel Wiggan hit a 3-pointer for a 37-32 Rutgers lead to end the half, the Scarlet Knights sprinted into the locker room sensing an upset.
Rutgers took its biggest lead of the game, 42-34, with 18 minutes 8 seconds left in the game when Calvin Wooten hit a 3-pointer. Connecticut went ahead with 13:37 left, but the Huskies couldn't put it away. A layup by Ben Gordon with 3:35 remaining gave them a 70-65 advantage, but Rutgers found a way to claw its way back.
Quincy Douby scored on a layup with 18.5 seconds left to cut the Connecticut lead to 74-72 and Marcus Williams helped Rutgers out a few seconds later by hitting only one of two free throws.
In the end, though, UConn had too many talented players, none more effective than Emeka Okafor. Rutgers hacked away at him through most of the game, but he finished with 21 points, 16 rebounds and 6 blocked shots.
''Their big men played me well,'' Okafor said. ''They made me earn those points.''
Waters said: ''Emeka Okafor is a man inside. He fought. We used every foul we had on him and he fought through it.''
Gordon led Connecticut (12-1, 1-0 Big East) with 22 points and the freshman Charlie Villanueva added 15 points and 12 rebounds in just 23 minutes. Rutgers (7-4, 0-2) was led by Herve Lamizana, who had 20 points. Shields scored 19 off the bench.
Waters did not allow his players to take pride in coming close.
''We're not taking away from this any consolation or any feeling that this was a moral victory,'' forward Sean Axani said. ''It's still a loss. For someone like me who is a senior, I need W's to get to the Big East tournament and the N.C.A.A. tournament. I don't need this. I don't need losses.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
