Braden Looper stood before a small gathering of reporters at the Mets' spring-training complex Tuesday morning and was asked to recall the chances his former team, the Florida Marlins, were given a year ago. The Marlins were a long shot that went on the win the World Series, with Looper playing a key role in a breakthrough game. Looper is confident that the Mets have the talent to make a similar about face.
''Just playing against this team and knowing what it's capable of, the sky's the limit,'' he said at the Mets' minicamp.
Looper referred to a healthy Mike Piazza and Cliff Floyd, who missed parts of last season with injuries, and the Mets' mostly veteran starting rotation. But three days after Looper agreed to a two-year contract to be the Mets' closer, several questions remained unanswered.
The signings of Looper, shortstop Kazuo Matsui and center fielder Mike Cameron followed the team's strategy of shoring up the defense and pitching within the framework of a shrinking budget, General Manager Jim Duquette said. That payroll, expected to be as low as $80 million, leaves little room for marquee signings, like the free-agent outfielder Vladimir Guerrero, much less for accomplished players to fill the voids in right field and the starting rotation.
Duquette continued to voice pessimism at the Mets' chances of making a strong push for Guerrero, the top free agent in this class, who remains unsigned a month before the start of spring training. Guerrero's continued availability ''lulls you into a false hope,'' Duquette said. Duquette would not rule out offering a short-term deal, but he said it would pale in comparison to the offers Guerrero has from other teams.
So right field and the fifth spot in the rotation will be filled through competition from within, Duquette and Manager Art Howe said, with nonroster invitees or a free agent returning from an injury joining the mix. That means Aaron Heilman, who often struggled during his rookie year last season, and Jeremy Griffiths, who had an uneven performance in an abbreviated major league debut, will compete to be the starter behind Tom Glavine, Al Leiter, Steve Trachsel and Jae Weong Seo.
Duquette also listed Tyler Yates, who was converted into a starting pitcher last season after having Tommy John surgery the year before, as a candidate to start or relieve. And Duquette said the Mets would attend most of the auditions for starting pitchers like Scott Erickson and Orlando Hernández, each of whom is returning from injuries, and Maels Rodriguez, a Cuban defector, who is expected to hold a tryout for major league teams this month.
The Mets have not had any trade discussions with teams for outfielder Roger Cedeño since a deal last month with Seattle died when Jeff Cirillo, who signed with San Diego Tuesday, used his no-trade clause. Duquette said the Mets plan on starting the season with Cedeño in a right-field platoon with Timo Perez.
Looper had the closer's job with the Marlins before losing it to Ugueth Urbina last September. The Marlins let both relievers go, not offering Looper a contract, and replaced them with the previous Mets closer, Armando Benitez. Looper now inherits Benitez's old job.
Even after losing the closer's job, Looper recorded one of the biggest outs of the Marlins' postseason, wiggling out of a bases-loaded jam by striking out Aaron Boone in the 11th inning of Game 4 of the World Series against the Yankees, holding the tie and allowing Florida to win the game and tie the Series.
Mets' officials attended that game and Duquette pointed to that moment as an example of Looper's ability under pressure.
''I think the majority of the people around the league knew about me, but I'm sure it didn't hurt,'' Looper said of his World Series performance.
BASEBALL
