John le Carré has two homes, a country house on a cliff in Cornwall and an 1830's town house just off Hampstead Heath in London, and he has had at least three lives. As David Cornwell, he was once a spy for M.I.5 and is now the paterfamilias of an extended family (4 sons, 11 grandchildren). Under his pseudonym he is the author of 19 novels, many of them international best sellers and nearly all of them about the plots and counterplots of international espionage.
His latest, ''Absolute Friends,'' was recently published in London and is being published in the United States next week (by Little, Brown). It received some of his best reviews in London in a long time, although Michiko Kakutani takes a different view in The New York Times today. It deals with post-9/11 terrorism and the war in Iraq. As in other le Carré novels, disloyalty and amorality are endemic. ''Absolute Friends'' offers a portrait of a frightening future in which no one can be trusted, least of all those who seem to have common goals.
The writer uses the spy world -- ''my playpen'' -- to ''make a political point.'' He has done this from ''The Spy Who Came In From the Cold'' (1963) on, but with greater intensity since the end of the cold war. In a recent interview in his Hampstead home, the conversation kept coming around to politics, both in his fiction and in his own increasing activism.
Mr. le Carré, 72, is as affable as he is calmly resolute, a courtly gentleman who could pass for a diplomat. In the past he harbored two secrets, that he had been a British spy and that his father, Ronnie Cornwell, was a con man and felon (a character richly reimagined in ''A Perfect Spy'').
Were there any leftover secrets in his life? ''I don't think so,'' he said, adding, ''I've had an untidy love life and am now settled,'' in his second marriage. One change is that he is more overt in speaking out about public issues. He is firmly opposed to the war in Iraq and never misses a peace march. ''Marching you can't pick your bedfellows,'' he said. ''You go down there determined to stop the war, and you find yourself marching alongside Friends of Osama.''
On request he traced his political awareness through several post-cold-war novels. ''Our Game,'' he said, was ''an attempt to show how the Soviet empire was becoming the Russian empire, and how the Muslims of the North Caucasus continued to be oppressed.'' In ''The Tailor of Panama'' he took ''a satirical swipe at American military postures in Central America.'' ''The Constant Gardener'' was ''a full-throated roar of indignation at the exploitation of the third world for our purposes,'' in that case by pharmaceutical companies. (Ralph Fiennes is to be in the film version, to be directed by Fernando Meirelles.)
''Absolute Friends'' did not ''just pop out of a box but came quite naturally from the other books,'' he said, continuing, ''The source of my despair is that of somebody who was engaged in the cold war seeing everything coming round again.'' Fearing that he might sound overly polemical, he added, ''I'm also terribly concerned with how to entertain and tell a story. The comedy in this -- if there is a comedy -- is that the lies that have been distributed are so many and so persistent that arguably fiction is the only way to tell the truth.''
At the novel's center are the title's friends: Ted Mundy, an old-school Englishman, the misfit son of a disgraced British Army major and once a spy but now a tour guide at one of Mad King Ludwig's Bavarian castles; and Sasha, a 1960's German radical.
Mundy, he said, ''is a loyal fellow at heart, very much in the pattern of the sort of man I've written about in the past.'' He is not, however, a new version of Smiley, the introspective spook -- to use Mr. le Carré's word -- played by Alec Guinness on television. In ''Absolute Friends'' the substitute Smiley is a British operative named Amory.
Sasha, whose father was a Lutheran minister with Nazi ties, is a double and possibly a triple agent. He is, Mr. le Carré said, ''a chaos addict who will probably never be satisfied with any social structure.'' Their lives as friends, secret agents and idealists have been intertwined for more than 40 years.
''The purpose of the story is to tell a fable, to illustrate the dangers of what we're doing,'' he said. The United States and Britain are conducting ''a virtual crusade in which we're exporting democracy by military means.''
When ''Absolute Friends'' was published in London in December, Robert McCrum wrote in a review in The Observer, ''Few could fail to be thrilled by the unbridled rage that fuels his storytelling. If he was seething when he wrote 'The Constant Gardener,' he is now incandescent.''
The book was, in fact, almost jettisoned. As Mr. le Carré explained: ''I started to write a story about a young Englishman who by accident and through his background and because of his natural naïveté had drifted into anarchism. When we meet him later in the story, 30 years on, he was going to be invited by his former colleagues to take part in terrorist acts.''
Then came 9/11. Mr. le Carré and his wife, Jane, were in Hamburg. He was looking at television news scenes of Rudi Dutschke ''and all those hotheads'' of the 1960's. Back at their hotel, they learned about the terrorist attack. ''I went through the exact cycle,'' he said, ''that many Europeans went through -- an enormous inexpressible sympathy for the victims, for America. We were filled with a sense of tragedy and a recognition that nothing would ever be the same again. I didn't know what to do -- except that I knew my book was just dead in the water.''
But after the invasion of Afghanistan, he decided that ''in this so-called war on terror, a new kind of global concept was being enacted, and I was appalled by the misinformation that was becoming public property in the United States, so that 7 out of 10 Americans were ready to believe that Saddam had a hand in twin towers.'' Puzzling over what he considered to be ''a terrible error,'' he thought his book had a renewed validity, and also that today's terrorism might have a relationship to the radicalism of the 60's.
Looking for witnesses to that earlier radicalism, he learned that many of the ''key players at the time were now orthodox citizens in the professions,'' including Mr. le Carré's German publisher, Lothar Menne, who fought alongside Che Guevara and was now ''this enormously respectable gentleman at the pinnacle of a great publishing house.''
For research he also went back to Berlin, Munich and Heidelberg, the scene of the novel's most violent episode. He returned to his school in Dorset, which he quit at age 16 and now used as the model for Mundy's school in the novel. He arrived in the evening and, ''heavily disguised,'' walked around the playing fields, immersing himself in memories and atmosphere.
Two of the minor characters -- Bernie Lugar, an artist, and Dr. Mandelbaum -- are drawn more directly from life. Mandelbaum was based on an academic at Bern University in Switzerland who was, Mr. le Carré said, ''a marvelous authority on Goethe, classicism and romanticism.'' Mr. le Carré studied with him, and as a result ''quite often in my books there is a kind of Dr. Mandelbaum figure, as mentor and somebody who lifts me above the insularity of English cultural life.'' As for Lugar, he was a familiar figure during Mr. le Carré's intelligence work: ''someone who out of bravado pretends to have done things far more drastic than anything he has done.''
This evocation of Germany of the period is coincident with the London success of Michael Frayn's play ''Democracy,'' about the fall of Willy Brandt as chancellor. Shadowing the play is the image of Markus Wolf, a master East German spy. When The Guardian reported that Markus Wolf was the model for Karla in Mr. le Carré's Smiley novels, he denied it and said that the only Wolf he knew was a lawn mower. He said that the newspaper responded by running two pictures on the front page: of Markus Wolf and of the lawn mower.
He wrote the book swiftly, finishing it in June, then making changes on three sets of galleys. Between novels he writes occasional essays, including introductions to two favorite, disparate works: a Norwegian edition of Gabriel García Márquez's ''Love in the Time of Cholera'' and a Sherlock Holmes collection. ''I love Conan Doyle,'' he said. ''The idea of setting the reader midway between a semi-buffoon, which is Watson, and an unfathomable genius, which is Holmes, is very, very clever.'' Mr. le Carré said that he borrowed the idea from Conan Doyle and did something similar in one of his Smiley novels.
As always, he refuses to have his novels submitted for the Booker and other prizes: ''It's not for reasons of insecurity or vanity or peckishness, but because writing is a one-man game, trying to beat your own talent, not someone else's. It's what Stefan Zweig called the battle with the demon.''
He seemed like a man at one with his various selves. ''I'm that dangerous animal, a happy writer,'' he said. ''One of the sources of my present contentment is that I know I am all writer. I could not have survived without it. Surely I would have gone to the devil in some way.''
He said: ''I've always written about people trying to express their individuality under the huge burden of history, people who are fighting the wars they inherit, who are living out the chance encounters they make.'' The friends in ''Absolute Friends'' were ''struggling to achieve what we all want to achieve, namely, that our origin should not be our destiny.'' Each wants ''to break loose from his parentage, from the sullied cultural burdens they inherited.'' That, of course, could also be said about Mr. le Carré.
