More than 40 years after Grant Ujifusa and Richard Sorenson met as freshmen living in the same college dormitory, they remain friends who have a lot in common, including a Harvard education and an appreciation for bluegrass music.
Their latest venture, however, is a product of another interest they share -- helping students who are anxious about getting into an elite college.
In August 2002, they arrived at an idea ''during an epiphany at lunch,'' Mr. Ujifusa said, that was the impetus for www.ThickEnvelope.com, a Web site that produces probabilities for admission into 80 of the nation's most competitive universities.
Mr. Ujifusa took time off from political consulting and writing and tucked himself into his basement in Chappaqua, N.Y., and Mr. Sorenson, a consultant with Morgan Stanley, worked on a computer in his attic in North Caldwell, N.J., for more than a year before they introduced the Web site on Dec. 22.
''We came up with the idea because both of us had two kids who went through it all, and what you do if you are the child or the parent is chew fingernails,'' Mr. Ujifusa said.
Mr. Sorenson said that as an alumnus, he had conducted interviews with Harvard applicants for many years, and in the late 60's he was an assistant director of admissions at Harvard. His background is ''one of the reasons that we have a high degree of confidence'' in the reliability of the Web site, Mr. Ujifusa said.
For $79.95, a student can fill out a detailed application and then view a page that reports his or her probability of being accepted into each of the 80 colleges on the site.
Students who use the service must provide their scores on the SAT I, PSAT or ACT test, numerical or percentile class rank, class size and grade-point average on a 4.0 system.
There are also questions relating to students' community service, research activity and extracurricular achievement.
Mr. Sorenson said there were a lot of students with high test scores. ''You need some way to differentiate them,'' he said. ''It's considered a leadership skill, and colleges are looking for potential leaders.''
The highest probability that www.ThickEnvelope.com gives its applicants is 90 percent, and the lowest is noted as a less than 5 percent chance of getting into a particular college.
Other Web sites offer similar services.
College Confidential offers a ''stats evaluation'' at www.collegeconfidential.com. Roger Dooley, a partner in College Confidential, said that for $89, students could receive estimates of their chances at particular colleges from experienced counselors.
Through College Admissions Services' site, www.go4college.com, freshmen, sophomores, juniors and beginning seniors can pay a fee starting at $8.95 per college for an initial assessment of their chances of being admitted into from one to 150 colleges.
Two free services are also available through www.collegedata.com and www.fastweb.com. And students can download a portion of a ''college admissions predictor'' for free at www.sheppardsoftware.com, according to Brad Sheppard, president of Sheppard Software.
So what do the partners at www.ThickEnvelope.com think about their competition?
''Ours is much more customized per college and will be much more accurate,'' Mr. Sorensen said. Other services, he said, ''are mostly based largely on scores and grades, and we're based on a lot of other things.''
But some admissions officials are uneasy about companies that charge students for these services.
''I don't think they need to pay an additional $80 to see somebody's formula to see what their chances are,'' said Dr. David M. Borus, dean of admission and financial aid at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y. ''I can't imagine that any experienced college admissions professional or secondary school guidance professional would urge their students to use this sort of approach.''
Dr. Borus, who has worked in college admissions for nearly 30 years, said the process was ''a moving target'' in that the variables that admissions officials consider can change from year to year.
''I have very little faith in secret formulas,'' he said.
Tallia Ofeck, an adviser to students on college and English teacher at Norman Thomas High School in Manhattan, said she was skeptical of ''programs that are going to offer you services that should be for free.''
An adviser at LaGuardia High School, Eugene Roth, expressed similar concerns. He said he was not keen on students ''paying for a service that they can get for free'' at their high schools.
''It's always better for them to talk to someone in person,'' Mr. Roth said.
But Bill Short, 43, an independent college counselor based in New York City, said the sites could be helpful.
''What's great about some of the sites is that they can offer information about aspects'' of the college admissions process, Mr. Short said. But ''professionals trained in college counseling or coaching provide a service that goes beyond what these sites can offer.''
He said counselors could guide students throughout their high school experiences by helping them with course selection, extracurricular activities and community involvement.
He advises students who use the sites to ''have an educated opinion'' about them.
''The chance of getting into school today is not necessarily a science,'' he said. ''I would seek outside advice and help to see which of these sites makes sense.''
Ricki Sara Bennett, vice president of product development for College Data, said that even high scores did not guarantee admission to a college. ''At most selective colleges, even students who are rejected have exemplary qualifications,'' she said.
Still, Mr. Ujifusa and Mr. Sorenson said their site took this into account. They said the information students enter on www.ThickEnvelope.com, if it's honest, can help to differentiate between students who have ''virtually identical'' academic standing.
However, Dr. Borus of Vassar expressed caution.
''I think the concept behind it plays on students' and families' fears, and that's inappropriate,'' he said.
Mr. Ujifusa said he was aware that there were critics of the site. ''People who are anxious often say it's a complete roll of the dice,'' he said.
