Frederick Wiseman, the documentary filmmaker, has made a career studying American institutions. But when the head of the Comédie Française asked Mr. Wiseman if he would like to direct a play, in France, Mr. Wiseman recalled, ''it took me about a quarter of a second to say yes.''
He directed ''The Last Letter,'' in Paris in the winter of 2000; made a film version in French, which was released in the United States last year; and then brought an English-version of the one-woman play to New York, where it is playing Off Broadway at the Lucille Lortel Theater through Sunday.
Mr. Wiseman, who turned 74 on Jan. 1, believes in departures. ''The Last Letter'' encompasses fiction, not documentary; stage, not film; the past, not the present. Performed as a monologue, ''The Last Letter'' is taken from ''Life and Fate,'' by the Russian novelist Vasily Grossman, whose mother was killed by German soldiers and buried in a mass grave in Ukraine in 1941. The only character, a Jewish doctor (played by Kathleen Chalfant) whose death is imminent, explains in a letter to her grown son what the Nazis are doing to the Jews in her Ukrainian town. Yet, like Mr. Wiseman's documentaries, the play gathers its power through simple, painstaking revelation of the most complex matters, including the real and illusory nature of hope.
Mr. Wiseman read the Grossman novel about 17 years ago and found the chapter about the doomed Jewish doctor's letter especially compelling. ''Grossman summarized in a very startlingly dramatic way what the plight of millions of people was,'' Mr. Wiseman said in a telephone interview from Bettmeralp, Switzerland, while on a ski vacation after staging the New York production of ''The Last Letter.''
Mr. Wiseman's father, a lawyer, immigrated to the United States from Russia when he was 5. ''I was 9 years old when the Second World War started, and the conversation at home was not only about the war, but about what was happening to the Jews in Europe and Germany,'' Mr. Wiseman said.
The chance to direct ''The Last Letter'' arose in 1995, when he made a documentary about the Comédie Française, another departure from his continuing examination of American institutions. But, he said, ''I had been an admirer of the Comédie Française for a long time,'' with fond memories of the cheap student tickets he bought in abundance when he was a student in Paris in the 1950's. The invitation to direct a play came when the documentary was completed.
He said he had enjoyed the experience, but wasn't about to give up documentaries or become an expatriate. ''If I had another chance to direct a play in France I'd do it,'' he said. ''In terms of movies, I'll stick to American subjects. I don't think I'm going international.''
His documentary career came about by happenstance. He was teaching at Boston University School of Law in the late 50's and early 60's when he took his students on field trips to prisons and mental hospitals. ''I wanted to show them where their clients might end up if they didn't defend them properly,'' he said. That is when he got the idea for ''Titicut Follies'' (1967), which was filmed in Massachusetts at a state hospital for the criminally insane. It was the first of many films about institutions. He explained, ''That was fresh material in film terms and you could, if you were lucky and patient enough, find these fantastically dramatic events or funny things that were as funny or dramatic as anything in fiction.''
Since ''Titicut Follies'' Mr. Wiseman has made 32 documentaries, mainly examinations of American life: the poor (''Welfare'') and the rich (''Aspen''), dancers (''Ballet'') and the disabled (''Blind'' and ''Deaf''), eating (''Meat'') and shopping (''The Store'').
''When I don't work I like to do what I'm doing now, which is skiing,'' he said. Mostly, however, he is working. He is nurturing a few film projects, and in May he plans to direct a new production, at Dance Theater Workshop in New York: ''Welfare: The Opera,'' a 1992 work based on his 1975 documentary ''Welfare.''
He may seem peripatetic, but the trademark quality of his work is patience. He asks his audiences to wait for the dramatic moments enmeshed in ordinary experience, even at the risk of boring them, refusing to create false drama or to succumb to sentimentality. With this demanding, austere approach, as Pauline Kael once said, ''Wiseman extends our understanding of our common life the way novelists used to.''
While Mr. Wiseman was earning his law degree at Yale, he said, he spent most of his time reading novels. ''It sounds sort of adolescent now,'' he said, ''but there was a great library on the campus with everything I wanted to read on open shelves, and very comfortable chairs.''
But his few attempts at pursuing fiction in film did not work out because of his basic requirement: ''Only if I can do it on my own terms.'' Not a way to win friends or contracts at most major studios. He wrote a screenplay adaptation of the Anne Tyler novel ''Celestial Navigation,'' and the first screenplay for the movie ''The Stunt Man,'' which had nothing to do with the movie that was eventually made, in 1980, starring Peter O'Toole.
''I couldn't get them financed because, in the immortal words of the industry, they were too soft,'' he said. ''I suppose that means not commercial.''
Though his work has appeared on public television for years, he said he does not watch much television, including other documentaries. ''Most of them aren't any good,'' he said. ''But again, that may not be fair because I don't watch very much. I watched some reality television for two or three minutes and turned it off.''
