In the end, the jury seemed to see the same thing so many people have seen at the World Trade Center site since Sept. 11, 2001: what is not there.
Faced with many possible additions to the site, jurors in the memorial competition chose subtraction instead. As conceived by Michael Arad, Reflecting Absence would evoke the outlines of the twin towers as pool-filled voids in the earth, 30 feet deep and almost an acre each in extent. Perhaps more than any finalist, this design expresses loss in stark, unambiguous visual terms.
It recalls the voids proposed on the tower footprints by Foster &amp; Partners of London, among the original entrants in the design study for the site. It also brings to mind the voids of the ''North, East, South, West'' installation by Michael Heizer at the Dia:Beacon museum in Beacon, N.Y.
Deep openings in a plaza, even one teeming with trees, will not be to everyone's liking; not neighbors who hoped for a friendlier park, not survivors who hoped for more tender consolation.
''The most frequent criticisms were that the design is too cold, bleak and angular,'' said Kent L. Barwick, president of the Municipal Art Society, which conducted its own survey. ''Responding to the question of how future generations would view the memorial, some felt that the meaning of 9/11 would be clearly understood because of the design's use of the void and emptiness.''
In that sense, it resonates with Daniel Libeskind's overall site concept, which identified the void -- the foundation of the towers -- as the container for memory.
''It's simple and bold,'' Mr. Libeskind said yesterday about Reflecting Absence, after meeting Mr. Arad, who is now allied with the landscape architect Peter Walker. ''People on the jury saw it as a very bold interpretation of the void.''
Mr. Arad's original design departed significantly from Mr. Libeskind's plan by proposing a long, slender cultural building on West Street. Mr. Arad said in November that the structure would shelter the memorial from the adjacent West Street-Route 9A.
But the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation noted that neither the building's width nor its volume would be suitable for a museum. And Mr. Libeskind objected to the way it would break the visual connection between the trade center site and the Hudson River. Community leaders, too, regarded it as a barrier.
The West Street building has since been eliminated from the plan, said someone with knowledge of the jurors' deliberations.
Other objections raised by the development corporation included the planned location of the truck ramp and the conflict between the lowest part of the pool in the south void and an emergency exit from the PATH station.
Most important, Mr. Arad's original design did not provide access to structural remnants of the twin towers, like the perimeter column footings that can still be found at the bottom of the foundation. The development corporation said it would ensure that access would be provided.
It is unclear how, or if, these issues have been resolved. And until the final design is shown next week, it would be perilous to critique the November submission too closely. Yet it seems safe to say that Mr. Arad's concept was embraced by many jurors.
''While these voids still remain empty and inconsolable,'' said Vartan Gregorian, the jury chairman, yesterday, ''the surrounding plaza's design has evolved to include teeming groves of trees, traditional affirmations of life and rebirth.''
