The Nets were well on their way to a technical knockout Tuesday night when Kenyon Martin threw a violent combination of his own.
An otherwise forgettable 92-75 victory over the Los Angeles Clippers at Continental Arena will now be remembered as the battle of two N.B.A. heavyweights, Martin and Corey Maggette, who exchanged punches that resulted in their ejections and will surely bring suspensions Wednesday from Stu Jackson, the league's senior vice president for operations.
In the past year, Martin has tried to erase his image as one of the N.B.A.'s dirtiest players, but his reputation might have taken a hit Tuesday as he unleashed a pair of haymakers at Maggette's head.
The Nets were ahead by 26 points with 7 minutes 6 seconds remaining in the third quarter when Martin fouled Maggette on the arm. Maggette, 6 feet 6 inches and 228 pounds, displayed obvious displeasure with the foul, pushing Martin, 6-9 and 240, backward and watching him fall to the floor.
Martin jumped up off the hardwood, eyes afire, and shoved Maggette in the throat with his right hand. Maggette came back with a right-handed punch that seemed to graze Martin, who responded with a left hook that appeared to strike Maggette on the side of his head. Martin followed it up with an errant right hand before teammates and officials restrained him.
After the blows had settled and both players escaped without injury, the two teams traded verbal jabs. The Nets maintained that Martin was defending himself and the Clippers invoked Martin's history of histrionics.
''That was a good foul on Kenyon's part,'' Nets Coach Byron Scott said. ''I thought Maggette overreacted, and Kenyon's a man. He's not going to back down if someone comes at him and throws a punch.''
Clippers Coach Mike Dunleavy, who coached Scott with the Lakers, said: ''Kenyon took a hard foul on Corey. That's Kenyon Martin. He does that. He's up 26 points and he does that. I'm not sure if it's good or bad. It depends on your perspective. He has a history.''
Although Martin declined to comment, his teammates indicated that he apologized after the game, saying, ''My bad getting kicked out of the game.''
Maggette issued a public apology from his locker and tried to explain his actions. ''He grabbed my throat,'' he said. ''When someone grabs you, what are you supposed to do? But I know Kenyon is a hothead.''
Maggette maintained that he did not push Martin. Dunleavy insisted that Martin stumbled over his own feet and fell down. Asked why Martin reacted the way he did, Dunleavy said, ''I don't know if he was embarrassed by it.''
Jason Kidd, who scored 32 points, tried to speak up for Martin. ''I don't think K is that clumsy,'' Kidd said. He added: ''I thought K had to protect himself and did the right thing. I'm not promoting violence, but he had to do something or he could have gotten seriously hurt.''
League rules mandate that Martin will be suspended for Friday's game at Philadelphia. He could have to sit out longer. He will also receive a stiff fine, but there should be no other suspensions because none of the Nets left the bench.
Martin successfully avoided this sort of altercation last season, after he became a public enemy in opposing arenas in 2001-2, when he was suspended for seven games, called for six flagrant fouls and fined $347,057.55.
When Martin left the game with 7 points and 12 rebounds, the crowd of 12,305 chanted his name and cheered enthusiastically. Later, Kidd scowled at Bobby Simmons after a foul, and Richard Jefferson jawed with Glen Rice, resulting in a double technical.
Kidd continued his recent rampage, cracking the 30-point barrier in consecutive games for the first time since he joined the Nets. After he threw a pass off the backboard that Jefferson jammed, the Nets grabbed their largest halftime lead of the season, 51-28.
The Nets had not been threatened, physically or otherwise, until Martin and Maggette went at each other. The Clippers promptly trimmed the deficit to 10 points, but the Nets eventually sealed the game and escaped the ring.
REBOUNDS
Eight teams are interested in acquiring the former Knicks point guard CHARLIE WARD, but two N.B.A. officials believe the Nets and the Spurs are among the leaders. The Phoenix Suns waived Ward on Tuesday, and his agent, CRAIG McKENZIE, said Ward planned to weigh his decision in the next 48 hours as he passes through waivers. The Nets beat out the Spurs to re-sign JASON KIDD in the summer and have an advantage with Ward because he lives in Connecticut and played the past 10 years for the Knicks. ROD THORN, the Nets' president, declined to comment on his interest, but said of Ward: ''He is experienced, can make shots and is a good defender. He's a good player.'' . . . EDDIE GRIFFIN will arrive in New Jersey on Wednesday night and practice with the team after signing a contract for the league minimum last Thursday.
PRO BASKETBALL
