They forgave the short shorts, the tart tops and even the juicy smooch with Madonna.
But this time, enough is enough. Many of the good folk of Kentwood say they are severely disappointed after the pride and joy of their town, the pop idol Britney Spears, married a hometown boy last Saturday and then cut him loose after 55 hours.
She, like, broke his heart.
And now, while Ms. Spears slinks behind a wall of publicists, her erstwhile husband, Jason Allen Alexander, is left with the paparazzi on his front lawn.
''I'm getting really aggravated with all this!'' Mr. Alexander shouted this week to a gaggle of journalists hanging around for a quote. ''I want y'all off my property!''
So much for Britney Alexander.
Ever since Ms. Spears got an annulment on Monday for the impulsive ceremony at the Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas, in which she wore ripped jeans and a baseball cap, Mr. Alexander, football star and son of an auto mechanic, has been cooped up in his house, ringed by tabloid reporters from across the planet, occasionally sticking his thick neck out the door to shoo people away.
''He's getting all stressed over this,'' said Robert Stewart Jr., a Kentwood scrap collector who knows both the Spearses and the Alexanders. ''That boy's going to lose his mind.''
''Man,'' Mr. Stewart said, ''what was Britney thinking?''
A lot of people are asking that.
When it came to Ms. Spears, Kentwood used to be loyal, protective and forgiving. She was born and raised here, just south of the Mississippi state line. And until Ms. Spears went gold, platinum, titanium and beyond, the most profitable thing to come out of Kentwood, population 2,200, were the semi trucks packed with spring water or fluffy white chickens.
When times got tough, like during the difficult breakup with Justin Timberlake, Ms. Spears would fly in from her homes in New York or Los Angeles and retreat to the minimansion she built on the outskirts of town. Sometimes she would be spotted at the Sunflower supermarket or Nyla's Burger Basket.
''She loves cornbread,'' said Mike Price, whose wife runs the Burger Basket.
In a place where 30 percent of the people live below the poverty line, Ms. Spears's life was a tunnel to another world, a glimpse of money and glamor and fame.
But as she got older, Ms. Spears got farther away. More time in the studio. More time in L.A. More time in Vegas.
And in Kentwood, the hurt feelings built up.
''You'd think after all she's done and how much money she's made, she could do a little more for the community,'' said Butch Chouest, a retired cattle hand, as he polished off a plate of spaghetti at the Burger Basket. ''I mean, look at this place. Nothing's changed.''
''But, Butch,'' said his wife, Beverly, ''she's so young.''
''I know, honey, I know,'' Mr. Chouest (pronounced swess) said. ''But she's also so rich.''
Both Ms. Spears and Mr. Alexander are 22. Ms. Spears is estimated to be worth $100 million. Mr. Alexander is a part-time student who lives at home. The two have been friends since kindergarten, though it's not clear if they ever were -- or still are -- dating.
There used to be three rules in Kentwood: Don't speed down the main drag or you'll get nailed. Don't say anything mean about Britney Spears or you'll get scolded. And whatever you do, no matter what, don't drop by her father's house, because he's got big, mean dogs and two summers ago ran off a group of teenage Britney fans (all girls) with a pistol in his shorts.
This week, one of Jamie Spears's German shepherds was on patrol, discouraging any follow-up visits.
Britney loyalists say all the negative attention has been unfair.
''She was just fooling around,'' said Margaret Strickland, who runs a deli in Kentwood. ''We're still proud of her.''
That pride is concentrated in Kentwood's small museum, which has multiple rooms full of Britney stuff, including an autographed pink cowboy hat and a pair of dancing boots.
Mr. Alexander, meanwhile, has gone underground, though he emerged to talk to ''Access Hollywood'' and gave this account of his wedding night: ''We were like this is a real pretty, beautiful night. It was cool and we were looking at each other and we were like, 'Let's do something wild and crazy and let's go get married just for the hell of it.' ''
Later, in the ''Access Hollywood'' interview, he was asked if he wanted to marry her, for real.
''Definitely,'' he said. Then he caught himself. ''I mean, we're just friends.''
Ms. Spears has not commented publicly, referring questions to her publicists, who say, ''No comment.''
But in an interview with People magazine in 2002, she said: ''There's one thing I don't understand about Hollywood. How they have a relationship, end it, and go right into the next.''
Kentwood Journal  Correction:  January 8, 2004, Thursday  A picture caption yesterday about Britney Spears's hometown, Kentwood, La., misstated the location of Nyla's Burger Basket, where patrons talked about her brief marriage. It is in Osyka, Miss., north of Kentwood.
