Pete Rose played his last major league game in 1986, and three years later he was barred from baseball. Still, Rose was scheduled to be on the Hall of Fame ballot in 1991. Banishment from baseball was not then linked to exclusion from the Hall of Fame.
That changed in February 1991, when the Hall of Fame's board of directors approved a rule change that made anyone on the permanently ineligible list also ineligible for the Hall of Fame. For the last 13 years, members of the Baseball Writers' Association of America have been sent Hall of Fame ballots without Rose's name.
''We were kind of taken aback,'' said Kit Stier of The Journal News, based in White Plains, who was the president of the writers' association in 1991. ''It's our award, they ask us to vote on it, and we were just completely bypassed. It was a shock.''
Rose's best chance to gain entry to the Hall of Fame is believed to be through the writers, but time is running out. By admitting in his autobiography that he bet on baseball while managing the Cincinnati Reds, Rose is apparently hoping to be reinstated in time to appear on the writers' ballot.
Members of the writers' association with 10 consecutive years of service, as well as honorary members, are sent ballots each year. This year, 506 members cast ballots, with 380 votes (75 percent) needed for election.
If Rose is not reinstated within the next two years, he will miss his chance to be elected by the writers. After that, his only chance for election would be through the veterans committee, which was reorganized in 2001 to include all living Hall of Famers and winners of the annual awards for contributions to writing and broadcasting.
Candidates on the veterans ballot must also receive 75 percent of the vote to be elected. Last year, the committee chose no one. Ross Newhan of The Los Angeles Times, who votes in both elections, said Rose's chances would decrease markedly in a veterans committee vote.
''I think it would be far more difficult,'' Newhan said. ''You've got two guys in Joe Morgan and Mike Schmidt who have been actively lobbying on his behalf. But the overall indication is that there's a pretty strong opposition.''
Newhan said that while he does not believe Rose should be reinstated, he would vote for him if he were.
''Some might disagree with me on this, but I think you have a very deliberate commissioner who wouldn't reinstate him on a whim or to satisfy any public demand,'' Newhan said, referring to Bud Selig. ''I think his reinstatement would be done on merit, and on that basis, considering his eligibility, I would vote for him.''
If Rose were reinstated, Jayson Stark of ESPN.com said, he would have to be judged solely on his credentials. That would be an easy decision, Stark said.
''If he were reinstated, that would be equivalent to baseball saying to me as a voter, 'Just vote on Pete Rose the player because we've resolved all that other stuff,' '' Stark said. ''I don't think I'd have to burn too many brain cells to debate the question of whether the guy with the most hits in the history of the sport is a Hall of Fame player.''
BASEBALL
