Law enforcement officials are considering bringing charges against an 11-year-old who they said sold heroin, sometimes in her nightgown, in a serene suburban neighborhood here.
The girl took orders from her mother, Alison Lolanda Davis, 36, who was charged with six felonies and two misdemeanors after a police raid on their house around 7 p.m. on Friday, said Charles Blazek, a spokesman for the City of South Miami. For months, surveillance teams watched the girl sell drugs to customers who arrived by car and on foot, Mr. Blazek said.
''She did what her mother told her to do,'' he said of the girl, who has been placed in foster care with her 7-year-old sister. ''Whether she knows it's wrong or not, we don't know.''
Mr. Blazek said officers, who observed the home since receiving a tip in October, had never seen such a young dealer. Undercover officers who bought drugs from the girl two times before obtaining a warrant for the raid were shocked that she was 11, Mr. Blazek said.
''Looking at her, one would think she is around 15,'' he said, adding that she is heavy and tall. ''She is bigger than her mother.''
Mr. Blazek said officials would meet with the Miami-Dade state attorney on Thursday to discuss whether to charge the girl with a crime.
Neighbors along the street, in an unincorporated section of Miami-Dade County near the University of Miami campus, said they had often seen the girl playing with other children after school.
''She was a very obedient and very nice child,'' said Troy Davis, 39, who lives across the street from the girl's ramshackle white-and-yellow house, which stands out on a block of neatly kept homes and lawns. ''She could not have known what she was doing.''
The SWAT team that raided the house reported finding at least 10 grams of heroin, 10 Xanax pills, 2 grams of crack cocaine, a rifle and drug paraphernalia. Officers led the girl and her sister out with their heads covered before arresting the mother and searching the house. The children were silent as they were taken away, Mr. Blazek said. Though the girl was arrested and questioned at a juvenile detention center, she and her sister were released to the custody of the State Department of Children and Families on Friday and placed in foster care.
Mr. Blazek said that he did not know the girl's school or grade, but that she was wearing a school uniform the first time she sold drugs to undercover police officers. The second time, last week, she wore a blue nightgown, he said. She was wearing that nightgown during the raid, which the SWAT team started by throwing percussion grenades at the house, he added.
Mr. Blazek said he did not know the girl's typical customers. A neighbor, Robin Reynolds, said people from other areas arrived to buy crack cocaine.
In one undercover purchase, the girl offered the detectives two bags of heroin, Mr. Blazek said. When they asked for a third, she told them that she had to check with her mother and ran into the house.
''She then came back with three bags,'' Mr. Blazek said.
In a hearing on Tuesday, the girl's father, Dennis Williams, 40, said he wanted custody of her and her sister. Mr. Williams, a mechanic, was behind in child support payments until recently, said Lourdes Pons, a lawyer for the Department of Children and Families. Mr. Williams has a criminal record, Ms. Pons said, for offenses 15 years ago.
She said her agency would investigate Mr. Williams and evaluate the girls' physical and emotional health before making a recommendation on custody.
For now, Judge Israel Reyes of Miami-Dade Circuit Court said that Mr. Williams could have supervised visits with his daughters.
Ms. Davis is in a county jail pending her arraignment.
A spokesman for the Department of Children and Families in Miami, Peter D. Coats, said of the girls: ''It's obviously a traumatizing situation for a child to be in. It's my understanding that the children are well at this point.''
