It took Stephon Marbury eight seasons and four N.B.A. cities to zigzag across the country and land back home in New York City. Marbury has not yet arrived at Madison Square Garden, but it awaits him for Thursday night's game against Jeff Van Gundy and the Houston Rockets. The occasion is likely to overwhelm Marbury, a Coney Island native, causing what he calls his Knicks-orange blood to pump wildly.
''I'm just hoping I don't cry,'' Marbury said.
He was emotional enough in his first game as a Knick, a 107-96 loss to the Cavaliers on Tuesday night. In the visitors' locker room here, Marbury took stock of the moment in his new jersey.
''It was the best feeling ever,'' Marbury said. ''I did the pose, back and forth, side, touched it, felt the number, it's a beautiful jersey.''
Ten hours earlier, Marbury began his Knick career with a news conference in the arena usually reserved for the 19-year-old Cavaliers superstar, LeBron James. Marbury sat next to his backcourt mate who came with him from Phoenix, Penny Hardaway, the four-time All-Star guard-turned reserve.
When prompted, Marbury offered an olive branch to his former and current teammate, Keith Van Horn, apologizing for his September criticism that Van Horn was not tough enough for the Garden. Later he apologized in person.
Marbury's 26-year-old eyes blazed with the sharpness of a point guard when he recounted the past, envisioned the future and ticked off the less-than-vital present Knicks statistics. He knew the Knicks were in 10th place, and how many home and away games they had left.
''I already broke the schedule down,'' he said. ''To me, it's like having your ducks in a row and visualizing what you want to see.''
As always, the dream ends just one way. ''That's the only thing I can visualize is winning the championship in New York City,'' Marbury said. ''I don't know what life could probably be like after doing that.''
Isiah Thomas knows. As a Pistons guard, Thomas, now the Knicks' president, helped rebuild the Detroit franchise by winning two championships, and he hopes to do the same as an executive in New York by linking his fortune to a hometown legend.
Thomas orchestrated the eight-player trade but did not talk to Marbury until they were on the private plane to Cleveland late Monday.
''Our talk was unbelievable,'' Marbury said. ''Like talking to someone who has championships, someone who has been where you're trying to go, someone who you've idolized, someone who you've seen walk the walk, talk the talk, who's done everything that you want to do as a point guard, right before your eyes,'' Marbury said, shaking his head.
''And I'm saying thank you to him and he's saying thank you to me.''
The point-guard relationship between Thomas and Marbury may be symbiotic, but it is the relationship between Marbury and his new teammates that will ultimately determine the success of the rebuilt team.
Van Horn said that Marbury approached him Tuesday to mend feelings not only from when they played together from 1999 through 2001 on the Nets, but from the recent comments he had made.
''I appreciate that,'' Van Horn said. ''I know Steph. I played with him long enough to know how he is. He's got some fire and that's good.''
Marbury said: ''I'm man enough to say I was wrong for making that statement. I also feel that now it's a fresh start and I think Keith knows as well as I know, he averaged 20 points when I played with him.''
Van Horn scored 20 points here to lead the Knicks for the seventh straight game.
''Playing in New Jersey we were both frustrated, we were in a losing situation,'' Marbury said. ''I was younger. I've matured so much from playing in New Jersey.''
Beyond Van Horn, how Marbury will mesh with the Knicks' leading scorer, Allan Houston, is an equally pressing issue. For the first time since Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe, the Knicks have two 20-point scorers in the backcourt.
''You have to wonder, will it work?'' said Frazier, now a color commentator for MSG Network. He said he and Monroe worked together because their egos did not clash.
''Earl came to New York, and we had competed against each other, there was a lot of respect there,'' Frazier said. ''He had accomplished everything individually so he wanted to win the title. It was Earl who made the sacrifice.''
Marbury understood what is expected. ''A lot of people think his touches are going to be limited,'' he said of Houston. ''It's going to be so much easier for him to score because of having a guy who can break down defenses.''
Marbury has studied the league hungrily, but has an innate grasp of Knicks history. He even had to give Isiah Thomas a quick lesson.
''When he was talking to us yesterday he was like, 'I did not realize how big basketball was in New York until I came here,' '' Marbury recalled. ''I'm sitting here looking at him like, 'You really don't understand.' It's not just basketball here. Everybody knows about basketball in New York.''
PRO BASKETBALL
