As many as 17 people were killed and dozens injured, many of them children, in a double bomb blast in the southern city of Kandahar on Tuesday, local officials said. The bombing came just one day after the country triumphantly adopted a new Constitution.
The governor of Kandahar, Yousuf Pashtun, blamed the Taliban movement for the explosions, which took place in the middle of the day within minutes of each other. ''They are terrorists, they are coming from Pakistan and they are killing innocent people,'' he said in comments to Kandahar Television.
President Hamid Karzai condemned the attack as an ''act of cruelty and barbarism'' and said it would only strengthen his resolve to fight terrorism in Afghanistan.
A statement from his office said that at least eight children were among the dead.
The blasts seemed calculated to cause a high number of casualties, officials said. The first bomb exploded inside a gas cylinder and was far less damaging, injuring no one. The second was far bigger and went off 10 to 15 minutes later in the same place, wounding the many people who had gathered at the site of the first blast, said the head of the police criminal investigation department in Kandahar, Muhammad Nabi Majrooh.
The second bomb had been laid underground and was probably set off by remote control, he said. Twisted wrecks of bicycles were strewn around the bomb site, and at least one truck was destroyed by the blast, television film showed.
Casualties by evening had risen to 17 dead and 43 wounded, Mr. Majrooh said. United States soldiers took 26 children to the hospital at an air base on the edge of Kandahar, said the deputy governor, Muhammad Anas.
Officials said the terrorists might have been planning to attack police and security officials or American soldiers who might be drawn to the site by the first blast. But most victims were children from the Abdul Ahad Karzai primary school, named for the president's father, who was assassinated by Taliban agents five years ago. ''They did not kill any government people, but small children coming out from school,'' Mr. Majrooh said. ''Lots of children ran to see what had happened.''
He gave a warning on Kandahar Television about the peril of double bombings, and he urged people not to converge on the site of any explosion but to evacuate it immediately. ''We had information that the Taliban was going to explode several bombs in Kandahar,'' Mr. Pashtun said. ''We found four bombs in recent days but unfortunately we did not find this one before it exploded.'' Soldiers caught two suspects fleeing from the scene and were searching for four more men, he said.
He has warned that the Taliban will turn to urban terrorism and aim at soft civilian targets to try to undermine the government and stall reconstruction and investment efforts in the region.
