Federal officials said on Tuesday that genetic tests had confirmed that the cow in Washington State found to have had mad cow disease was born on a dairy farm in Alberta, Canada.
Officials from the United States and Canada made the announcement in a joint telephone news conference in which they said the inquiry would continue until they found out how and where the animal had been infected.
The officials emphasized the cooperation between the countries throughout the investigation, which began after the finding on Dec. 23 of the first case of mad cow in the United States. Several American lawmakers used the announcement to call for an indefinite postponement of the importation of live cattle from Canada, a suggestion that met resistance from Prime Minister Paul Martin, who said this was problem of a ''North American industry.''
The Washington cow is the second mad cow case found in cattle born in Alberta. The first was on May 20, 2003, on a different farm, and led to a ban on Canadian beef exports. Canadian officials said the first animal most likely contracted the disease by eating contaminated feed. Officials said it was unlikely that these two Canadian-born cows had eaten the same infected feed.
''We have not at this point got sufficient evidence to make any definitive feed link between the two farms,'' said Dr. Brian Evans, the chief veterinarian of Canada, who spoke at the news conference.
Agriculture Department officials said they would use the finding in their efforts to persuade more than 40 trading partners to lift their varying bans on American beef imports since the discovery of mad cow, also known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy.
Japan, the top importer of American beef, said on Tuesday that it would continue its ban.
Senior Agriculture Department officials arrived in Mexico on Tuesday to persuade that major importer that it was safe to import American beef.
American cattlemen and ranchers are hoping to recover some of the $3.6 billion export market for beef, veal and variety meats that disappeared when the mad cow case was announced. Beef prices reached record highs last year, helped by the restriction of Canadian imports.
Senator Kent Conrad, Democrat of North Dakota, used the first Alberta case to promote American beef and demand the continued ban on importing live cattle from Canada.
''This should reassure consumers of U.S. beef both at home and in overseas markets that American beef is safe from mad cow,'' Mr. Conrad said.
Dr. Ron DeHaven, chief veterinarian of the Agriculture Department, said American scientists had matched the DNA from the infected Holstein and the DNA from the Canadian bull that sired the cow.
''We now have DNA evidence that allows us to verify with a high degree of certainty the B.S.E.-positive cow found in the State of Washington originated from a dairy farm in Alberta, Canada,'' Mr. DeHaven said.
The cow was one of more than 80 exported to Washington in September 2001.
The officials said investigators would try to find all those cattle, as well as another group from the same farm that were exported in a second wave to the United States.
The Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, said he would call for the immediate financing of a program to require country-of-origin labels for American meat and produce, a step that many lawmakers said would have helped in the search for the origins of the infected cow.
The farm bill that Congress passed in 2002 required labels with the country of origin of meat and meat products beginning in October 2004. Industry groups opposed the measure, and this year the House Appropriations Committee struck the requirement for beef, pork, lamb and fish and failed to finance the measure. The Senate is expected to vote on the spending this month.
Agriculture officials said recall records had traced the raw beef that may have been exposed to tissue from the infected cow to six states: California, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon and Washington.
Cattle prices continued to drop on Tuesday in commodities markets.
