The American-led government is expected to announce on Wednesday that it will release 506 detainees in Iraq who still pose ''some risk'' but who have not engaged in violence against occupation forces, senior military and government officials said Tuesday.
''We're talking about low-level detainees, what we call minor violators, who have not been involved in organizing or executing any violence against the coalition or Iraqis,'' a senior military official said.
The detainees will be released after they vow not to commit violent acts. A prominent member of the community must promise to take responsibility for the behavior of each detainee released. The first 100 are to be released on Thursday, and the rest in the next several weeks.
The officials said many of those detainees were being held because of their association with activities or people in the insurgency against the occupation, rather than because of any direct involvement.
One senior military official gave an example: Soldiers raiding a house might have detained four brothers, three of them armed and planning attacks, and the fourth in an upstairs room reading. The fourth man would have known about the plot, the official said, and might even have planned to take part, but was not caught doing anything wrong.
Once detainees are freed, there are no rules dictating what they do. As for the community leaders who guarantee their behavior, their promises are moral, not legal, and they face no consequences, the officials said.
The American military in Iraq regularly releases detainees, but this is the first time the military intends to free people who are considered suspect. Most are being held in Abu Ghraib, a prison on the western outskirts of Baghdad.
The officials said the authorities decided to free the detainees as a sign of goodwill. The hope is that the action will persuade low-level insurgents or sympathizers to refrain from violence or to help occupation forces, they added.
''The reconciliation process is beginning,'' a senior official with the Coalition Provisional Authority said. ''This is one small part of it.''
To determine who would be freed, the military reviewed the files of 9,000 detainees; those who had committed violence were eliminated from consideration. Military lawyers and intelligence officers reviewed those remaining and sent on 1,200 files to a board that settled on the final 506.
The military will review the files of detainees to see whether others qualify to be released, the officials said.
Adnan Pachachi, the current head of the Iraqi Governing Council, approved the releases, they added.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DETAINEES
