Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on Tuesday labeled as ''positive'' the latest offer by North Korea to suspend its nuclear programs as part of an overall nuclear agreement, saying that he hoped the offer would lead to more talks on the issue.
Appearing at the State Department after a meeting with the foreign minister of Tunisia, Habib Ben Yahia, Mr. Powell said it was ''interesting'' that North Korea had ''in effect said they won't test and they implied they would give up all aspects of their nuclear program, not just weapons program.''
The secretary's comments were a response to the latest statement from North Korea on the contentious issue of nuclear weapons, issued earlier on Tuesday from the official Korean Central News Agency.
Administration officials said the North Korean offer differed only slightly from a proposal put forward last month but said it was important to take note of it in order to encourage more cooperation.
As is often the case, the North Korean statement contained words that were both bluntly challenging and mildly conciliatory. Administration officials acknowledged frankly that they had decided to overlook the bluster and seize on the more moderate aspects of the statement in order to restart a stalled conversation with the North.
The more confrontational language by the North Korean agency said American demands for an irreversible dismantling of its nuclear weapons program, as opposed to a suspension, ''will destroy the foundation of the dialogue and cast a dark shadow'' over hopes for new talks.
For the last year, the United States has been working with China, Russia, Japan and South Korea to engage the government in Pyongyang, the North Korean capital. Two largely unsuccessful sessions took place in Beijing last year.
A third session was supposed to have occurred in December, but plans foundered when China, the sponsor of the talks, tried to work out a rough statement of what was accomplished ahead of time.
There is now no plan to try to prearrange a statement for the next round, but American officials did not rule out a set of goals being worked on once the talks are scheduled.
The main problem has been disagreement over sequencing the steps that would be taken by North Korea toward the goal of ending its nuclear programs, and the steps that the United States and others would offer in return, ranging from security guarantees to economic benefits.
Mr. Powell's comments were described by an aide as reflecting the view that North Korea had indeed gone a bit further than it had in the past by expressing willingness to suspend its nuclear energy programs, which many experts say are a front for weapons activities.
In addition, the official said, Mr. Powell wanted to take note of what seemed to be a concession in order to lock it in at the next round of negotiating.
''This is an interesting step on their part, a positive step,'' Mr. Powell said. ''We hope that it will allow us to move more rapidly toward the six-party framework talks.'' He was referring to the talks sponsored by China.
Administration officials say that it has not been easy forging a common policy toward North Korea within the administration and not easy to get a consensus accepted by China, South Korea, Japan and Russia.
The Bush administration has said it could not go along with any kind of a ''freeze'' or ''suspension'' of North Korea's nuclear programs because of concerns that the program could be restarted down the road.
The repeated goals of the administration have been to get a ''complete, irreversible and verifiable'' dismantling of its nuclear weapons program. Only after North Korea has agreed to accept that as a goal, administration officials say, could the United States begin to think about offering concessions in return.
