Republicans who redrew Texas Congressional districts last fall in an effort to gain seats won a crucial victory on Tuesday when a special three-judge federal panel in Austin found no constitutional grounds to intervene.
Barring any action by the Supreme Court, the Congressional campaigns this fall will be fought using the unfamiliar and sometimes tortuous new lines.
The judges ruled that there was no bar to mid-decade redistricting, even though redistricting normally occurs after the once-a-decade census. They also found that politics -- not illegal racial discrimination -- prompted the redrawing of district lines.
Twice last year, Democratic lawmakers, angered by the proposed redrawing, left the state to withhold quorums that would allow Republicans to pass the redistricting plan, which seemed likely to cost Democrats several seats in the Congressional delegation.
But the decision by the judges, Patrick Higginbotham, Lee Rosenthal and T. John Ward, pointedly noted that ''we decide only the legality'' of the plan ''and not its wisdom.'' Judge Ward, moreover, partly dissented, arguing that in one district Hispanic voters were illegally disenfranchised and that the Legislature had to remedy the violations.
Justice Department officials cleared the map on Dec. 19, finding it consistent with the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
By some counts, Texas Democrats, who had held a 17-to-15 edge in the House until Representative Ralph M. Hall announced last week that he was joining the Republicans, could find themselves in a 23-to-9 minority.
The court ruled on four issues: whether Texas could redistrict mid-decade; whether the plan discriminated on the basis of race; whether it was an unconstitutional gerrymander; and whether it diluted the voting strengths of minorities. In all cases, the judges decided, it did not violate the Constitution. But they said, ''Whether the Texas Legislature has acted in the best interest of Texas is a judgment that belongs to the people who elected the officials whose act is challenged in this case.''
The decision sent candidates scrambling to prepare their filings in the newly redrawn districts by the deadline of Jan. 16.
Republicans from Gov. Rick Perry on down praised the ruling. Democrats denounced it, vowing to take the battle to the Supreme Court, which is already hearing a related Pennsylvania gerrymandering case that could have an effect on Texas.
Both sides were bruised by the vitriolic remapping battle in the Texas House and Senate. At the end of the legislative session in May, House Democrats, claiming a plot to lock them in for a vote, fled to Oklahoma.
Later, Senate Democrats thwarted two special sessions by going to Albuquerque. After one of their number broke ranks to provide a quorum, the others reluctantly followed for a third special session during which the Republican majority pushed through the redistricting bill.
Democrats and other critics of the redistricting plan then filed suit.
''The Legislature has fulfilled its constitutional responsibility,'' Governor Perry said after the judges' decision. The chairwoman of the Texas Republican Party, Tina Bensiker, said, ''Our claims have been validated.'' Tom Reynolds, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, called the ruling ''a serious blow to the Democrats'' and added, ''It makes their already remote chances of taking back the House slimmer than ever.''
Democrats accused Republicans of drawing districts to dilute the voting power of minorities. Representative Martin Frost of Dallas, a major target of Republican redistricters, said the court ''effectively repealed the Voting Rights Act and turned back the clock on nearly 40 years of progress for minority Americans.''
Representative Robert Menendez of New Jersey, chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, said the ruling ''reinforces the Republican party's declaration of war against the Hispanic and African-American communities throughout Texas.''
Richard Murray, director of the Center for Public Policy at the University of Houston, who testified in the case as an expert witness called by the Democrats, said he found that the remapping drained some votes from Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, a black Democrat from Houston. But he said the judges seemed persuaded that because other minority representatives gained, the plan was not discriminatory.
