WHEN Tom Coughlin was named the Jacksonville Jaguars' coach as well as their director of football operations in 1994, he described his hiring as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to construct an expansion franchise.
But with the Giants set to introduce Coughlin formally today as their new coach, he has been granted a second once-in-a-lifetime opportunity, to reconstruct one of the National Football League's flagship franchises.
Coughlin is exactly the coach these Giants need after their 4-12 collapse this season: a stern drill sergeant who will snap them out of their stupor of too many turnovers, too many interceptions, too many lost fumbles, too many penalties and too many wasted scoring chances in the red zone.
Of all the coaching candidates out there, Coughlin was the best man for the Giants' job. He has been not only an N.F.L. head coach, but also a winning head coach. He guided the Jaguars to two conference championship games.
No other candidate has so impressive a pro résumé. Not even Nick Saban, a Cleveland Browns assistant coach a decade ago who was the Michigan State coach when he spurned an offer to be the Giants' head coach in 1997 before they hired Jim Fassel. Saban is now basking in the Bowl Championship Series title as the Louisiana State coach.
Coughlin, whose connection to the Giants goes back to when he was the receivers coach on Bill Parcells's staff when the Giants won Super Bowl XXV, has long had Parcells's seal of approval on his résumé.
''Tom is one of the best two or three coaches I've ever been around,'' Parcells said before his 1996 Patriots defeated Coughlin's Jaguars, 20-6, in the American Football Conference championship game. ''Because he's fearless -- fearless. He's not afraid of anything.''
Coughlin certainly won't be afraid to jolt the Giants out of the comfort level they developed in their seven seasons under Fassel.
Over all, Fassel was a good coach and a better man, but he didn't impose in his players the fear of making a mistake that the best coaches do, as Parcells did as coach of the Cowboys this season and as coach of the Jets, the Patriots and the Giants. Or the fear that Coughlin imposed in Jacksonville and will impose now.
John Mara, the Giants' executive vice president, and General Manager Ernie Accorsi seriously interviewed three coordinators who deserved the utmost consideration: Romeo Crennel (defense) and Charlie Weis (offense) of the 14-2 Patriots, and Lovie Smith (defense) of the 12-4 Rams.
All three may emerge as successful head coaches elsewhere in future years, if not next season. Smith may be hired in Atlanta, Crennel in Arizona. But the Giants could not afford to take a chance on a coordinator, at least not when Coughlin was available. Mara remembered 1974, when the Giants hired one of pro football's most respected coordinators, Bill Arnsparger, the architect of the No-Name Defense that had helped the Dolphins win consecutive Super Bowls.
For all of Arnsparger's brilliance as a coordinator, with the Giants he was simply not a head coach. His quiet personality didn't have much impact on the Giants players of that era, especially because too many players were not that talented. He had been the best bass violinist in somebody's band, but he couldn't lead his own band.
Not that a coordinator can't develop into a good head coach. When Ray Perkins announced with three games to play that he was leaving the Giants after the 1982 season, General Manager George Young immediately named Parcells, their defensive coordinator, as coach. But for every Parcells, there are dozens of coordinators who can't lead the band.
If the Giants had hired Crennel, Weis or Smith, maybe that choice would turn out to be another Parcells, but the Giants couldn't take the risk that he might be another Arnsparger. Not when Coughlin was available.
Although Coughlin's last three Jaguars teams were 7-9, 6-10 and 6-10 and prompted his dismissal a year ago, he had assembled an enduring expansion franchise. After a 4-12 start in 1995, the Jaguars were 9-7, 11-5, 11-5 and 14-2 with quarterback Mark Brunell generating Coughlin's high-scoring, pass-oriented offense.
Coughlin is geared to offense. After two seasons on the Giants' staff, he moved to Boston College as head coach. He was Young's choice to succeed Ray Handley after the 1992 season, but he preferred to stay at B.C., where he orchestrated the 41-39 upset of No. 1 Notre Dame that cost the Irish the mythical national championship in 1993.
Around the time Coughlin was fired by Jacksonville a year ago, Parcells, who was taking over in Dallas, wanted him to be the Cowboys' offensive coordinator, but Coughlin preferred to sit out the season and wait for a head coach's job to develop. And one did, with the Giants. His second once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.
Sports of The Times
