The Intel Corporation said on Tuesday that it planned to invest $200 million in start-up companies that are creating digital home entertainment technology that could eventually reach nearly every American household.
The company's newest venture capital fund is intended to support development of digital home entertainment networks, which would connect digital devices, like stereo systems, portable music players, flat-screen televisions and personal computers, and permit them to share and transfer video, music and information from room to room.
''This is a statement of how much potential there is ahead,'' said Scott C. Darling, vice president of Intel Capital, the company's venture capital unit, based in Santa Clara, Calif.
The public announcement of the Intel Digital Home Fund was timed with the opening of the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas, an annual event that brings together the leading companies in digital electronics and networking, as well as entrepreneurs.
Van Baker, research director at Gartner Inc., said the market for digital home electronics networks could eventually reach 80 million households, the same homes that already pay for cable and satellite television. Mr. Baker said he expected that within the next three years, 20 million households would seek to link new digital devices as they replace aging analog equipment.
''Lots of people have PC's, home theater and broadband networks already,'' said Bob O'Donnell, director for personal technology at IDC, a market research company. ''The challenge is to develop technologies to help these things work together.''
The ''digital home'' has been a rallying cry for Intel executives, who have been promoting a vision of the futuristic home powered by Intel microprocessors. ''As more entertainment and educational content becomes digital, people want to edit, manage and access that content and share it among multiple devices, including TV's, stereos, PC's and hand-helds,'' said John H.F. Miner, president of Intel Capital.
The new venture fund is the third specialty fund created by the company's venture capital unit, which was formed more than a decade ago to help nurture industries that use Intel's microprocessors. Intel has long acknowledged that while its chips supply the brain power for computers and other devices, demand for those products drives demand for chips. ''At Intel, we rely on external innovation,'' Mr. Miner said. ''We just build the chips.''
Intel Capital's other two venture funds, the Intel Communications Fund and the Intel 64 Fund, have invested heavily in dozens of companies. Intel Capital's general fund, which has made the vast majority of the company's venture investments, has financed more than 1,000 start-up companies that could increase demand for Intel's microprocessors.
Intel Capital's earlier investments in communications companies helped create a market for Intel's Centrino chip, which permits computers to communicate over wireless networks. The Intel Communications Fund, a $500 million fund, has invested in more than 50 start-ups in the wireless industry since it was created four years ago. The Intel 64 Fund, a $250 million fund started in 1999, has financed companies developing software and devices that take advantage of Intel's 64-bit Itanium chip, which has had lukewarm demand. Among those investments are SendMail, an Internet mail program, and several Internet security firms.
For Intel Capital, the digital home represents the next major market opportunity. The fund has already invested in Bridgeco, a start-up designer of low-cost chips for linking home devices, and Entropic, which designs chips for home networking systems over standard coaxial cable. Another investment, Musicmatch, sells software for recording, organizing and playing music on digital devices.
Mr. Miner compared the state of the digital home electronics market today to that of the computer industry two decades ago, when the makers of monolithic mainframe computers began to give way to the upstart personal computer makers. Within a few years, an entire industry of new players had emerged.
Likewise, in digital consumer electronics, the industry is only now realizing that the necessary innovation may well come from nimble entrepreneurs rather than established corporations. ''People are just now waking up to the realities,'' Mr. Miner said. ''There have been entrenched players in consumer electronics so that people have been hesitant to jump in.''
Mr. Baker of Gartner said that the problems of digital networking are likely to be solved by new companies that do not have a vested interest in one technology or another. ''What we have now is a complex set of technologies that don't work together well and are cumbersome to use,'' Mr. Baker said. ''It's probably going to take some fresh thinking from start-up companies.''
TECHNOLOGY
