Condoleezza Rice, President Bush's national security adviser, stood in front of Mr. Bush's desk in the Oval Office last summer and tried to coax the president into something he did not want to face.
She suggested, carefully, that the White House begin repairing the rupture with the allies over Iraq by reaching out to Germany, whose chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, had infuriated the president by campaigning for re-election on an antiwar platform. Mr. Bush, simply put, did not trust him.
''I can't do it with Schröder,'' Mr. Bush told Ms. Rice, according to a senior administration official who witnessed the exchange. Ms. Rice, who had not directly suggested that Mr. Bush meet with Mr. Schröder, rushed to reassure. ''No, no, no, we won't make you do it with Schröder,'' she said. But Mr. Bush seemed to know what Ms. Rice had in mind. ''Wait a minute, you'll get me back with Schröder, I know what you're trying to do,'' the president said, the official recounted.
Soon enough, a meeting to begin defrosting relations was set up between Mr. Bush and Mr. Schröder at the session last September of the United Nations General Assembly. '' 'I knew that was going to happen,' '' Mr. Bush laughingly told Ms. Rice after the meeting was scheduled, the senior administration official said. Ms. Rice gently bantered back, the official said, but then concluded, '' 'Now, look, it's the right time to do it.' ''
Condoleezza Rice began her relationship with George W. Bush as the foreign policy tutor who educated the little-traveled 2000 presidential candidate in the complexities of a world more dangerous than either of them knew. Now, three years, two wars and countless crises later, the relationship between the president and Ms. Rice has evolved into a partnership that has shaped one of the most assertive foreign policies in recent American history.
Like a number of earlier relationships between national security advisers and their bosses, including Henry Kissinger's association with Richard Nixon and Zbigniew Brzezinski's work with Jimmy Carter, Ms. Rice's interactions with Mr. Bush have developed into a fulcrum for the development of foreign policy. But even more than those earlier collaborations, Ms. Rice's relationship with Mr. Bush has been closely guarded.
Now, as Ms. Rice heads into what she insists will be her last year of service in the White House, she and other top Bush advisers have begun to lift the veil of secrecy about her relationship with the president, with whom she spends an extraordinary amount of time -- long days at the White House, summer walks at the president's Texas ranch, weekends of gym workouts, football games on television and jigsaw puzzles with the president and first lady at Camp David. There, Ms. Rice has a cabin to herself on the wooded grounds.
''I sit with my reading and my cup of coffee, and especially if it's winter, I make a fire,'' Ms. Rice said in one of two recent interviews in her spacious West Wing office. ''It's really not tough duty. But, of course, I look forward to having control of my life.''
Ms. Rice is hardly the only important foreign policy adviser to Mr. Bush in a sometimes contentious inner circle that includes Vice President Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and Secretary of State Colin L. Powell. Mr. Cheney, who lunches alone with Mr. Bush once a week and maintains his own national security staff, has had an especially large role in policy making, including the decision to go to war with Iraq.
Competing Viewpoints
In Washington, Ms. Rice has faced increasing criticism that while she has done a good job as the president's friend and cheerleader, she has done a bad job of managing the president's frequently warring foreign policy team.
Her inability to rein in other powerful advisers, critics say, has helped lead to little planning for the occupation in Baghdad, stalled negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians, and no success in stopping North Korea from making nuclear weapons.
''She has a problem that I didn't have,'' said Brent Scowcroft, who was national security adviser to Mr. Bush's father and a longtime mentor to Ms. Rice. ''Everyone then was facing in the same direction, but she's got people facing in opposite directions. And that's really hard.''
Ms. Rice discounts the criticism, and several senior advisers to Mr. Bush said it was in fact the president who demanded the open debate. ''The president has never said, 'I want only one opinion presented in the Oval Office,' '' said Andrew H. Card Jr., the White House chief of staff. Ms. Rice, he said, ''does not run around affixing muzzles to our faces.''
Either way, no other adviser spends as much time with the president as Ms. Rice. ''He takes Cheney seriously, obviously,'' said a senior administration official, ''but she's the last person to talk him through it.''
In short, Ms. Rice has become a germination point for Bush foreign policy, from the war in Iraq to sidelining Yasir Arafat to the policy of pre-emption. As a Russia specialist and a former provost of Stanford University, she says she has melded her realism -- the view that great powers act in their own self-interest -- with what she calls Mr. Bush's idealism, or what his critics say is his naïve belief in a ''moral'' American foreign policy that can spread democracy throughout the world.
In this equation, Ms. Rice is the unsentimental academic who focuses on facts and history, while Mr. Bush starts with a set of big-picture principles rooted in his Christian faith, along with a politician's sense about other leaders and the pressures that drive them. Ms. Rice said that she saw her job as translating the president's instincts into policy, and that he now influenced her as much as she influenced him.
''This president has a very strong anchor and compass about the direction of policy, about not just what's right and what's wrong, but what might work and what might not work,'' Ms. Rice said. The president likes to focus ''on this issue of universal values and freedom,'' and after Sept. 11, she said, ''I found myself seeing the value of that.''
It is not, she added, ''the orientation out of which I came.''
Mr. Bush declined to be interviewed for this article, but as a presidential candidate in 2000 he gave a reporter a hint of his chemistry with Ms. Rice. ''She's fun to be with,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I like lighthearted people, not people who take themselves so seriously.'' Besides, he said, ''She's really smart!''
To the Bushes, Ms. Rice, 49, is almost a surrogate daughter, a charming, reassuring and -- in private -- sardonic presence who can explain Middle East policy in five digestible bites. She is also, like the president's mother and another influential adviser, Karen P. Hughes, a tough-minded woman brimming with self-confidence.
To Ms. Rice, an only child who has never married and whose parents have died, the Bushes are some of the closest friends she has. Just about the only time she spends away from her job, and the Bushes, is on Sunday afternoons, when Ms. Rice, who trained as a concert pianist, returns from Camp David and practices with a chamber music group.
''We are all in one way or another close to the family, but she is especially close to the family because of the time she spends with the president,'' said Mr. Powell, who was national security adviser to Ronald Reagan. ''This is not unusual, but at the same time, a little unusual.''
Ms. Rice, a former Democrat turned ardent, hawkish Republican, has no trouble making her views known to the president. Last summer, along with Mr. Powell, she urged Mr. Bush to intervene militarily in the civil war in Liberia, over the opposition of the Pentagon. Mr. Bush eventually approved sending a contingent of 200 marines.
''And what he would challenge me on is, 'All right, if we send X number of marines, and they're at the airport, and they are characterized in a particular way, what's that going to do to our central premise that this is an African peacekeeping effort, not an American one?' '' Ms. Rice said.
More recently, she told Mr. Bush she was concerned about developments in Russia, where the man Mr. Bush calls a trusted friend, President Vladimir V. Putin, has jailed the country's richest businessman.
''Then, usually, there's a conversation: 'Well, how do we communicate that?' '' Ms. Rice said. In this case, she said, the president raised his unease in a conversation with Mr. Putin, ''in a broad sense of just saying,'' Ms. Rice said, '' 'O.K., everybody is concerned about this.' ''
Making Arguments
Ms. Rice is the first to say that the president does not always take her advice, and that one of the biggest misperceptions about him is that he is captive to the competing views of his foreign policy advisers.
''I don't talk the president into almost anything, all right?'' Ms. Rice said. ''I just want that understood. You can't do that with the president. What you can do with the president is make your arguments.''
In Northern Ireland this past April, Mr. Bush and Ms. Rice had a tense disagreement about a phrase that Mr. Bush planned to use in a joint news conference with Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain. With American and British forces making quick gains in Iraq, Mr. Bush wanted to say that the United Nations would have a ''vital role'' in an American-led occupation. Mr. Blair and Mr. Powell agreed. But Ms. Rice, according to a senior administration official, was under pressure from officials in Mr. Cheney's office who disliked the United Nations and thought ''vital'' was going too far.
The president used the word anyway -- not once, but nine times. Afterward, the senior administration official said, Ms. Rice was ''fussing about it a bit because she was afraid she might have some explaining to do back here in order to cover all of our various constituencies. And after a while, the president got annoyed about it.''
The president, the official said, then cut off Ms. Rice, curtly telling her, the official recounted, ''I did it, and that's it.'' The two nearly made a scene, the official said. ''They almost had to go off for a minute to sort it out,'' the official recounted. ''And then it blew over.''
But Ms. Rice worked hand in hand with Mr. Bush on translating into policy his belief that democracy has a chance in the Middle East -- now a central goal of his administration. In the spring of 2002, when violence raged between the Israelis and Palestinians, Ms. Rice said the president began to question not whether we ''were pushing this party hard enough or that party hard enough,'' but ''Did we have some fundamental problems here?''
Mr. Bush concluded that they did, and that Mr. Arafat had to be marginalized so that a democratic Palestinian state might emerge.
''When you think about the way people had thought about the Middle East, it was just about land,'' Ms. Rice said. ''And the innovation here, and it was the president's innovation, was to take this sense that these values are universal, and that democratic states are different, and to apply that to the Middle East.''
Since then, Ms. Rice has taken considerable control of the Middle East policy through Elliott Abrams, the fiercely pro-Israel director of Middle East Affairs at the National Security Council, whom Ms. Rice hired a year ago. Although Mr. Powell has been the administration's longtime point person on the negotiations, Ms. Rice traveled to the Middle East with Mr. Abrams last spring, and through him has enforced Mr. Bush's insistence that the United States not deal with Mr. Arafat.
Taking Control in Policy
Ms. Rice was in similar lock step with Mr. Bush, and Mr. Cheney, on going to war with Iraq, senior advisers to the president said, and served as an implementer of the president's wishes. Richard Haass, the former director of policy planning at the State Department who is now the president of the Council on Foreign Relations, recalls going to see Ms. Rice in July 2002, well before the president began making a public case for ousting Mr. Hussein, to discuss with Ms. Rice ''the pros and cons'' of making Iraq a priority.
''Basically she cut me off and said, 'Save your breath -- the president has already decided what he's going to do on this,' '' Mr. Haass said.
In the same way, Ms. Rice has worked to carry out Mr. Bush's demand for six-party talks, rather than direct American negotiations, to try to get North Korea to dismantle its nuclear weapons program. She shows no patience with other agencies that wanted a different approach.
''I'm not going to spend time trying to manage what level four at State and Defense think about our North Korea policy,'' Ms. Rice said, referring to lower-level officials.
Similarly, Ms. Rice and Mr. Bush decided last August at the president's ranch to bring the management of the administration's Iraq policy to the White House, after the Pentagon managed the war, under the purview of Ms. Rice and a new Iraq Stabilization Group.
It is unclear what has changed in the administration of Iraq policy since then. Ms. Rice will only say that her group ''is really kind of the traditional role for the N.S.C. adviser'' -- a point made more sharply by Mr. Rumsfeld, the perceived loser in the switch.
At the time, Mr. Rumsfeld said he had ''no idea'' why Ms. Rice sent him a memorandum on the subject -- an unusual public breach in a relationship that some in the administration liken to that of a cantankerous uncle with a take-charge niece. Ms. Rice is intimidated, some critics say, by the combative Mr. Rumsfeld.
''Really?'' Ms. Rice said, pointedly. ''I wonder if Don Rumsfeld would think that. I don't think so.'' Mr. Rumsfeld, she said, ''has a kind of a bluntness that I actually like. We're able to be direct with each other, but we're friends, and have been for years.''
She has managed men older than herself for years, she said. ''I was the provost of Stanford University at 38, O.K.?'' she said.
Ultimately, she added, she will look back on her job as that of a pianist in a chamber music group.
''The pianist is always facing the fact that this beast that is the grand piano can just overwhelm in sound and volume and drama any string, or all of the strings together,'' she said. ''So you want your playing to have personality, but you don't want it to be front and center, overwhelming. It has to be part of the team.''
