IN many ways Washington State is America's stealth wine region. Without the magnitude and tourist-generating power of California, or the friendly rebel attitude and accessibility of Oregon's Willamette Valley, Washington wines pass almost unnoticed into the marketplace. Few people realize that Washington grows more grapes for wine than any state but California.
Very quietly, however, small, high-level Washington producers are making some excellent red wines that offer distinct stylistic alternatives to California. In a recent tasting of 25 red wines made from various blends of Bordeaux grapes, the Dining Section wine panel found wines of high quality that ranged from light and friendly to intense and complex.
''It's an overlooked category with no identity yet, at least not on the East Coast,'' said David Gordon, the wine director at Tribeca Grill in New York. He and Mark Golodetz, a contributing editor to Wine Enthusiast, joined Amanda Hesser and me for the tasting.
One likely reason for this void is that Washington's primary wine-producing region is so far out of the way. Concentrated in the Columbia River Valley, an arid, almost desertlike region east of the Cascade Mountains, the area is not easily accessible from the well-traveled coastal corridor. There is precious little in the way of spas, restaurants, inns and all the other attractions that have turned the California wine regions into exemplars of a ''lifestyle.'' Without the distraction of a tourist industry, the focus is squarely on making wine.
We decided to taste Bordeaux-style wines because they are where Washington has concentrated its efforts. Cabernet sauvignon, merlot and cabernet franc, the primary red grapes of Bordeaux, are also by far the most widely planted in Washington, covering approximately 13,000 acres altogether. This may not be true for long, though. Syrah is coming on strong, and while a little more than 2,000 acres are now planted with syrah, that amount will continue to grow. We also sought out many of Washington's high-end artisanal wineries because we were curious about the best that Washington had to offer. Many of these bottles may be hard to come by, but they give an important idea of the potential of Washington wines.
Almost all Bordeaux reds are actually blends of wines made from various proportions of cabernet sauvignon, merlot and cabernet franc, along with two other minor contributors, malbec and petit verdot. In the Médoc, cabernet sauvignon dominates, while in St.-Émilion and Pomerol, merlot is the lead grape.
American Bordeaux-style wines are mostly blends, too, even those labeled cabernet sauvignon or merlot. By American rules, a wine need include only 75 percent of, say, merlot in order to call itself merlot. So even though we tasted 11 cabernet sauvignons, 4 merlots and 2 cabernet francs among our 25 wines, almost all were blends dominated by one grape. We also tasted eight blends in which no particular grape met the 75 percent standard.
We all agreed that these Washington reds claimed a middle ground between the plump, powerfully fruity, almost sweet style of California and the leaner, more earthy, elegant style of Bordeaux. ''You don't get waves and waves of flavor as in California,'' said Ms. Hesser, who went so far as to call these wines delicate. I, too, very much liked their texture, finding them graceful and balanced, which makes them especially nice at the dinner table.
''They're real food wines,'' said Mr. Golodetz, who also contrasted them with California-style wines. ''They're not out there grabbing you by the throat,'' he said. ''They're very friendly -- they wag their tails at you.''
Maybe, but we didn't find many dogs in this bunch. Among those Washington wineries that have achieved some degree of fame, few are as highly regarded as Leonetti Cellar, and Leonetti's 2000 cabernet took top honors with us as well. Although it was young and closed, we all sensed the potential, power and balance of this wine and awarded it three stars. It ought to be delicious in a couple of years. Another leading Washington name, Andrew Will, made the list with his 2001 blend of grapes from the Champoux Vineyard. It's only 68 percent cabernet sauvignon, so it's simply called red wine on the label. We found it full of flavor, though not particularly subtle, and gave it two-and-a-half stars.
If Washington has made an impression on the wider wine-buying public, it's probably because some of the larger wineries produce excellent buys. One, the 2000 Columbia Crest Grand Estates cabernet sauvignon, from one of the state's biggest wineries, was our best value at $14. A wine from a much smaller producer, the 2000 L'Ecole No. 41 Columbia Valley cabernet sauvignon, was another good deal at $25.
Even some of the more expensive bottles offered value, especially when compared with California and French wines. For instance, the 2000 Delille Cellars Chaleur Estate, a blend (65 percent cabernet sauvignon), was clear and pure, with razor-sharp flavors that persisted in the mouth. It's certainly not cheap at $55, but I've had more than a few insipid $55 California cabernets.
Only one merlot made our final cut, the 2000 Owen-Sullivan from Klipsun Vineyard in the Red Mountain region. It especially appealed to Ms. Hesser and Mr. Gordon, who found it elegant and persistent. All the rest were cabernet sauvignons or blends dominated by cabernet, which at least suggests that by comparison, merlots don't have the intensity or elegance to compete with Washington cabernets.
Tasting Report: A Bit of French Elegance and California Power
Leonetti Cellar Cabernet Sauvignon $75  *** [rating: three stars]  Walla Walla 2000  Very young, tannic and closed, but great potential; this wine is going somewhere, Eric Asimov said. Mark Golodetz noted its complexity, and David Gordon liked its ripe fruit and balance.
Owen Roe Cabernet Sauvignon $59  *** [rating: three stars]  Yakima Valley Dubrul Vineyard 1999  Real purity to it, said Amanda Hesser, who found plum flavors and a long finish. Gordon admired its richness and Asimov called it intense, complex and evolving.
Delille Cellars Chaleur Estate $55  *** [rating: three stars]  Yakima Valley 2000  A favorite of Asimov, who called it razor sharp and delicious. Golodetz felt the tannins gave this wine excellent structure. Hesser called it coarse but convincing.
Woodward Canyon Cabernet Sauvignon $39  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Artist Series No. 8 1999  A fruity, juicy style with soft tannins, Gordon said. Hesser praised the fruit and acidity, and found a roasted plum aroma.
Owen-Sullivan Merlot Red Mountain $50  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Klipsun Vineyard 2000  The weight, ample fruit and aroma reminded Hesser of Australian shiraz. Gordon found lots of cherry flavors and called it elegant and persistent.
Andrew Will Red Wine $50  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Champoux Vineyard 2001  Not subtle, but plenty of fruit and chocolate flavors, Asimov said. Golodetz felt the fruit was ample enough to stand up to the oak flavors. Hesser found the wine improved with exposure to air.
L'Ecole No. 41 Cabernet Sauvignon $25  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Columbia Valley 2000  Ripe and elegant with good structure, Gordon said. Asimov found it light and fruity, but not complex, which Hesser amended to delightfully simple.
Columbia Crest Grand Estates $14  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Cabernet Sauvignon Columbia Valley 2000  Both Hesser and Golodetz felt this was made in the traditional Bordeaux style, emphasizing elegance over plush fruit. But Gordon found it very soft and Asimov called it pleasant and straightforward.
Matthews Red Wine $48  ** 1/2 [rating: two and a half stars]  Yakima Valley 2000  Graceful, elegant and balanced, Asimov said, with aromas of anise, mint and berries. Hesser found the aromas delicate, in contrast to the burly body.
Kiona Cabernet Sauvignon 2000 $24  ** [rating: two stars]  Big, spicy and decadent, Hesser said, but well balanced. Gordon called it jammy and Golodetz found it very simple. California-like, Asimov said, friendly but not subtle.
WHAT THE STARS MEAN  (None) Pass it by  * Passable  ** Good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the panel's reaction to the wines, which are tasted with names and vintages concealed. The panelists this week are Eric Asimov, Amanda Hesser, Mark Golodetz, a contributing editor to Wine Enthusiast, and David Gordon of Tribeca Grill in New York. The wines tasted represent a selection generally available in good retail shops and restaurants. Prices are those paid in liquor shops in the New York region.
Tasting Coordinator: Bernard Kirsch  nytimes.com
Recent wine columns from the New York Times are online: nytimes.com/wine.
WINES OF THE TIMES
