Brooklyn nurses its grudge against Manhattan with all the subtlety of King Kong, a Red Sox fan or Gerald R. Ford.
So this may come as perverse consolation, but slowly, quietly and over the course of decades, the borough has created something -- or, rather, a conspicuous nothing -- that elevates it among the ranks of the country's real, independent big cities.
At the borough's heart, framed by the waterfront to the west, the arts center to the east, the civic center to the north and a thriving residential neighborhood and dining scene to the south, sit eight square blocks of urban blight. There are some buildings, some beauty salons, a deli here and there, but the dominant features of this rectangle bounded by Atlantic Avenue, Schermerhorn Street, Court Street and Bond Street are parking lots, fences, dirt, and nothing.
By virtue of its centrality and run-down state, this area gives Brooklyn a challenge and an opportunity that compares not with Manhattan but more directly with the West End in Dallas, downtown Columbus, Ohio, or Skid Row in Los Angeles. In short, it is the archetypal little urban patch right in the middle of everything that no one knows how to use.
What sets this one apart from comparable sites in those other cities is that it includes an unrelated patchwork of seven major projects, five of them already under way.
''What's there right now is an area that hasn't had much attention paid to it,'' said Glenn D. Markman, an executive director of the real estate services firm Cushman &amp; Wakefield. ''Now, the focus is there. The vision is going to result in this being one of the important gateways in all of Brooklyn.''
The success of each project, though, depends to some extent upon completion of the others. And around the intersection of Willoughby Street and the Flatbush Avenue Extension, more is at stake. The city of New York has earmarked that zone for a $100 million economic development project and identified it as one of the city's last best hopes to retain companies and jobs after so many have moved away in pursuit of less expensive real estate.
That commercial area, where the city hopes to create 4.5 million square feet of new office space, is linked to Manhattan by the Brooklyn Bridge and the Manhattan Bridge and subway service, including the A, C, F, M, N and R lines and the 2, 3, 4 and 5 trains. It is isolated, though, from much of what Brooklyn has to offer, including the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the promenade and a group of neighborhoods so trendy that the civic boosters have taken to referring to them collectively as BoCoCa, for Boerum Hill, Cobble Hill and Carroll Gardens.
What stands between them all is this frozen zone, its south side sometimes called the Atlantic Avenue Gap, which is now thawing in chunks.
''It's one of the most critical intersections in all of Brooklyn,'' said David Yassky, a City Council member whose district office is on Court Street at the edge of this zone.
This barren but strategically invaluable area was nearly a half-century in the making, created from the Brooklyn House of Detention -- which was erected in 1957 and emptied last year -- and three urban renewal sites acquired by the state for a project that was aborted in the 1970's.
New plans for the lots would create a mixed-income residential neighborhood served by its own retail stores and hotels.
The most expensive and intricate of the projects is an effort to overhaul a full city block bounded by Schermerhorn, Hoyt, State and Smith Streets.
The presence of five historic town houses near the southeastern flank makes the block visually striking. They make this stretch of State Street look like any other tree-lined block of moneyed Brooklyn, only with a gaping hole plugged by a parking lot.
A partnership including Time Equities, known recently for its conversions of office buildings around Wall Street into apartments, and Abby Hamlin, a Brooklyn-born onetime dancer who has developed town houses in TriBeCa, bought the 100,000-square-foot site from the Empire State Development Corporation last month after two years of negotiations, for $4.6 million.
The developers say they intend to line State Street with 27 single-family town houses and to build about 200 apartments and lofts, a theater and retail space, perhaps including a supermarket. They have to work around the five town houses because of the historic designations, and the city mandated the inclusion of low-income housing, developed and managed jointly by the Actors' Fund and Common Ground. The total cost of the project is estimated at $165 million.
''It looked like an opportunity to do a project that would have a significant impact on the urban environment,'' Ms. Hamlin said.
Directly to the east, the state is selling a 60,000-square-foot parcel bounded by State, Bond, Hoyt and Schermerhorn Streets, to the IBEC Building Corporation in a deal expected to close for $3.5 million in the spring, state officials said. IBEC, which has been awarded development rights from the city, has indicated that it plans rental housing and the sale of town houses, state officials said.
South of those parcels, at Smith Street and Atlantic Avenue directly east of the House of Detention, Lev Leviev/Boymelgreen Developers paid the state $3.3 million last February for an 18,000-square-foot parcel, where it intends to build a boutique hotel with 50 luxury rental condominiums and 10,000 square feet of retail space. Work is under way at the site, and the building is scheduled to open in the spring of 2005 at a total cost of $30 million, according to the developer.
''The projects count on each other,'' said T. William Kim, project developer for the hotel complex. ''How much traffic comes into the area depends on there being some momentum and the right mix of services to create that niche.''
On the other side of the House of Detention, at the intersection of Court Street and Atlantic Avenue, Two Trees Management, the company controlled by the Walentas family and best known for transforming the neighborhood known as Dumbo (Down Under the Manhattan Bridge Overpass), bought the site from the city for $16.5 million and plans a $120 million project that would include a 700-space subterranean parking garage, 321 apartments for diverse income levels, 20,000 square feet of retail space and a new $14 million Y.M.C.A.
The same company has been engaged in negotiations to acquire the old Board of Education building at 110 Livingston Street. Though Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg slapped a red ''Sold'' sign on the front door for dramatic effect at a news conference in July, the sale still faces some public review, according to the city's Economic Development Corporation. Two Trees envisions transforming those offices into condominiums.
''Long-term, downtown Brooklyn is going to be what's going to compete with New Jersey,'' said Jed D. Walentas, an executive of Two Trees.
Between the two sites where Two Trees has its designs, on Boerum Place between State and Schermerhorn Streets, the Brooklyn Law School paid $6.2 million for a parking lot that it plans to convert into a residence hall for 360 students. The plans drawn up by Robert A. M. Stern call for an exterior of brick and cast stone to match the brownstones of the neighborhoods nearby, and Joan G. Wexler, dean of the school, said it would be completed in the spring of 2005 at a total cost of $83 million.
Across the street, on the east side of Boerum Place between State and Schermerhorn Streets, developers acquired yet another parking lot last year and have plans to build an 11-story tower of 99 one-  and two-bedroom market-rate rental apartments. The project will be completed in the spring of 2004 at a total cost of $28 million, according to Mario Procida, a manager of the development group.
The fate of the stark Brooklyn House of Detention is among the more obvious variables, cited as a challenge by several of the developers. Though the building is empty, the city has characterized its closing as temporary and left open the possibility that it could be filled again, a prospect that would oblige all the fancy new apartment buildings to find tenants who do not mind living next door to a jail.
The obstacles do not end there.
''You have streetscapes that, most of them, are pretty ugly, with very few amenities, street trees,'' said Michael J. Burke, director of the Downtown Brooklyn Council, a business advocacy group. ''That will require a lot of public investment.''
If in fact a new neighborhood emerges, there remains the matter of winning over the neighbors. Few people are sorry to see the parking lots go, but the prospect of a new influx of people is not universally applauded in the existing neighborhoods.
''What are you going to do to create open space, realistically, that people can use?'' said Jo Anne Simon, a past president of the Boerum Hill Association. She cited additional traffic as another concern.
And there are those who see the eventual success of the whole endeavor as a loss for Brooklyn, for reasons as old as the borough's grudge against the island to the northwest.
''When we become more like Manhattan due to the high-rises, it takes the personal nature out of it,'' said Matthew LaSorsa, owner of Heights Chateau, a wine store that has been on Atlantic Avenue between Clinton and Henry Streets since the mid-1980's. ''I don't know that you ever get a communal feeling out of a high-rise building, as if you were walking down Henry Street and people were sitting on their stoops. It's not the same.''
