Tucked away in her atelier along antique row on Wyndham Street here, Teresa Coleman nurtures a collection of ornate imperial robes from the courts of China that give new meaning to the term vintage clothing.
The robes are displayed as art, and their finely embroidered decorative symbols and splendid colors -- brilliant yellow for the emperor, more muted yellow for his underlings -- tell much about life and rank in the almost 300 years of the Qing dynasty (1644-1911).
Much of the West's interest in Chinese art has been devoted to porcelain, painting and furniture. But for an understanding of how the imperial court worked -- its pomp, ceremony and emphasis on rank -- imperial robes are invaluable guides, Ms. Coleman said. They are also remarkable works of artistry, with their lavish colors and stitching and exquisite materials, like thread from peacock feathers.
''All robes are diagrams of the universe,'' she said as she unwrapped layers of tissue from robes stored flat in drawers to protect them from light and dust. ''After 1759, court law said the emperor must wear the 12 symbols of authority.'' These signs of his power included the ocean, stars and dragons.
As an example, Ms. Coleman pulled out a chi-fu, the formal court silk robe worn by the emperor, princes and imperial ministers. The lower portion is embroidered with diagonal stripes signifying water and rolling waves for the sea. Four tall mountain peaks symbolize the earth and mountains, and dragons embroidered among clouds represent the air. The neck of the robe stands for the gate of heaven, and the symbolism is complete when the robe is worn: the wearer's head represents the heavens, Ms. Coleman said.
As one of the most distinguished kinds of imperial robes, the chi-fu has nine dragons. (More informal robes have far fewer.) Nine was considered an auspicious number, symbolizing virility and power.
''Don't forget, silk was very valuable,'' Ms. Coleman said. ''A mandarin's costume cost a year's salary.''
Museums and auction houses have long been interested in imperial robes. Last month the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, opened ''Draped in Dragons: Chinese Court Costume,'' a show of rare robes and other items from the museum's collection and from private collectors (through May 2). Earlier this year, at Sotheby's in Hong Kong, an imperial robe from the Qianlong period (1736-95), in which the color was slightly faded but the workmanship remained fine, sold for $90,000.
Ms. Coleman, who has collected imperial clothing for more than 20 years, has more than 1,000 pieces on show in the United States and Britain. In all, her collection of robes, embroidered fabrics, shoes for bound feet, miniature silk bags, jewelry, fans and hats topped with jeweled knobs amounts to a complete imperial wardrobe.
Some robes are on view through Feb. 15 at Kim 3 International Furnishings in Santa Barbara, Calif., in conjunction with an exhibition of Chinese ancestor portraits at the Santa Barbara Museum. (The paintings are on loan from the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery in Washington.) At the Fortnam &amp; Mason department store in London a selection of her robes recently complemented a show of ancient terra cotta called ''The Land of the Dragon.''
In Teresa Coleman Fine Arts, her gallery here, some robes are displayed on the walls, but the most valuable are in drawers, to be viewed only by request. Visitors from mainland China, now free to travel to Hong Kong, frequently find their way to her gallery; they are curious about their heritage, whose most splendid imperial forms have been deemed hopelessly bourgeois by China's Communist leaders.
Among Ms. Coleman's prizes is a woman's version of the chao-fu, the most formal court costume, which is based on the riding costume of the Manchus, a nomadic people noted for horsemanship. Until the late 18th century, women had few ceremonial duties in the Chinese court, so a woman's chao-fu is very rare indeed, she said.
The one in her collection has a brown silk background and very long, horseshoe-shaped cuffs to cover the hands. (It was considered impolite to show the hands and fingers.) Brown is considered ''a lesser yellow,'' so the robe, from about 1770, would have been made for a princess or noblewoman.
It has become harder to discover robes of outstanding quality, Ms. Coleman said. She thinks the best examples are long gone from China. Some are unearthed from burial sites, she said, and are often in pristine condition because they have been untouched for centuries. But ''I don't buy underground material dug from graves,'' she said.
As sources become more scarce, Ms. Coleman is contemplating selling her collection or becoming involved with a museum in Hong Kong specializing in imperial Chinese dress. Meanwhile, she has not completely given up collecting.
''The good news is you never know what is around the corner,'' she said. ''Some people can come and look at the collection and say: 'That looks like something we used for dressing up. Let's see if it's still there.' ''
