Sealed in a studio without a television camera in sight, six of the Democratic presidential candidates engaged in an unusual radio-only debate on Tuesday, and promptly revealed a sharp distinction that is dividing the field: Whether to raise taxes on middle-class Americans.
In an intense series of exchanges, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut-- talking from under a set of radio headphones -- hammered Howard Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri for proposing to reverse middle-class tax cuts passed under President Bush.
The medium might have been different, but the discussion, even under the famously decorous auspices of National Public Radio, was appropriately intense for this competition. And it showed how an issue that many Democrats thought would not generate much heat until the general election against Mr. Bush -- tax cuts -- was emerging as a dividing line between the candidates in Iowa.
Mr. Kerry has proposed eliminating the tax cuts that benefited wealthy Americans but not the cuts that benefited the middle-class. To dramatize his criticism of Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt, he repeatedly invoked the plight of two Iowa residents, divulging to the listening audience their incomes and potential new tax bills should Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt have their way.
''You're going to add to those people's burden the taking away the child credit, taking away the 10 percent bracket,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Everybody in Iowa will pay additional taxes at 15 percent and the marriage penalty be reinstated.
''Now, there's a terrific message: Democrats in America if you get married, you ought to pay more taxes.''
Mr. Lieberman, who again flew to Iowa to engage in a debate where he could draw a contrast with Dr. Dean, lined up with Mr. Kerry.
''I don't know of a case where a Democratic candidate for president has been elected who called for a massive increase in taxes on the middle class,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''These are our people. This is what America is all about. They are hurting more today than I've ever seen them hurting in my adult life.''
The attacks were focused mostly on Dr. Dean, who moved quickly to remind listeners that he was not alone in calling for the repeal of the Bush tax cuts -- or, as his opponents describe it, raising taxes. ''I'll take that and then I hope Dick responds because we're on the same side on this one as well,'' he said.
But for the most part, Dr. Dean was alone as he defended his position and scolded his opponents for promising voters all kinds of programs along with a tax cut.
''What John just said is hogwash,'' said Dr. Dean.
''You cannot promise people tax cuts, college education, health care and whatever else you want, and say, 'Oh, it'll all be fine,' '' Dr. Dean said. ''That's what George Bush is doing. I want fiscal responsibility in this country, but I want to help middle-class people send their kids to college. You cannot have tax cuts and help people send their kids to college at the same time.''
The debate was unusual even in a year where there have been, by some counts, more than 30 debates, that have left the candidates numb and familiar with each other's positions. It was, according to National Public Radio, the first radio-only presidential debate since Harold Stassen and Thomas E. Dewey competed for the Republican nomination in 1948.
The candidates were seated in a room without an audience to applaud or heckle them. At one point, Representative Dennis A. Kucinich of Ohio used a prop more suited for a television venue as a way demonstrating to Dr. Dean that he could not reduce the deficit without cutting Pentagon spending, drawing an incredulous if helpful bit of narration from the host.
''Congressman Kucinich is holding up a pie chart, which is not truly effective on the radio,'' said Neal Conan, the host of ''Talk of the Nation'' and the moderator of the debate.
''Well, it's effective if Howard can see it,'' Mr. Kucinich said.
Mr. Gephardt argued that that the repeal of the tax cut was an appropriate trade-off to finance the national health care plan he has made a central part of his campaign.
''I think that we need to help everybody with health care insurance,'' he said.
Of the remaining candidates, General Wesley K. Clark has decided not to compete in Iowa after concluding he would fare poorly here, and thus skipped the debate. On Monday he issued a tax proposal that would cut taxes on the poor and middle class, while substantially raising the burden on millionaires.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina spent the day campaigning across the state, after concluding that attending a two-hour radio debate in downtown Des Moines was not the best use of his time.''
Mr. Lieberman, who like General Clark is not competing here, argued that Dr. Dean was polarizing the nation with his intense attacks on Mr. Bush and appeals to Democratic partisanship. He said that Dr. Dean would lead the party to defeat with that kind of appeal.
''Howard Dean has said a number of things that are polarizing,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He has represented anger. Anger has fueled his campaign.''
''I love the enthusiasm of his supporters,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''He's done an incredible service to our party and our political system by bringing a lot of them in, but we've got to go beyond that.''
Dr. Dean responded by noting that he had won the endorsement of both Bill Bradley, who flew with Dr. Dean here on Tuesday, and Al Gore, the Democrats who ran against each other for president in 2000. ''If I can begin to breach the gap between Bill Bradley and Al Gore, and bring in people who have served long periods of time in Washington, and all the enthusiastic supporters we have, then I think I may be the right candidate to beat George Bush,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: DEBATE
