Declaring California an ''empire of hope and aspiration,'' Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger on Tuesday promised to lead the state to better economic times but warned the road to recovery would be difficult.
''I remain a great believer in the future of this state,'' Mr. Schwarzenegger said in his first state of the state address. ''I did not seek this job to cut, but to build. I did not seek this job to preside over the decline of a dream but to renew it.''
Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican who was elected governor in the October recall election, put forth a broad and aggressive agenda for his first full year in office that included cuts in government spending, the elimination of government departments and changes in the state's workers compensation insurance.
Though the speech did not delve into many details of the proposals, Mr. Schwarzenegger reiterated a popular campaign promise not to raise taxes. He also said he would appoint a negotiator to seek additional state revenues from Indian gaming operations, another hot topic during the recall election of Gov. Gray Davis.
''You could compare that with the best of Ronald Reagan,'' Ted Costa, the antitax crusader who initiated the recall effort, said on a Sacramento television panel following the speech. ''I give that man a cigar.''
Many Democrats also gave Mr. Schwarzenegger good reviews, but they said the real test would come on Friday, when the governor is to unveil his budget proposal for 2004 and 2005.
Mr. Schwarzenegger touched on some budget issues in the address on Tuesday, promising, for example, to limit fee increases for college students. But administration officials said the speech was not intended as a primer for the budget.
''Tonight we heard a speech,'' said Assemblyman Herb Wesson, a Democrat from Los Angeles. ''We didn't hear a budget. On Friday we will get the details, and on Friday we will be able to understand exactly what the governor's words meant.''
Mr. Schwarzenegger appeared confident and relaxed in his address to a joint session of the State Legislature, the most significant speech of his brief political career. He invoked the memory of Ronald Reagan, another actor who became governor, and at one point in the half-hour speech said that he had ''changed my mind'' and decided to return to his acting career.
''Just joking,'' he said with a wide grin.
Later Mr. Schwarzenegger said that he loved being governor and he promised to use his Hollywood celebrity to help the state bring new businesses -- and jobs -- to California.
''I am going to be California's job czar,'' he said. ''I am going to travel the nation and the world to find those jobs.''
Bill Whalen, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and a former speechwriter for Gov. Pete Wilson, a Republican, said the state of the state address would be very helpful in setting the tone of the Schwarzenegger administration, particularly with press interest so high. About 250 journalists were accredited to cover Tuesday's speech, which was broadcast live on television and radio across the state and in some other countries.
''The state of the state speech is to a governor what a strong serving game is to a good tennis player,'' Mr. Whalen said. ''It is a chance to put the ball in play and determine the location and move his opponent.''
Kevin McCarthy, the newly elected Republican leader of the Assembly from Bakersfield, described the speech as a ''bold vision for California's future'' and said Republicans in the Legislature would work with Mr. Schwarzenegger to help bring it about.
There had been predictions that Mr. Schwarzenegger would emphasize themes popular with his fellow Republicans, like not raising taxes and promising to cut waste in government, to help keep peace with members of his own party.
Some Republicans have grumbled in recent weeks that Mr. Schwarzenegger moved too close to the Democrats in the Legislature when he struck a deal last month on two ballot measures related to spending and borrowing. Democrats hold majorities in both the Assembly and the Senate.
Those measures, which will appear on the ballot on March 2, would impose a constitutional requirement for a balanced budget and allow the state to borrow up to $15 billion to help pay for past deficits. Mr. Schwarzenegger said Tuesday that passage of the measures would be one of his top priorities.
''The alternative is economic chaos,'' he said.
Mr. McCarthy and other Republicans were insistent Tuesday that the state's recovery would come about without tax increases, one of the most divisive and partisan issues during the Davis administration.
But State Senator John Burton of San Francisco, one of the most powerful Democrats in Sacramento, said the budget deficit, estimated at more than $14 billion, was too big to close with cuts alone. He said it was a mistake for Mr. Schwarzenegger to reiterate his no-tax pledge, noting that even Mr. Reagan eventually had to raise taxes.
Barbara O'Connor, director of the Institute for the Study of Politics and Media at California State University in Sacramento, also predicted that it would be difficult for Mr. Schwarzenegger to honor the no-tax pledge in the end. But she said that it was important for him to do so in this first major address.
''While the opinion leaders are more critical of specific mechanisms he will use,'' Ms. O'Connor said, ''the average public perceives him as doing what they hired him to do. He still has a remarkable reservoir of good will with the voters who elected him.''
