In an effort to attract dieters, some McDonald's restaurants in the New York metropolitan area began displaying posters and brochures yesterday that show how the company's products can fit into low-carbohydrate, low-fat and low-calorie meal plans.
The posters, hung inside participating restaurants, detail how consumers can customize burgers and salads to fit popular diets. Carbohydrate counters, for example, are encouraged to eat a double order of scrambled eggs for breakfast, an option that the McDonald's Corporation says contains less than five grams of carbohydrates.
Consumers may delete buns, condiments and, in some cases, lettuce and tomatoes, but the cost of each menu item will not change, a McDonald's spokeswoman said.
The regional program, focusing on 650 restaurants in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York, is McDonald's latest effort to appeal to health-conscious consumers. McDonald's outlets in Southern California have started promoting salads and low-fat sandwiches, while restaurateurs in Houston are providing low-fat menu items and exercise tips. Last year, the corporate office of McDonald's introduced several products billed as healthy and began allowing consumers to replace fries in Happy Meals with bags of fruit. It also enlisted Bob Greene, Oprah Winfrey's personal trainer, as its fitness czar.
''A lot of folks need to know that we have things that fit every aspect of their lifestyle,'' said Paul E. Cottrell, a McDonald's franchisee who owns 12 restaurants in New Jersey.
Some consumer groups applauded McDonald's efforts, but said the company could do more to provide useful nutrition information to consumers.
''People don't go to fast-food restaurants and expect to peruse posters,'' said Michael F. Jacobson, the executive director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a consumer advocacy group in Washington. ''The calories need to be listed right up on the menu board.''
The Burger King Corporation is scheduled to announce a low-fat, low-carbohydrate, low-calorie menu platform next week, a company spokesman said.
