When Richard Reid was found with a fuse in his shoe two years ago on a flight from Paris, the discovery foiled a terrorist plot. But on Tuesday, the suspicious wiring on another flight from Paris turned out to be a false alarm.
With the United States and France on heightened alert over the prospect of an international hijacking, French security officials at Charles de Gaulle Airport removed a woman from a Delta Air Lines flight bound for Cincinnati after an airport screener noticed some odd wiring in her coat, officials said.
The wiring turned out to be an electrical heating system built into her motorcycle jacket, American officials said, and the French determined after a brief detention that the woman had no police record and no known ties to terrorism. The woman, whose name and nationality were not disclosed, was then booked on a later flight, officials said.
But officials on both sides of the Atlantic were taking no chances after nearly two weeks of terrorist scares and flight cancellations prompted by the code orange, or high-alert status, which was declared by the United States on Dec. 21.
So when Delta Flight 43 arrived at the Cincinnati airport on Tuesday afternoon, it was rerouted away from the main terminal, explosive-sniffing dogs were brought on board, and passengers and luggage were rescreened.
F.B.I. investigators interviewed about two dozen passengers before concluding there was ''nothing of note,'' a law enforcement official said.
''There's an attitude that more caution now is better than less,'' the official said. The discovery of the electronic wiring in the woman's jacket ''was really the catalytic event,'' combined with broader concerns of American intelligence officials about threats to flights bound for the United States out of Paris, London and Mexico City, the official said.
Flights from those cities continue to undergo heightened security checks, and a Bush administration official, confirming a report on ABC News on Tuesday, said investigators remained keenly interested in finding a passenger who did not show up for an Air France flight to Los Angeles on Dec. 24. That flight was canceled because of security concerns.
''He has potential terrorist links and has received some sort of pilot training and is of Middle Eastern descent,'' the official said.
Some investigators suspect that the man may have been part of a terrorist plot but that the abrupt cancellation of the Dec. 24 flight ''potentially scared him away,'' the official said.
Senior administration officials, however, have said that they have no clear evidence of a terrorist plot on the canceled Air France flights or any of more than a dozen others that have been disrupted.
