For the second time in nine months, the engineering company Bechtel National, the government contracting arm of the Bechtel group, has won a large government contract to help restore power, water and other essential services in Iraq.
Officials from the United States Agency for International Development said Tuesday that the deal could be worth as much as $1.82 billion over two years. It follows the awarding of a $1 billion contract for similar work over 20 months that Bechtel won in April.
The latest award was made after a three-month open bidding process in which Bechtel competed against two other companies, which were not identified. The earlier award came after the agency invited Bechtel and six other companies to bid for reconstruction work.
Bechtel's first deal with the government was one of a series of federal contracts awarded shortly after the end of major combat in Iraq. The contracts not only drew criticism from members of Congress and public interest groups who charged that the bidding was not open enough but they also attracted the interest of the General Accounting Office, which began an investigation. Its report is expected to be completed in a few months.
Still sensitive to questions about the integrity of the award process, Bechtel, a San Francisco-based company, has been a generous campaign contributor to President Bush and other Republicans, but senior agency officials insisted Tuesday that both awards were made in full compliance with federal laws and that Bechtel had not gained any special advantage as a result of winning the first contract.
Tim Beans, the agency's director of procurement, insisted that Bechtel's proposal was not only less expensive but technically superior to the others. ''You have to assume that past performance was taken into consideration, but Bechtel had just as much chance to mess up as do well,'' he said.
Andrew S. Natsios, the agency administrator, said sharply, ''The notion that any of us going in manipulated the process is ridiculous.''
Shortly after the Bechtel contract was announced, the Defense Department said it was seeking bids for another 17 construction and management projects in Iraq worth $5 billion.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: RECONSTRUCTION  Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  Because of an editing error, an article on Wednesday about a large Iraq reconstruction contract awarded to a subsidiary of the Bechtel Group, a generous contributor to President Bush and other Republicans, referred incorrectly to criticism of the award process. It was directed toward the government agency that conducted the bidding for the contract -- the Agency for International Development -- not toward Bechtel.
