Senator John Edwards of North Carolina on Tuesday promised broad changes to American schools if he is elected president, including increasing teacher pay and after-school programs and improving President Bush's signature education law.
''We still have two public school systems, not divided by race but by income,'' Mr. Edwards told teachers, students and supporters at Metro High School here, tying together proposals he has made over the past months. ''Millions of school children in our cities and small towns do not get the education they deserve.''
Mr. Edwards, joining a growing number of Democrats, including his rivals for the presidential nomination, criticized the federal law known as No Child Left Behind, which imposes penalties on schools that do not show yearly progress in education. Critics say provisions in the law to help schools avoid the penalties have not been fully financed.
''We need to fix it and we need to change it and we need to fund it,'' said Mr. Edwards, who proposed a commission to examine ways to improve the law. He was among senators who voted for the law, but now he says it was wrong to have had ''faith that this president would support his own education bill.''
Mr. Edwards told reporters later that, despite his criticism of the way the administration had carried out the law, he did not regret the vote.
''I believe in standards and I've always believed in standards,'' said Mr. Edwards, who in an interview last week supported standardized testing as a measure of progress. ''What I regret is giving the president that kind of authority.''
Mr. Edwards said he would change the benchmarks for progress in the schools to put greater emphasis on students as they move grade to grade, rather than the current law's snapshot of a class as a whole. But Mr. Edwards's aides said that at least for now he would leave alone a controversial element of the education law, allowing students to transfer out of schools deemed failing.
President Bush defended the law on Monday and how his administration enacted it, saying third graders -- an important grade watched by educators -- have been reading and doing math better in the two years it has been in place.
Mr. Edwards said he would create after-school centers at or near every school, at a cost of $3 billion to $4 billion, and would increase federal grants for teacher training and pay to $6 billion from $3 billion and concentrate the money where there are teacher shortages. The costs would be covered by money recouped from the repeal of Mr. Bush's tax cuts, he said.
Mr. Edwards made six scheduled stops across eastern Iowa on Tuesday but skipped a candidates' radio debate in Des Moines sponsored by National Public Radio.
Mr. Edwards said he was interviewed Tuesday by N.P.R., had participated in a televised candidates' debate Sunday and planned to attend another one this weekend. His aides said that given the time of the debate, 1 p.m. to 3 p.m., Mr. Edwards might more directly reach caucusgoers on the stump.
''I am doing what I believe Iowans expect of candidates, which is grass-roots campaigning,'' Mr. Edwards said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: EDUCATION
