One day after Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced a plan to flood 12 of the city's most violent schools with police officers to curb school violence, six students at four of the schools were arrested on various charges, including assaulting safety agents. No serious injuries were reported.
In addition, 17 other students were cited on lesser charges, like possession of marijuana and disorderly conduct.
City officials said the arrests reflected the new crackdown on school violence. By contrast, on Dec. 16, there were two arrests at the 12 schools.
''The increased security is definitely catching a lot of activity,'' said Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott. ''The school safety agents and the police are reinforcing the message that school is for learning and that any type of possession of either criminal materials, such as drugs or assaults obviously, or weapons, will not be tolerated.''
Others suggested the arrests may indicate that students are chafing at the increased security.
''When you try to reassert control mid-term there will be a pushback,'' Randi Weingarten, head of the teachers' union, said. ''Any good classroom teacher will tell you that you need to assert control and the rules of your classroom in the first few days of your class.''
Either way, life was different at the 12 schools yesterday. Police cruisers patrolled the streets outside Far Rockaway High School in Queens, and a dozen police officers and school safety officers stood guard as hundreds of students emerged from the school's massive tan brick building.
''It's like they're turning the school into a precinct,'' said Keith Booker, 16.
Next month, the Police Department will begin a 150-member task force that will focus on the problem schools. In the meantime, the schools have been assigned additional safety officers, one or two extra police officers, as well as help from existing police task forces.
At some schools, students said other security measures are now in place, including a requirement that students remove their shoes before entering school. ''I feel like I'm in an airport,'' said Philip Alphonse, 18, a student at Far Rockaway.
The increased police presence in the school was only one change. Also yesterday, two five-member teams including police captains and education officials started examining the first of the 12 schools in an effort to lay the foundations for a new approach to violence modeled on the Compstat approach made famous by the Police Department under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Under that system, crime patterns are tracked and supervisors held accountable for trends in their precincts. As with the police, who focus on smaller ''quality-of-life'' offenses as a way to reduce major crimes, city officials said they intend to crack down on less serious school problems, like graffiti.
''There's no doubt that if you walk into a school and you feel that the hallways are out of control, if you feel that people are just milling around and going from class to class, if you see graffiti, if you see that there are stair wells that are isolated from the rest of the school, those are hotspots,'' said John Feinblatt, the city's criminal justice coordinator. ''What you need to do is fix the broken windows and manage the hotspots.''
At Far Rockaway High School, two brothers were arrested yesterday for assaulting a school safety agent who tried to block one of them from entering the school after he refused to remove his hat, Mr. Feinblatt said.
At South Shore High School in Brooklyn, a student was arrested after officials said he punched a safety agent who asked him for identification. At Franklin K. Lane High School in Brooklyn, two students caught walking the halls during class were arrested, officials said, when one got ''out of control'' and the other became ''aggressive'' after safety agents asked them to show identification. At Evander Childs High School in the Bronx, a student was arrested after being caught with a controlled substance, officials said.
Even as some saw yesterday's incidents as confirmation that the city had done well in picking the 12 ''impact schools,'' some public officials said they wished the security measures had been spread more widely.
Eva S. Moskowitz, chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee, said, ''I don't doubt that if you put 150 officers at 12 schools you're going to get some dent, but what I don't see is how, over the long run, we're going to address the underlying problems.''
