One elderly tenant, a World War II veteran, testified that he feared he would not be able to absorb the biggest proposed increase on rent-controlled apartments in a decade. Another, who once worked as a lawyer for the very state agency that adjusts the rents, warned that the proposed increase -- of roughly 15 percent over two years -- would hurt ''the most vulnerable of all tenants.''
But perhaps no one stirred as much emotion yesterday at a public hearing in Lower Manhattan as Paula Glatzer, a retired magazine editor, who said that she was befuddled by how the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal had computed the increases. At one point, she got into an exasperated exchange with David B. Cabrera, an assistant commissioner of the state agency.
''Are you refusing to tell us what your role is?'' she asked, generating a cacophony of sarcastic comments from the audience, directed at a stoic Mr. Cabrera. ''You're talking to me like I'm in an insane asylum!''
Rent hearings typically generate spirited debate, but yesterday's was particularly passionate. The proposed increases would affect about 36,000 of New York City's roughly 60,000 rent-controlled apartments, a subsector of real estate that is known for having some of the lowest rents in New York City.
State officials say the increases are justified because of a surge in costs to landlords, including real estate taxes and insurance.
But if the tenants' anger was palpable, so, too, was the sense that everyone attending the all-day hearing was essentially powerless to do much to change anything. Under state law, the Division of Housing and Community Renewal must calculate proposed increases every other year, hold a public hearing and, barring any egregious mathematical errors, approve the increases.
Most tenants and landlords anticipate that it will be only a matter of weeks before the state allows landlords to charge the maximum increase permitted by law for the next two years, probably retroactive to Jan. 1. That means more people will face a 7.5 percent increase in each of the next two years than at any time since the late 1980's or early 1990's, state officials and tenant groups say.
Rent control, the original form of tenant protection, dates back to the 1940's, and is different from the much bigger system of rent stabilization, which applies to one million rental apartments in New York City. Generally, rent control applies to apartments in buildings constructed before 1947 in which tenants have lived continuously since 1971.
Whenever a rent-controlled tenant vacates an apartment, that apartment enters the rent-stabilization system. Between 1975 and 2002, the number of rent-controlled apartments dropped by 91 percent, to roughly 60,000 from 642,000.
But if rent control is a dying system, it is one that has spawned its share of idiosyncratic tales, some even true, about people paying a couple of hundred dollars for a commodious space on Park Avenue, or those who would rather give up spouses than apartments.
The reality is far more complex. The median monthly cost of rent-controlled apartments is $500. The median annual income of the tenants is slightly above $20,000. Roughly two-thirds of those tenants are over 62 and living on fixed incomes.
Any increases are applied not uniformly, as they are for rent-stabilized apartments, but rather according to a complicated formula based on the ''maximum base rent'' for each apartment.
State housing officials said that their research this year concluded that the maximum base rent should be adjusted by 17.2 percent because of higher real estate taxes, water and sewer rates and energy costs -- the biggest adjustment since 1976 but one that is rendered moot because of a 7.5 percent annual cap.
To landlord representatives who spoke at yesterday's hearing, the proposed increase, while insufficient, was enough of a step in the right direction to help landlords keep pace.
''The historically low rents of controlled apartments, and the limitations on the permitted annual increase, make this proposal a bargain for tenants and a hardship for owners,'' said Jack Freund, executive vice president of the Rent Stabilization Association, a landlord group.
But to the tenants who showed up, any increase would be almost too much to bear. It was also frustrating, they noted, that only a legislative act by Albany could change the formulas or the laws.
''I live in fear with these increases,'' said Patricia McGovern, who pays $1,069 for a rent-controlled apartment in Tudor City in Manhattan. ''They're just out of control. Why should I worry at this point of my life where I have to live, and how much I have to pay?''
