Transit officials say they now believe that a section of rail that pierced the bottom of a subway car on Monday was a damaged piece that had been taken out of service and was sitting on the track bed for more than a year, waiting for pickup.
Employees are working around the clock along the entire length of the subway system to inspect other scrap rail pieces stored on the track bed for any signs of cracking or other damage, officials said yesterday.
''Any rail that is found to be cracked or damaged will be moved off to the side and later removed from the system,'' said Charles F. Seaton, a spokesman for New York City Transit.
The inspections are scheduled to be finished sometime today. Mr. Seaton said he did not know how many scrap pieces were in the system, but the extra rails, secured between the running rails, can often be seen from the subway platforms.
It is common practice for transit workers to nail spare rail pieces, or older sections that have been replaced by new rail, to the track bed so they can be used for track replacement or removed later. But Mr. Seaton said there was no rule for when pieces of scrap rail needed to be picked up. Removals, he said, are typically done late at night by crews on work trains and require interruptions in service.
But John Samuelsen, chairman of the track division for Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union, said it was ''outrageous'' that the piece had been sitting around for so long. Usually, these pieces are picked up after a few days, he said, or two weeks at the most. ''That's an absolute failure on the part of management,'' he said.
The 20-foot rail was sitting in a trough between the regular rails and parallel to them, and lying across a pair of supports that were 10 feet apart. Investigators have learned that the piece was swapped out in September 2002 because of a hairline fracture. As it sat on the track bed with trains running above it, investigators believe, it broke completely.
In the accident just north of the 96th Street station, a No. 2 train passed overhead about 9 a.m. on Monday, and the piece snagged in the undercarriage and was pushed along about 200 feet, being driven deeper and deeper into the train.
The section pierced a box that contains the electrical controls for the car, causing a small explosion, Mr. Seaton said, then progressed through the floor of the passenger compartment. No one was injured.
