When Rodney Harrison counts the fines he has accumulated in his 10-year career, he estimates he has paid the N.F.L. nearly $300,000.
Harrison is either one of the league's most fearless hitters or one of its dirtiest, depending on who is asked. He said his reputation cost him a spot in next month's Pro Bowl.
In his first season with New England after nine in San Diego, Harrison led all league defensive backs with 126 tackles and assists, galvanized an overhauled Patriots secondary and made New England fans forget about the release of safety Lawyer Milloy.
On Monday, sports broadcasters and writers selected Harrison as an Associated Press All-Pro safety. N.F.L. fans voted him second among strong safeties in Pro Bowl balloting, but he believes the votes of players and coaches kept him from a berth.
''I know what it's about,'' he said Tuesday. ''It's about them feeling like I'm a dirty player.''
But heading into the American Football Conference divisional playoff game against the visiting Titans on Saturday night, Harrison certainly has the respect of the Titans' coaching staff. In New England's 38-30 victory over Tennessee on Oct. 5, Harrison's performance summed up his style.
He led New England with 11 tackles and gave Titans tight end Shad Meier a concussion with a jarring blow. He also hit Tennessee wide receiver Drew Bennett in the back of the head, drawing a $10,000 fine from the N.F.L.
Titans Coach Jeff Fisher put Harrison in the same class as the Ravens' Ray Lewis in defending the pass. ''He's going to show up wherever the ball is,'' Fisher said. ''You can count on that. He's going to bring contact when he shows up.''
Harrison's career, which includes Pro Bowl appearances in 1998 and 2001, has been a study in controversy and success.
In 2002, the N.F.L. suspended him for a game after his helmet-to-helmet hit on Jerry Rice, his third serious rules violation of the season. Harrison lost $111,764 in pay.
More recently, he feuded with Miami Dolphins tight end Randy McMichael after the Patriots' overtime victory in Miami on Oct. 13. McMichael calling Harrison a ''garbage player'' and a ''dirty player.'' Harrison said he did not approve of McMichael's dancing after catches.
When asked Tuesday if he was a dirty player, Harrison smiled.
''Not at all,'' he said. ''I'll hit you and help you up.''
On the first day of full contact during training camp last summer, Harrison's aggressiveness made an impression on his new teammates when he delivered a big hit on wide receiver Troy Brown.
''That raised some eyebrows,'' cornerback Ty Law said. ''What are you doing? That's Troy Brown.''
Harrison has not let up since.
Not when his hard blitzes caused offensive linemen to pick fights with him in training camp, and not when Milloy, a team captain, was cut.
''Now that I've been here and I've got in a couple of fights, I understand that the guys are good people and they're good guys,'' Harrison said. ''They welcomed me and everything has been fine since.''
The outlook for New England's secondary was definitely not fine after a season-opening 31-0 loss at Buffalo. Drew Bledsoe picked it apart for 230 yards, and Milloy, who signed with Buffalo, had a sack and forced an interception.
During the off-season, the Patriots cut cornerback Otis Smith and traded safety Tebucky Jones, giving them three new faces in the secondary's four starting positions.
But a unit made up of the veteran Law, the free agent Tyrone Poole, the rookie safety Eugene Wilson and Harrison evolved and improved. The Patriots led the league in interceptions (29), opponents' passer rating (56.2) and fewest touchdown passes allowed (11).
Wilson has been the biggest surprise of that group. He played cornerback at Illinois, but Harrison's mentoring helped him make a a deft transition to safety. Law credits Harrison for turning Wilson into a big hitter. Wilson emulated his mentor by earning a $7,500 fine for a blow against Dallas's Randal Williams.
''He's been a greater inspiration to Eugene Wilson, who wasn't really the type to hit people as hard as he does,'' Law said. ''That's Rodney right there.''
Harrison and his mates will be trying to stop quarterback Steve McNair. The Titans have the league's fifth-ranked passing team, averaging 242.4 passing yards a game. McNair's strained right calf muscle and a sprained left ankle with a cracked bone spur forced him to miss two of the Titans' three final regular-season games, and he threw three interceptions against Baltimore last week.
''They say he's hurt?'' Harrison said. ''Right, he's hurt. He'll be ready to play.''
So, no doubt, will Harrison.
PRO FOOTBALL
