It's a safe bet in American politics that any time a governor stands out in a run for the presidency, his or her statehouse record will be vetted furiously in a search for cronyism, hypocrisy and a fresh cast of colorful characters who promise the real truth about the candidate's past. Bill Clinton and George W. Bush went through this process and lived to inhabit the White House.
Former Gov. Howard Dean's record in Vermont is being eagerly muckraked well before the first primary votes are cast. A word from someone -- perhaps an old political associate or a rival back home -- has spurred interest in two state audits in the 1990's that criticized the Dean administration's awarding of a contract to a health maintenance organization with ties to a onetime Dean aide. Potential voters can now decide for themselves whether the audit casts any light on Dr. Dean's executive style and abilities.
This is part of any modern governor's path to higher office. It may even be a compliment of sorts, the kind of attention paid only to a front-runner. Whatever the public response, Dr. Dean has certainly made things worse with his own actions. He anticipated this vetting of his past when he first considered a presidential run. And he opted to keep almost half of his records as governor sealed longer than usual, safely beyond the time limits of the eight-year White House incumbency that he covets.
''We didn't want anything embarrassing appearing in the papers at a critical time in any future endeavor,'' Dr. Dean explained at the time. That certainly shows an executive gift for anticipation. Then again, it has put an extra premium on pressing the search through his past. Dr. Dean says he must defend sensitive private matters from unfair scrutiny in resisting political rivals' demands for greater disclosure. Proper exceptions should be made, but hardly the sweep of secrecy Dr. Dean has claimed. Any reader these days can see that his resistance is making Vermont only more of a magnet for media and political sleuthing.
