HIGHLIGHTS
FILM: DIRECTORS AND PRODUCERS NOMINEES -- The Directors Guild of America, whose choices historically prefigure the Oscar winner, announced its nominees yesterday in Los Angeles for outstanding directorial achievement in feature films. Vying for the organization's accolade, to be announced at the Annual D.G.A. Awards Dinner in Los Angeles on Feb. 7, will be Sofia Coppola, for ''Lost in Translation''; Clint Eastwood for ''Mystic River''; Peter Jackson for ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King''; Gary Ross for ''Seabiscuit''; and Peter Weir for ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World.'' Only six times since the inception of the guild's award in 1949 has its winner not won the corresponding Academy Award. On Monday, the Producers Guild of America announced its finalists for best feature film producer. The films of the winners of this prize, to be announced this year on Jan. 17, have won the Academy Award for best picture in 10 of the past 14 years. The nominees were the producers of ''Cold Mountain,'' ''The Last Samurai,'' ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World,'' ''Mystic River'' and ''Seabiscuit.''
LITERATURE: WHITBREAD AWARD WINNERS -- A story narrated by a youth won the Whitbread prize yesterday for novel of the year. The book is ''The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-Time,'' by Mark Haddon, left. Told by a 15-year-old boy detective afflicted with a form of autism, it was acclaimed by the judges in London as a work with resonance for adults as well as adolescents, Reuters reported. The novel of the year is one of five categories of the Whitbread awards in Britain. The winners in each category compete for the $45,550 Whitbread Book of the Year award, to be announced on Jan. 27. Besides Mr. Haddon, the winners in the other categories include the Booker Prize winner, DBC Pierre, who took the Whitbread first novel award for ''Vernon God Little,'' about a Texas teenager and a high school massacre. D. J. Taylor's ''Orwell: The Life,'' won the biography award; Don Patterson's ''Landing Light'' won the poetry prize, and the children's book award went to ''The Fire-Eaters,'' David Almond's story of a boy growing up in a seaside community in northern England at the time of the Cuban missile crisis.
PIANO MUSEUM CLOSES -- Unable to pay its rent, the Museum of the American Piano at 291 Broadway in Lower Manhattan, has closed its doors. Kalman Detrich, its founder and director, said he had received some offers of space since an article about the impending closing of the 20-year-old museum appeared in The New York Times on Christmas Day. ''We're chasing each other on answering machines,'' he said. The antique pianos are to be dispersed to temporary homes and storage, and the museum's Web site, www.museumforpianos.org, remains in operation while Mr. Detrich tries to find another location.
BOBBY HATFIELD: AUTOPSY FINDING -- Bobby Hatfield, left, of the pop-soul duo the Righteous Brothers did not die of coronary disease after all. The official autopsy report says that Mr. Hatfield, 63, fell victim to acute cocaine intoxication when he died in his hotel room in Kalamazoo, Mich., on Nov. 5 just hours before a concert, The Associated Press reported. The news agency, citing The Kalamazoo Gazette, said the determination was made by Dr. Richard Tooker, the chief medical examiner for Kalamazoo County. Mr. Hatfield, a passionate tenor, and his partner, Bill Medley, had hits like ''Unchained Melody'' and ''You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin' .''
FOOTNOTES
A vocal cord hemorrhage has forced Andrea Marcovicci to heed a doctor's advice and take the rest of the week off from her singing engagement in the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, but not before recommending that the jazz pianist and singer Barbara Carroll, who has been appearing in the Oak Room on Sundays, become her replacement. Ms. Carroll will perform tomorrow at 9 p.m. and on Friday and Saturday at 9 and 11:30. Ms. Marcovicci expects to return to the Oak Room on Tuesday, singing Cole Porter through the end of her engagement on Jan. 24. . . . The list of participants includes names like Matthew Broderick, Christo, Plácido Domingo, Tony Kushner, Nathan Lane, Daniel Libeskind, Peter Martins, Terrence McNally, Toni Morrison, Tim Robbins, Marilyn Horne and Stephen Sondheim. And they're not all. The event is the third annual New York Times Arts &amp; Leisure Weekend, from Friday through Sunday. The centerpiece of the weekend is Times Talks: Special Edition. Taking place at the CUNY Graduate Center, at Fifth Avenue and 34th Street, it features arts luminaries in conversation with Times critics, reporters and editors. Subject to availability, tickets may be bought at the door. Information: www.NYTimes .com/alweekend and (888) 698-1870.
