JOHN STAFFEN, who as a senior creative executive at DDB Worldwide helped produce familiar campaigns for advertisers like Hershey Foods and McDonald's, is joining an agency seeking to reverse its flagging fortunes, the New York office of Arnold Worldwide.
The hiring of Mr. Staffen, effective today, is the latest example of the steps Madison Avenue will take in uncertain times to attract new clients and keep current ones content. It also typifies the recent ferment in the executive suites of major agencies, as underlined yesterday by the abrupt firing of Nigel Carr, a managing partner at Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners, after more than a dozen years there.
Mr. Staffen, 43, resigned in October from the New York office of DDB Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, where he had been one of two executive creative directors. At the time, he gave no explanation for the decision. In an interview yesterday, Mr. Staffen said he had concluded ''it was time to move on, because it was time for a change -- for me as well as for DDB.''
The latter point was a reference to a decision last January by Lee Garfinkel, the new chairman and chief creative officer at DDB New York, to hire John Russo as a second executive creative director for the office. Before that, Mr. Staffen had been the sole person with that title.
''Maybe four times at DDB New York is enough,'' Mr. Staffen said, laughing, as he counted his stints there: from 1984 to 1989, 1990 to 1995, 1996 to 1999 and 2000 to 2003. (In 1999 and 2000 he was at the agency's Chicago office, creating ads for the McDonald's Corporation.)
At the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, part of the Arnold Worldwide Partners division of Havas, Mr. Staffen will have the title of creative director, overseeing work for clients like the Bermuda Department of Tourism, GlaxoSmithKline, Hasbro, the United States Tennis Association and Welch Foods.
Mr. Staffen will be taking over the duties of Rochelle Klein, who was vice chairwoman and chief creative officer for three years before leaving unexpectedly in November. A statement from the agency at that time attributed her departure to creative differences with other executives.
Ms. Klein's leaving came after Arnold New York fell short in several high-profile reviews, failing to land assignments from the Andrew Jergens division of the Kao Corporation, Pfizer and Travelocity. It also followed a decision by Welch to place its account, with billings estimated at $20 million to $30 million, in review after more than two decades at Arnold New York and predecessor agencies.
''After Rochelle made her decision to move on, we set about to find the ideal person to be the New York creative director,'' said Mary Baglivo, president of Arnold New York, ''and a lot of hands went up in the air.''
''John turned out to be the lead standout'' candidate, she added, ''and it's great that he was available and up for this challenge, this opportunity, we have ahead of us.''
As Arnold New York has struggled, one large client at the Boston headquarters, the Monster division of Monster Worldwide, left for Deutsch in New York, owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies, while a second, Fidelity Investments, placed its account in review. And Havas, Arnold's parent, began a reorganization that included the scaling back of ambitious plans to expand Arnold overseas.
''We've had a history of our accounts not churning, but recently things have happened to us,'' said Ron Lawner, chairman and chief creative officer at Arnold in Boston, ''and we now have to deal with it.''
''You need to find the players to do that -- creative adults, I call them -- who can put their arms around all different kinds of clients,'' Mr. Lawner said, ''and John has done that, in areas where the degree of difficulty is fairly high.''
There are significant risks in recruiting an outsider to help in turning around Arnold New York, as shown by numerous examples of executives parachuting in to agencies where they had never worked before who failed to achieve their goals and were forced to resign or even fired.
Such examples were ''very much on my mind,'' Mr. Lawner said, ''so the person had to be the right person, with people skills, with the right credentials, to command respect, to be able to lead.''
Mr. Staffen said he was ''aware of the challenges'' confronting outsiders and their generally poor track record.
''It's something I've talked a lot about for a long time'' with Mr. Lawner and Ed Eskandarian, Arnold's chief executive, he added. ''They know in New York and Boston that they've gone through a rocky time, and I see commitment from the top that they've got to refocus, and me coming is part of it.''
Of course, not all problems at agencies involve newcomers, as demonstrated yesterday by the sudden dismissal of Mr. Carr by Jonathan Bond and Richard Kirshenbaum, the co-chairmen of the Kirshenbaum Bond Creative Network in New York. The three had worked together since June 1991, when Mr. Nigel was hired as the first director for brand planning at the Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners division. He was promoted to partner in 1992 and managing partner in 1995.
Mr. Bond and Mr. Kirshenbaum said in a brief statement that Mr. Carr had been ''terminated from his position, effective immediately.'' They declined to elaborate. Mr. Carr did not respond to a voice mail message left at his office in San Francisco, where since 1997 he had been general manager of a division known as Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners West. An employee who answered the phone said he was ''out of the office and no longer works here.''
A new management team in San Francisco, including Noel Cottrell, managing partner and executive creative director, is to be named Friday, the statement said. The change is part of a reorganization centered on the dissolving of Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners West as a separate division and the reconfiguration of Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners as an agency with offices in New York and San Francisco.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING  Correction:  January 8, 2004, Thursday  The Advertising column in Business Day yesterday, about the hiring of John Staffen at the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, misstated his title. It is executive creative director, not creative director.
