Former Vice President Al Gore is scheduled to spend Friday and Saturday campaigning for Howard Dean in the eastern Iowa cities that gave Mr. Gore an overwhelming victory in the 2000 Democratic caucuses. Then he heads to South Carolina on Dr. Dean's behalf later this month.
Mr. Gore's wife, Tipper, is likely to be the headliner at several events for Dr. Dean next week, Dean campaign aides said. And Mr. Gore's rival in the 2000 primary fight, former Senator Bill Bradley, who made his endorsement official on Tuesday with twin appearances in Des Moines and in Manchester, N.H., has agreed to sign an e-mail solicitation for contributions.
At the same time, Representative Jesse L. Jackson Jr. of Illinois, who is featured in an advertisement for Dr. Dean now running on black radio stations in South Carolina, plans to make several visits to stump for him in that state before its Feb. 3 primary. Representative Robert Menendez of New Jersey will do the same in the heavily Hispanic states of Arizona and New Mexico, which vote the same day.
While endorsements, even of high-profile politicians, may not move large numbers of votes, the growing list of names on Dr. Dean's roster does provide a set of surrogates allowing him to, in effect, campaign in several places at once. This could prove particularly critical in a multicandidate race where candidates have each selected different states to make their stands against Dr. Dean's so-far front-running campaign.
Mr. Bradley, who made a strong surge in New Hampshire before being overcome by Mr. Gore's late get-out-the-vote machine, told a crowd of 300 there Tuesday that the Dean campaign was ''one of the best things that has happened to democracy in decades'' and that it ''offers the best chance to beat George Bush.''
Hours later, at a house party in this Des Moines suburb, Dr. Dean's cellphone rang and instead of making his typical joke about how it must be Karl Rove, President Bush's chief strategist, getting upset about his stump speech, Dr. Dean looked at the incoming number and picked it up. It was Mr. Gore.
''You are just as popular in Iowa as you were before,'' he told Mr. Gore amid an eruption of applause and flashbulbs. Handing the phone off to an aide, he told the crowd: ''He says, he loves you all, he's really grateful for all the help, and he's looking forward -- I think he's going to come out and campaign for us.''
Dr. Dean is already using the double endorsements from the 2000 contenders -- though there are no joint appearances yet on the schedule -- to enhance his new message that he is the candidate best suited to pitch a big Democratic tent.
''The two of them together represent the unification of a very difficult battle that we saw four years ago,'' he said Tuesday afternoon during a stop at a winery in Indianola, Iowa. ''We're going to need every Democrat to beat George Bush.''
Dr. Dean, who was the first candidate to enter the race, as a little-known governor of a small state, assembled his team of endorsers through a relentless courtship that in some cases stretches back years. With persistent personal phone calls seeking advice on policy questions as well as campaign survival skills -- without necessarily asking for endorsements -- he has built relationships with presidential candidates past as well as with union leaders and little-known state legislators and school board members.
''In a sense, Howard Dean picked us,'' Nan Grogon-Orrock, the majority whip in the Georgia House of Representatives, said last month as she stood in an Atlanta living room with 16 colleagues all signing onto Dr. Dean's banner.
''Howard Dean came down and met the Legislature twice during our session,'' she added. ''I didn't see any other candidate. Did y'all see any other presidential candidates in the halls of the Statehouse?''
Kate O'Connor, who was Dr. Dean's first campaign aide, said the two of them also spent hours roaming statehouses in Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Iowa, and City Council chambers in New York, San Francisco and Washington. This was in late 2002 and early 2003, when few people knew their names.
''When we started this whole thing, we didn't know how to run for president, so we did what we know: we'd call people up,'' Ms. O'Connor said, explaining, ''that's how you do things in Vermont.''
''If we went to an event and someone gave us a business card and said even the remotest nice comment, a week later, we'd call them up,'' she added. ''That's what he's always done. It's worked so far.''
This strategy was cited by Mr. Gore, Mr. Bradley, several members of Congress, and leaders of the Service Employees International Union and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, whose November support helped start the wave of big ticket endorsements.
In addition, the Dean campaign has corralled its supporters to flood people with personal letters -- Mr. Gore got 2,575 and Mr. Bradley 1,644 -- asking them to sign up. Now Mrs. Gore and several members of Congress are joining the throng writing letters to undecided voters in Iowa and New Hampshire.
The relationship with Mr. Bradley started long before Dr. Dean's campaign, back around Thanksgiving of 1999. At Dr. Dean's request, the two men met in the back of a book store at the Willowbrook Mall in Wayne, N.J. Though Dr. Dean eventually endorsed Mr. Gore in the 2000 race, he called Mr. Bradley again in late 2002 and, aides say, has done so every six weeks or so since.
''He reached out to Al Gore and Bill Bradley in a substantive way,'' said Jay Carson, Dr. Dean's national spokesman, who traveled with Mr. Bradley in 2000.
''A lot of the other candidates were calling him saying, 'Mr. Vice President, I'd love your endorsement, can I get your endorsement?' Howard Dean was calling saying, 'Hey, can I talk to you about health care, what's it like to run?' '' Mr. Carson said. ''Talking to Bradley yesterday, he said it was very clear that Governor Dean was listening to you and he wasn't just talking to you to talk to you.''
In addition to Mr. Gore -- who already has signed a fund-raising letter, made calls to Iowa radio stations and, with his wife, joined a Dec. 30 conference call to 1,300 fund-raising house parties -- Mr. Bradley and Mr. Jackson, Dr. Dean will have several leaders of the Congressional Black Caucus speaking for him around the country.
Dr. Dean has said frequently that he thinks respected African-Americans are particularly important as ''validators'' for a white politician from a rural state.
Of course, Dr. Dean is not the only candidate with an impressive list of supporters: Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has former Gov. Jeanne Shaheen, perhaps the most prominent Democrat in all-important New Hampshire, running his campaign in that state, while Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri has the backing of two sitting governors and 34 members of the House of Representatives, four more than Mr. Dean.
It is unclear how much time the higher-profile endorsers will spend with Dr. Dean, since they can draw crowds on their own, and could, in some cases, overshadow the candidate.
On Tuesday, the 5-foot-8 (and a half, but he does not like to fuss about it) Dr. Dean stood a full head shorter than Mr. Bradley, the 6-foot-5 N.B.A. Hall of Famer, at the morning appearance in New Hampshire. By the time they got to Iowa, aides had set the podium on a platform, so the two men seemed of similar heights -- at least while Dr. Dean was speaking.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR  Correction:  January 8, 2004, Thursday  An article yesterday about people who have endorsed Howard Dean for the Democratic presidential nomination referred incorrectly to former Gov. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire, who supports a rival of his, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts. Ms. Shaheen is Senator Kerry's campaign chairwoman, not just head of his campaign in New Hampshire.
