In November, when Michael Arad's design was chosen as a finalist in the competition for a World Trade Center memorial, he said he had ''felt compelled to do something before there was a competition.''
Mr. Arad, an architect with the New York City Housing Authority who has worked on designs for police stations in Brooklyn and the Bronx, said in a videotaped statement in November that his design, Reflecting Absence, had evolved.
In his initial design, Reflecting Absence turned the outlines of the two fallen buildings into two pools below an open plaza with pine trees. ''The victims of the attack would be inscribed along this parapet which surrounds each pool,'' he said on the tape. ''So as you're standing there, you stare out and you see this void which is about the absence of these people.''
''The sheer enormity of these pools and these two incredibly long ribbons of names would just serve to underscore how large a tragedy occurred,'' he added.
Yesterday, in announcing that Reflecting Absence had beaten two other designs that were informal semifinalists last week, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation said ''significant'' changes had been made in Mr. Arad's original design.
The corporation also said Mr. Arad was collaborating with the landscape architect Peter Walker. Mr. Arad was virtually unheard of until the finalists were selected, while Mr. Walker has worked with some of the biggest names in architecture, including I. M. Pei, Rem Koolhaas, Norman Foster and Yoshio Taniguchi.
Neither Mr. Arad nor Mr. Walker returned telephone calls last night.
Mr. Walker was a co-founder of the firm that became the SWA Group and opened its West Coast office. He formed his own firm, Peter Walker and Partners, 21 years ago. That firm, in Berkeley, Calif., has worked on the Millennium Park for the 2000 Olympics in Sydney, Australia; the headquarters of Novartis, the Swiss pharmaceutical company; and Disney City in Orlando, Fla.
Mr. Walker has also taught at the University of California at Berkeley, where he was chairman of the Department of Landscape Architecture from the fall of 1997 through the summer of 1999. He held the same title at the Graduate School of Design at Harvard from 1978 to 1981, and was an adjunct professor there from 1976 to 1991, the year Mr. Arad graduated from Dartmouth.
Mr. Arad received a master's degree from the Georgia Tech College of Architecture and worked at Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates for three years before joining the Housing Authority.
Howard Marder, a spokesman for the authority, said yesterday that Mr. Arad had helped design two police stations. One, at 2794 Randall Avenue in Throgs Neck, the Bronx, is the headquarters of Police Service Area No. 8, which covers 27 housing developments in the north Bronx. The other, Police Service Area No. 2, at 560 Sutter Avenue in Brooklyn, is responsible for 37 housing developments in Brooklyn.
