State researchers on Tuesday unveiled their work so far on developing a childproof ''smart gun,'' while members of the state's Congressional delegation said they would seek federal research grants to help advance the technology, which is intended to revolutionize gun safety.
Engineers and scientists at the New Jersey Institute of Technology here said they were ''about two years away'' from perfecting their ''dynamic grip technology,'' a newly developed method that electronically stores and recognizes the grip pattern and pressure of a gun's owner and prevents the gun from being fired by anyone else. The technology, on view at a news conference on Tuesday, grows out of scientists' belief that grip and pressure patterns are unique to individuals and do not vary under conditions of stress.
The state's two United States senators, Frank R. Lautenberg and Jon S. Corzine, and Robert Menendez, a key Democratic member of the House of Representatives, also announced that they would seek more than $1 million in the evolving $817 billion Omnibus Spending Bill in Congress to move the research to the next phase. That includes further enhancement of the grip and pressure electronics, broader scientific evaluation of the technology, and field testing of a prototype that could be easily manufactured and marketed.
But at the same time, Senator Lautenberg and the other lawmakers, who have all been strong gun control and regulation advocates over the years, said the work faced fierce opposition. ''I hope and pray that we can get this done,'' Senator Lautenberg said. ''We're just going to work hard on it.''
New Jersey took the lead in gun control and regulation legislation in 2002 when it became the first state to approve a requirement that all guns sold in the state be childproof ''smart guns'' three years after perfection of the technology. But in the years before that, the Legislature had appropriated money for the New Jersey Institute of Technology to look at the options for such personalized weapon technology. Bryan Miller, executive director of Ceasefire New Jersey, an advocacy group for stronger gun control, said the $1.5 million in state research money was approved by the Legislature in 1999 after it defeated smart-gun legislation.
''They thought this smart-gun technology was science fiction,'' said Mr. Miller, adding that most opponents of the technology thought it would get bogged down in the research process.
Many of the opponents of New Jersey's law, like the National Shooting Sports Foundation, the representative of more than 2,000 gun makers and dealers, continue to suspect that such measures are barriers to gun ownership and are riddled with mechanical flaws that make them unreliable and dangerous to gun owners. Gary Mehalik, a spokesman for the foundation, repeated those concerns when asked about the latest effort to develop the technology.
''Relying on mechanical devices rather than a safe operator just means that you are going to have more problems,'' he said.
Michael Recce, a professor in Informations Systems at the Newark-based engineering school, who holds the key patents in the dynamic-grip technology, said that the current model of the handgun they have developed has 16 sensors built into the handle, which holds not a bullet clip, but electronics. The automatic handgun that they are developing uses electronically fired ammunition that is stored in the weapon's barrel rather than in the handle.
One key feature of the technology is that once a grip pattern is programmed into the battery-operated weapon, it activates the handgun only for the three-tenths of a second it takes to pull the trigger. Before and after that, the gun will not fire. Mr. Recce pointed out that other smart-gun technology that uses an owner's fingerprint actually turns the weapon on for up to three minutes when the print registers, thereby allowing anyone to fire it in that time period before it automatically turns off.
Mr. Recce added that trials with the weapon so far at Picatinny Arsenal had shown that in live firing, the weapon, once programmed for a particular user, was not affected by sweat on the user's hands, the user's stress level, movement or gloves.
