Gov. John G. Rowland received a federal subpoena late Tuesday for all documents relating to work on his private cottage. It is the first time federal investigators have sought personal records from him, one of his aides said.
Although Mr. Rowland has already turned over roughly 30 pages of documents regarding work done on his Bantam Lake Cottage, the subpoena requires him to turn over much more personal material, including tax returns, personal investment records and information related to gifts he received, said Ross Garber, Mr. Rowland's chief counsel. The subpoena does not, however, seek the governor's testimony before a grand jury, Mr. Garber said.
''The governor and his administration have been cooperating with federal investigators, and this step was anticipated,'' Mr. Garber said.
The subpoena came on the day Mr. Rowland met with Democratic leaders for the first time since his admission that he had accepted free work on his cottage from people who had business with the state.
After the meeting, described by participants as ''somber'' and like a ''wake,'' lawmakers moved one step closer to initiating the state's first impeachment inquiry into a sitting governor, even as Mr. Rowland vowed to stay in office.
Emerging from a 90-minute discussion in Mr. Rowland's office, the Democratic legislative leaders said that the governor had done little to change their opinions about the gravity of what he had done wrong, and that despite his personal apology, they now needed to decide what comes next.
During the meeting they discussed the possibility of beginning an impeachment inquiry, and according to the House speaker, Moira K. Lyons, Mr. Rowland was obviously opposed to the idea.
Ms. Lyons said the governor told them that an inquiry would ''suck the oxygen out of the building.'' But she said that Mr. Rowland recognized this as an ''Armageddon-like moment'' and that it was reflected in the mood of the gathering.
''It was almost like we were going to a wake,'' she said.
Mr. Rowland did not come out to face the cameras after the meeting, and his aides said he would have no comment. They said he planned to make a live television address to the state from his office on Wednesday at 6 p.m. It will probably be the most important speech of his long political career.
The governor, a Republican, has remained largely secluded since he admitted last month that he had accepted thousands of dollars worth of gifts and free work on his private cottage. Many of the people who provided work on the cottage are now at the center of a federal corruption investigation that is increasingly focused on Mr. Rowland's administration. His former deputy chief of staff, who helped pay for work on the cottage, has pleaded guilty to accepting cash and gold in return for granting state work. Mr. Rowland's former co-chief of staff is being investigated, as is a construction company owned by a family with close ties to the governor.
Making matters worse, the governor's admission that these people helped outfit his cottage came 10 days after he denied it.
Even within his own party, lawmakers have been harshly critical.
Republicans at the meeting said that if Ms. Lyons decided to go forward with an impeachment inquiry, they would not oppose such a move.
''My only demand is that it be a fair and bipartisan committee,'' said Robert M. Ward, the Republican House minority leader. While he said that he did not believe an impeachment inquiry was warranted, he said that ultimately it was Ms. Lyons's decision to make.
There is little precedent for such an inquiry. Lawmakers said the only similar case was the impeachment inquiry of the Hartford probate judge James H. Kinsella in 1983.
Whether the Legislature decides to pursue an impeachment inquiry or not, lawmakers said this issue would dominate state business for the foreseeable future.
''There is probably no issue that will be before this Legislature, no issue that will be in the newspapers or on the radio or on television that essentially isn't going to in one sense impeach him day by day,'' said Kevin B. Sullivan, a Democrat and the Senate president.
For his part, Mr. Rowland is turning to what has always been his greatest political strength -- his ability to persuade people through the power of his personality. He has already started meeting with small groups of Republican lawmakers, and on Wednesday he will meet with a group of Democratic lawmakers at his official residence here.
While he has been apologetic and contrite in public, one close friend said that he was determined to fight for his survival. His planned televised speech Wednesday night is an acknowledgment of how precarious his position is.
In the small and often insular world of Connecticut state politics, Mr. Rowland has built strong working and personal relationships with many of the people who may now decide his fate.
Ms. Lyons acknowledged that the decision to go forward with an inquiry would be extremely difficult for her, especially after working so closely with the governor for the better part of a decade. But, she said, ''this is a different chapter in the history of Connecticut and a different chapter in the history of his life.''
James A. Amann, the Democratic House majority leader, said that there were essentially two options to discuss when they go back to their caucus on Thursday: to do nothing or to move forward with an inquiry. Democrats said privately that doing nothing seemed less and less likely.
In an interview after the news conference, Mr. Amann said that legislative staff members had been working for the past three weeks on plans for how to go about an inquiry. Should the caucus decide that that is the way to proceed, they could move fairly quickly, he said.
Lawmakers would probably set up a bipartisan committee of 8 or 10 members who would look at the entire history of Mr. Rowland's ethical lapses in the course of his three terms in office.
But regardless of what legislators do, federal prosecutors continue to focus increasingly on Mr. Rowland.
The subpoena seeks, among other things, his personal tax returns dating from 1996, a law enforcement official said. Disclosures in recent months have raised questions about profits Mr. Rowland made from real estate transactions involving friends of his who were doing business with the state.
One of those transactions, Mr. Rowland's sale of a Washington apartment he owned in 1997, has drawn the attention of federal agents, who have begun preliminary inquiries into the deal, the official said.
