ABOUT a hundred years ago, when I had a brief affair with low-fat food, I started to sneer at real cooking. Anyone, I thought, could make food taste good without any dietary concerns getting in the way at the stove. The real challenge was to produce food that you actually wanted to eat when you were painting, as it were, with a restricted palette.
The romance was short-lived, and I'm not going to bombard you now with descriptions of meager dishes, but it's impossible at this time of year to resist seasonal pressure to be a little restrained about food intake. And the premise holds: you do need to give a lot more thought to making the food taste good when you're trying to eat less.
Most weight-loss regimens work because they exclude certain foods, but unfortunately most people fall off the dietary wagon because of the tedium of eating food with little variety. The trick of eating less -- not that I am expert in this field -- lies in making the food you do eat both good and varied. A meal must always be a reward.
None of the accompanying recipes comply with any particular diet sheet, but all give the eater something more than frugal sustenance: a ricotta tart, light and crustless, and bound with the whites of egg and served with some roasted cherry tomatoes, and a highly spiced, aromatic and crunchy salad of cabbage and crab that you can pick at for hours without feeling guiltily self-indulgent. The ricotta tart is an unusual concoction but the perfect thing to cheer a palate otherwise bored with grilled meats and fish and sparse portions of bland chicken. I love it for a light supper or for lunch, and it works well as a starter if you want to have people over without blowing all the New Year's resolutions.
It helps that it's a snap to make: you do no more than mix some ricotta with salt, pepper, the zest of a lemon, a little dried oregano (or any herb of your choice) and some egg whites, then bake this pallid mixture in a cake tin for half an hour. It cooks to a creamy, low-rise disk, to be eaten with an easily assembled salad and a plate of the roasted tomatoes.
The toothsome acidity of the tomatoes perfectly undercuts the delicate, savory, low-calorie cheesecake, though they have a much wider application. I love them with a piece of quickly griddled salmon and revel in their wonderful healthiness. Tomatoes are rich in lycopene, which acts as an antioxidant, and when they're cooked, more of it is released, so you can eat these sweet babies while feeling that you're doing your system good.
The cabbage salad is really a version of a Vietnamese chicken salad that I love to keep in the refrigerator to pick at when the alternative might be a much less wholesome toasted bagel or piece of toast. The crunchiness of the cabbage remains, even when it's a day or so old, and the crab meat gives a sweet richness that positively sings within the lime-sharp acerbity of the dressing.
And it's addictive stuff: you can't stop going back for more of the chili-hot, lime-sour and cilantro-heady slaw, and given its virtuous ingredient list, there is really no reason not to.
Fiddle if you like, replacing the crab with shrimp, the cilantro with fresh mint -- play as you see fit. But any way you make it, this is light food that's heavy on pleasure and reward. I couldn't have it any other way.
BAKED RICOTTA  Time: 40 minutes
18 ounces (2 1/4 cups) ricotta cheese  2 large egg whites, lightly beaten
1/4 teaspoon dried oregano  Finely grated zest of 1 lemon  Salt and freshly ground black pepper  Vegetable oil for greasing pan.
1. Heat oven to 350 degrees. In a mixing bowl, combine ricotta, egg whites, oregano and lemon zest. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Lightly oil an 8-inch springform baking pan. Pour in ricotta mixture, and smooth surface.
2. Bake until ricotta is dry on top but not browned, about 30 minutes; it will have risen slightly but will remain a thin disk. Allow to cool slightly, and release from pan. Cut into wedges, and serve warm with a plate of roasted tomatoes. (See recipe.)
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
ROASTED CHERRY TOMATOES  Time: 40 minutes, plus cooling time
8 ounces cherry tomatoes, halved  Scant teaspoon kosher salt  1 teaspoon olive oil.
1. Position an oven rack in lower third of oven, and heat oven to 350 degrees. Line a jelly-roll pan or a baking sheet with foil. Place tomatoes on foil, cut side up.
2. Sprinkle tomatoes with salt and oil, and bake 30 minutes. Remove from heat and allow to come to room temperature before serving.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
VIETNAMESE CRAB COLESLAW  Time: 35 minutes
1 Thai chili or other small hot chili pepper  1 large garlic clove, peeled and minced  1 teaspoon sugar  1 1/2 teaspoons rice vinegar  1 1/2 tablespoons lime juice  1 1/2 tablespoons Vietnamese or Thai fish sauce (nuoc nam or nam pla)  1 tablespoon vegetable oil  4 scallions, finely sliced into rings  Salt and freshly ground black pepper  8 ounces cabbage (inner white leaves only), shredded  1 medium carrot, peeled, and shredded, julienned or grated  2 cups loosely packed white crab meat  3 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro leaves, more for garnish.
1. In a small bowl combine chili, garlic, sugar, vinegar, lime juice, fish sauce, oil and scallions. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Set aside at room temperature for 30 minutes.
2. In a large mixing bowl, combine cabbage, carrot, crab meat and 3 tablespoons cilantro. Add chili dressing, and toss slowly until everything is coated evenly with a thin layer of dressing. Adjust salt and pepper to taste.
3. To serve, arrange salad on large, flat plates. Sprinkle with cilantro leaves, and serve immediately.
Yield: 2 to 4 servings.
AT MY TABLE
