The F.B.I. and other federal law enforcement agencies have made important strides toward fine-tuning their counterterrorism operations to avoid prolonged detentions of illegal immigrants with no clear terrorist ties, a Justice Department inspector general's report concluded Tuesday.
Among other critical changes, the report said, the F.B.I. has developed a much clearer set of criteria in recent months for determining which illegal immigrants should be considered terrorist suspects.
And the Bureau of Prisons, criticized for the treatment of illegal immigrants in Brooklyn after the Sept. 11 attacks, agreed to hold on to prison videotapes for six months to help investigate accusations of physical and verbal abuse against its guards. An investigation into reports that Brooklyn prisoners were physically and verbally abused was stymied for a time by the disappearance of the prison's videotapes.
The report, by Glenn A. Fine, the inspector general for the Justice Department, grew out of a major investigation that his office completed last year into the treatment of hundreds of illegal immigrants arrested on immigration violations after the Sept. 11 attacks. That investigation concluded that the Justice Department had allowed many illegal immigrants with no connection to terrorism to languish in federal prisons for weeks or sometimes months in unduly harsh conditions.
The department promised reforms last year in response to Mr. Fine's findings. But the inspector general's office said it found many of those initial pledges to be vague.
A second set of responses, prepared by Deputy Attorney General James Comey and released on Tuesday, ''is much fuller and fleshes out the procedures and protocols much more clearly,'' an official with the inspector general's office said.
The main provisions, officials said, center on new criteria for determining which illegal immigrants are treated as terrorism suspects and how quickly they can be released from special detention once they are cleared of any links.
The F.B.I. said in the report that its new procedures laid out a clear line of investigation for counterterrorism agents, supervisors in Washington and immigration officials at the Department of Homeland Security to trace the histories and activities of illegal immigrants. The special agents in charge of F.B.I. field offices have final authority in determining ''in a timely manner'' whether an illegal immigrant has terrorist links, the F.B.I. said in the report.
