It was 1995 and Tom Coughlin was busy drawing a line in the dirt outside the locker room of his Jacksonville Jaguars. Inside, players awaited the first day of practice in franchise history.
When the players emerged, they approached Coughlin's handiwork. It was, the coach said, the Concentration Line.
On one side was the players' quarters, where they could laugh and joke, discuss something besides football, wear sunglasses or jewelry, even cross their legs while sitting in a chair.
On the other side of the line, they were in Coughlin's world, a place where they did none of those things without reprisal.
In time, some in that locker room called the coach Colonel Tom. For the first five years, when the Jaguars won 49 games and appeared in two conference championship games, it was meant to describe a prosperous taskmaster. During the next three losing seasons, it was meant to depict a medieval autocrat.
The fascinating thing about the Giants' search for Jim Fassel's successor is that there was always one leading candidate and no amount of reputation-bashing could dissuade the Giants from their man.
But the Giants were smitten by more than Coughlin's disciplinarian pedigree, even if a crack of the whip fits a team coming off eight lifeless, season-ending losses. Historically, Coughlin has always been the Giants' kind of coach, something the team recognized as early as the late 1980's, when he was one of their assistant coaches.
In many ways, what the Giants appear to see in Coughlin is the prodigal son of his mentor, Bill Parcells, who may not have had a no sunglasses rule but who has surely escorted the no-nonsense approach of his coaching idol, Vince Lombardi, into another century of football.
Today, there may be two or three times as many N.F.L. teams chasing the ex-coach Fassel as there were N.F.L. teams chasing the new coach Coughlin, but the Giants could not care less. Coughlin will bring Giants fans what they expect, a bruising, physically imposing team. There will most likely be other changes, too. If Tiki Barber keeps fumbling, he will be doing his radio shows and television commercials with a football duct-taped to his arm.
It has been at least 10 years since Coughlin has occupied a place in the back of the minds of the Giants' brain trust. He shocked them when he turned down their offer to be head coach in 1993, choosing to remain at Boston College. But they noticed when he led his B.C. teams to bowl games and upsets of Notre Dame. Later, they watched with envy as his tenderfoot Jaguars outperformed the storied Giants, with Coughlin trading for quarterback Mark Brunell in the same season the Giants settled on Dave Brown as their quarterback of the future.
Coughlin eventually wore out his welcome in Jacksonville largely because of his personnel and salary-cap missteps, for which he had allies in disaster. But it was a general apathy among fans and players, spurred by too much Jaguars losing, that led to Coughlin's dismissal -- the same conditions that led Fassel's firing.
The Giants, it is now clear, never let any of this stick to Coughlin.
Not that the Giants brass did not do its homework on the charges that overbearing Colonel Tom ruined a good thing in Florida. But the Giants came away more certain that it was the losing that spawned any bad feelings, not the other way around. According to several Giants officials familiar with the Coughlin courtship, Coughlin did tell the Giants' executive vice president, John Mara, and General Manager Ernie Accorsi that he had learned from mistakes in his tenure in Jacksonville and had refined some of his coaching beliefs and methods.
The Giants leadership knows that an unemployed coach might say anything -- Dan Reeves promised not to meddle with the front office in 1993, then was fired in 1996 for meddling -- but unlike Reeves, the Giants have a track record by which to judge Coughlin.
When Coughlin came to coach Parcells's wide receivers in 1988, they were a wild, unruly lot. The Giants were a running team and the receivers suffered from the inattention, lacking both self-esteem and good work habits. Coughlin showed up and drew another Concentration Line. Meetings began on time, with penalties for the tardy.
Feet went flat on the floor. There were quizzes on that week's new pass routes. And most of all, Coughlin announced that since the Giants were essentially a running team, the receivers were going to start blocking on running plays.
Imagine that.
A corps of determined receivers blocking on the corners is never going to be the primary reason for an improved ground attack, but by the time Coughlin left in 1991, the team's rushing totals had jumped 32 percent and the Giants were Super Bowl champs.
One of Coughlin's receivers, Mark Ingram, caught a pivotal second-half pass in that Super Bowl, making a dogged, gritty push up the field, breaking four tackles to barely pick up a first down that led to the Giants second touchdown in the 20-19 victory over the Buffalo Bills. It was the kind of play you do not soon forget, in the way that Giants ownership and management never forgot Tom Coughlin.
That Super Bowl game was Coughlin's last on a Giants sideline, a hiatus of 13 years. Figuratively, if not actually in the dirt, the Concentration Line will be drawn once again, awaiting a new Giants team at the start of its first practice.
PRO FOOTBALL
