THERE is a touch of swank to the place. But then the man in green appears with the afternoon's repast in two buckets, and what had seemed like a cordial gathering turns into last call at a bad Waldorf soiree. For penguins, apparently, nothing beats the feel of a nice cold smelt sliding down your gullet.
The man in green, Rob Gramzay, knows this better than most humans. Officially, he is the Central Park Zoo's ''senior wild animal keeper for polar birds and polar mammals.'' Unofficially, he is Manhattan's penguin guy, responsible for the well-being of this island's 42 Chinstraps and 23 Gentoos.
He has other charges, of course, including but not limited to 13 puffins, three polar bears, two screech owls and old Breezy, the blind sea lion whose repertory of tricks once wowed them at Coney Island. But the penguins are especially dear to his heart, in part because they seem always to be gently mocking those on the other side of the zoo exhibit's glass partition: waddling about in comic self-importance, beaks raised as if detecting an aroma nowhere near as pleasant as a bucket of smelt.
On the penguin side of this partition, the chilled air reeks of fish and wet feathers, and the braying and splashing of its inhabitants resound off the gunite shores. But Mr. Gramzay has spent so much time here that he barely notices. By now he knows every one of the 65 penguins by name and habit: Nicky hangs out with Dr. Bob, his mate; Geppetto prefers herring to smelt. Georgey gets so excited at mealtime that she stands tippy-toe.
Mr. Gramzay grabs a fistful of smelt -- in this case, a smelt called capelin -- from a bucket and begins feeding the penguins by hand, while an assistant with a clipboard keeps track of what Duffy eats, what Squawk eats, what Nipper eats. Sometimes the braying grows so loud that the humans have trouble hearing each other; sometimes they have to beckon the penguins with whistles and shouts.
''Frankie, you going to come and eat!'' calls the man in green, who at 42 looks like an older and wiser Richie Cunningham.
Mr. Gramzay, who has lost the taste for smelt that he enjoyed as a youth in East Detroit, earned a bachelor's degree in zoology and worked for four years at the San Antonio Zoo before joining the renovated Central Park Zoo in 1988. Some of the penguins have been at the zoo longer than he has, he said, ''so there's quite a relationship there.''
The zoo at Central Park is one of the few where penguins are fed by hand. This up-close attention has helped the captive penguins to live longer and grow in number. It has also tightened the bond between man and bird, though not to the point where Mr. Gramzay feels the pangs of a sympathy molt.
Still, he has engaged in penguin gossip with other zookeepers about who nipped whom, and about the nest-swapping habits of a certain couple that had many a beak flapping (O.K., it was Georgey and Terry). He has occasionally traveled with penguins or their eggs, transporting them to zoos as far as Germany.
HE has even dreamed about penguins, often during the breeding season, when he worries about the safety of newly hatched chicks. In one dream, he imagined himself in a Florida motel room with all 65 penguins. He doesn't remember fretting about room-service charges, though he does recall warning his roommates, ''You're going to make a mess.''
Mr. Gramzay smiles when recalling his dream. It may seem silly to others, but he finds true companionship with these penguins; true connection in their cold, odoriferous domain.
There are times outside the partition when he is not having the best of days, times when he is focused more on the life cycle of human beings than on the mating cycle of polar birds. Several years ago, for example, he was consumed with the illness and death of his partner, Rich Almanza; they had lived together for more than a decade. But time has passed, and now he is 18 months into another relationship.
Bad day, good day, it doesn't matter; the penguins must be fed. And when he steps into their domain, Custo and Schatzi often greet him with slight bows, and he remembers again what it is he does for a living, and he thinks, ''This is really cool.''
After 45 minutes, all 65 penguins have been fed. The man in green reaches for his empty pails and walks toward the door that leads to the other side. Many of the penguins wave their stumpy wings, as if in applause.
About New York
