Paul Molitor has always been a savvy baseball player. So when he faced Dennis Eckersley with runners on second and third, two outs and the score tied in the ninth inning on Aug. 22, 1998, Molitor noticed the third baseman was playing too deep. Molitor pushed a bunt in that direction for the softest of game-winning singles.
Eckersley has always been an emotional pitcher. So, after Eckersley's wide throw failed to nail Molitor at first and the Boston Red Sox lost to the Minnesota Twins, 4-3, he unleashed a few expletives at Molitor. Eckersley was annoyed that a superb hitter would bunt in that situation.
The simple sequence symbolized both players. There was Molitor, always thinking, always searching for an edge. There was Eckersley, always feisty, always expecting to succeed in the ninth. The bunt came in Molitor's last at-bat against Eckersley, and the two will undoubtedly retell that story often because they were linked in a grand way by being elected yesterday to the Hall of Fame.
''I think if you probably asked him now,'' Molitor said during a conference call from the Twins' offices, ''he'd know you have to do what you have to do to win the game.''
That is not how a playful Eckersley phrased it.
''I was 43 years old, and they're 25 games out of first place, and it's September, and the bases are loaded and he drops down a bunt,'' Eckersley said during a conference call at Fenway Park, his recollection of the specifics a little foggy. ''Guess what: it worked.''
Eckersley, a dominant closer with the Oakland Athletics who began his career as a capable starter, was in a giddy mood after he was named on 421 of the 506 ballots (83.2 percent) cast by veteran baseball writers. Molitor, a pillar of the Milwaukee Brewers who lengthened his career by becoming a designated hitter, was just as effusive after he received 431 votes, or 85.2 percent. Both were on the ballot for the first time and will be inducted July 25 in Cooperstown, N.Y.
No other player received the 75 percent vote needed to be enshrined. Ryne Sandberg earned 61.1 percent, Bruce Sutter 59.5 percent and Jim Rice 54.5 percent. Pete Rose, who is barred from baseball and is ineligible to be on the ballot, received 15 write-in votes.
The new Hall of Famers were asked about Rose, who confesses in a book to be released tomorrow that he bet on baseball while he managed the Cincinnati Reds and is clearly trying to be reinstated and be put on the ballot.
''I'll say I'm a little disappointed with the timing of it,'' Molitor said. ''I'm sure Pete has his reasons for selecting the announcing of the opening of his book. Does it take away from the current class and what the Hall is trying to do? In my mind, it does a little. I also understand Pete has been trying to get back in the game, and he's maximizing his opportunity.''
While Eckersley also charged Rose with bad timing, he added, ''I'm so thrilled to be in the Hall of Fame, it doesn't bother me.''
Eckersley had a two-part career after making his debut with Cleveland as a 20-year-old in 1975. He pitched a no-hitter for the Indians in 1977 and won 20 games the next season for the Red Sox. But, after the A's acquired Eckersley in 1987, the team's pitching coach, Dave Duncan, suggested to Manager Tony La Russa that Eckersley, who had 151 of his 197 victories at that point, be switched to a relief role.
''I wasn't going to the bullpen to be a star,'' Eckersley said. ''I was going there to clean up.''
But Eckersley became a star and ushered in the era of the one-inning relief specialist. Using only a fastball and a slider, Eckersley accumulated 320 of his 390 saves in nine years with Oakland. He was the American League's most valuable player and the Cy Young award winner 1992. Still, Eckersley, who will join Hoyt Wilhelm and Rollie Fingers as the only relievers in the Hall, said, ''There's no way I would have gotten into the Hall strictly as a reliever.''
Molitor had 3,319 hits and batted .306 over 21 years with the Brewers, the Toronto Blue Jays and the Minnesota Twins and was the World Series M.V.P. with the Jays in 1993. Like Eckersley, Molitor was a modern specialist as 1,457 of his hits came as a designated hitter. He is the first Hall of Famer who played in more games as a D.H. than at any other position, and he picked Bruce Springsteen's ''Glory Days'' to depict the honor.
''It's about how the older you are, the better you get,'' Molitor said. ''I think that's kind of appropriate. I'll be able to exaggerate myself as good as anyone.''
INSIDE PITCH
Commissioner BUD SELIG continued his policy of declining comment on PETE ROSE's new book, ''My Prison Without Bars.'' Rose's application for reinstatement is still being considered by Selig. ''It really hasn't changed,'' RICH LEVIN, a baseball spokesman, said yesterday. ''As far as Bud is concerned, it's been on the back burner. I've got to believe it'll sit there for a while.''
BASEBALL
