Following is an excerpt from a campaign speech by Senator John Edwards of North Carolina in Kingstree, S.C., on Dec. 27, as recorded by The New York Times:
We lost all these jobs. We got people hurting and struggling.
Let me just share with you a few of my ideas today. First, we need to not just have free trade in America but fair trade that allows our workers to compete so we don't continue to see the flow of jobs going oversees. We need to shut down these loopholes in our tax code that give American companies a tax write-off for leaving and taking jobs with them. This is absolutely insane.
So here's what I want to do as your president. I want to say, first, if you're starting a business and you're willing to come to a place like this where unemployment is high, we'll give you the venture capital, the seed money to get started, so long as you have good benefits, so long as the pay is good pay.
We have had a sea change in this country in the last 20 years. Now you think about this. Twenty years ago most working families, most middle-class families in America were doing pretty well. They were saving money, 15 percent of their income. They had a nest egg set aside. They had some level of financial security. If something went wrong, they were ready for it.
That's all changed. Now today most middle-class families are spending every dime that they make. They're not saving anything. Instead they are going into debt. Their credit cards are maxed out. Both spouses are working. If one thing goes wrong, they go off the edge. If there's a medical problem, a layoff, a financial problem, whatever it is, if there is one problem, they go over the edge. So the question is, what are we going to do for these families, what are we going to do to strengthen working families so they once again feel good about themselves, feel good about their future and what they're capable of?
We ought to help them to be able to invest. George Bush is all about creating wealth for people who already have wealth. How about if we create some wealth for people who need some financial security, middle-class working families, the poor. These are the families that need help. We ought to help people buy a home. We have millions of families across this country who desperately want to buy a home, but every dollar they make goes to pay the bills. So where in the world are they going to come up with the down payment? They can't. So we ought to give them a credit that allows them to make the down payment so they can actually buy a house.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
