The opera repertory is dominated by works written more than 100 years ago because those compositions are so powerful that they can still speak to audiences today. But to do that they have to be performed with conviction, passion -- even naïveté. If not, familiar operas like Verdi's ''Rigoletto'' can come across as checklists, bills of goods to be filled. And the Metropolitan Opera audience was surely sold a bill of goods with the ''Rigoletto'' that opened there on Monday night.
The singers, who filled the bill -- and that was all they did -- were evidently cast with visual as well as vocal appeal in mind. Andrea Rost was a petite, girlish Gilda; Frank Lopardo, with a tousled wig, a dashing, youthful Duke; and Juan Pons an elephantine, rather monstrous figure as the humpbacked jester Rigoletto. They were also careful to sing all the notes -- too careful. Perhaps it's hard to let yourself go in difficult music that much of the audience knows by heart. But the alternative is to perform it in such a calculated manner that you can hear the gears grinding as the illusion shatters.
Ms. Rost and Mr. Lopardo, especially, were scrupulously attentive to dynamics and nuance. Ms. Rost has an attractively dark-toned voice in its lower registers, but her fluttery vibrato sometimes carried her right off the pitch. ''Caro nome'' was sung with pretty care, but she was at her best in Act II, when, whipped up into a frenzy of emotion, she sang with more force.
Mr. Lopardo is an honest and forthright singer who seemed to be in a role one size too big for him. He may well have been hampered by a cold, to judge from the way his voice sometimes failed to do what he wanted in quiet passages. You could hear him managing his singing, expertly and musically, to help him get through the evening, and the result was quite commendable.
Mr. Pons showed himself less gentle, as if matching the clumsiness of his character with a blustery, leathery voice. His inspiration came with his top notes, which he held out most impressively. But for the most part he contented himself with the same few gestures, both with his hands and in his music, yielding an approximate, untender performance.
One of the night's scheduled debuts was prevented by illness. Instead of Julian Konstantinov, Rosendo Flores appeared as Sparafucile, showing stereotypical bass traits: a beanstalk physique, some woodenness and a strong but erratic voice. The other debut went on as scheduled: Marina Domashenko, a bombshell of a Maddalena with a dark, capable voice it would be nice to hear again.
Anooshah Golesorkhi, who didn't have the full lower extension he needed, was miscast as Monterone. Charles Edwin Taylor was a solid Marullo. In the pit Marco Armiliato moved the orchestra along well, counteracting the evening's tendency toward sluggishness.
OPERA REVIEW
