A senior adviser to Howard Dean accused two rival campaigns on Tuesday of harassing Dr. Dean's supporters here with a relentless flurry of telephone calls intended to disrupt his organizing strategy for the upcoming Iowa caucuses.
The adviser, Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, said that dozens of Dr. Dean's fervent supporters had each received as many as 20 computerized phone calls over the past weekend from the campaigns of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
All the campaigns are pushing hard to identify and mobilize supporters. Mr. Trippi accused the two rival campaigns of trying to frustrate Dr. Dean's supporters so they would not answer the phone, making it difficult for Dr. Dean to recruit precinct captains on caucus night.
Advisers to Mr. Kerry and Mr. Gephardt instantly and vehemently denied the charge.
Mr. Trippi, who suggested that the calls were a ''dirty trick,'' said his Iowa staff could provide reporters with a list of 10 of Dr. Dean's supporters who had received the harassing calls. But when asked for the names, his staff did not produce them on Tuesday evening.
''I clearly think now there's a calculated phone strategy to disconnect our supporters from us,'' Mr. Trippi said.
Erik Smith, a spokesman for Mr. Gephardt, described the accusation as ''a paranoid delusion.'' He said his campaign had not made automated calls to Dr. Dean's supporters.
''We utilize automated calls to communicate with identified Gephardt supporters and undecided voters,'' Mr. Smith said. ''Calling anyone else would be a waste of valuable time and resources.''
Voters have been receiving a flood of calls and mail from all the campaigns competing in the Iowa caucuses set for Jan. 19. Mr. Smith said that nearly 50 of his staff members regularly received automated calls from Dr. Dean's campaign.
David Wade, a spokesman for Mr. Kerry, also denied Mr. Trippi's accusation. ''Joe Trippi is a master of misdirection, but this tall tale is little more than a transparent effort to distract from the negative attacks he's aiming at Iowa voters and from the damage Howard Dean has done to himself with his own statements,'' Mr. Wade said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: STRATEGY
