The Homeland Security Department said on Tuesday that it had picked three teams of companies to try to adapt military antimissile systems to protect airliners in an effort to counter the threat of terrorists with shoulder-fired missiles near airports.
The contracts are the first American effort to place such protection on airliners. Officials said it would take two years before they knew whether such a system was practical. Officials said that along with the costs they also worried about blinding people on the ground with lasers and starting fires with flares if a ''false positive'' or actual attack activated the system. In a war zone, military planes do not face those considerations to the same degree, the domestic security officials said.
Critics said the Bush administration was proceeding too slowly because of the potential cost. Under the first phase of the program, each team named on Tuesday will have $2 million and six months to draw up plans. After those are reviewed, the government will pay two or three teams to test a prototype. After 18 months, the department will decide on the feasibility.
''We don't have any facts right now,'' said Penrose Carballo Albright, assistant secretary for plans, programs and budgets in the Homeland Security Department. ''We're going to spend the next two years collecting facts.''
Two teams were assembled by military contractors, Northrop Grumman of Los Angeles and BAE Systems of London, and the third by United Airlines, part of UAL of Elk Grove, Ill. Twenty-four companies had submitted proposals. Five were asked for more detailed presentations. Officials said the criteria included management skills.
Mr. Albright said that although the technology existed it was not suitable for commercial airline use. Laser systems used on military planes, he said, generally require maintenance after a few hundred hours of operation, but airliners fly longer between major maintenance visits.
Adaptation, he said, was ''an extraordinarily difficult problem.''
Senator Charles E. Schumer, the New York Democrat who has proposed legislation to require such systems, noted that a terrorist attack on an Israeli plane in Kenya occurred 14 months ago. Air Force One and El Al use such systems, Mr. Schumer said.
Northrop Grumman has a Large Aircraft Infrared Countermeasures system on the large Boeing C-17 cargo plane that uses infrared energy to jam sensors of an incoming missile.
