As of this week, each foreign visitor to the United States traveling on a visa must have a picture taken digitally and a fingerprint scanned electronically when going through customs at airports and at 14 major seaports. This is only the first step in the nation's struggle to keep better track of who arrives and who leaves the country, as Tom Ridge acknowledged in unveiling the program.
This page had many reservations about this new security program, but Mr. Ridge's Homeland Security Department has gone a long way toward assuaging widespread concerns that the United States would excessively humiliate certain travelers, or treat them in an undignified manner. Despite earlier worries that visitors from the Middle East might be singled out for special scrutiny, the program applies to visitors from all over the world. It exempts only tourists from 28 nations whose citizens need not get visas to come to America, though citizens of those nations will be subject to the identification procedures if they are coming here for more than 90 days -- to study, say, or to work. And the United States has required that passports from these countries include fingerprints.
The idea of using biometrics -- a physical reading, like a fingerprint -- in addition to a photograph to help verify someone's identity is hardly novel, and should strengthen security at the border. The claim that checking visitors' fingerprints violates their privacy is misplaced. Flying a commercial airliner to another country always entails a surrender of some measure of privacy. Moreover, tamperproof identity checks should lessen the need for the cruder forms of profiling that have been used to screen for potential terrorists.
Under the new system, visitors are checked against various lists of wanted criminals and terrorists, and their photos and fingerprints are compared to those taken in their home countries when they applied for visas. The idea, obviously, is to make sure that the person getting on the plane is the same one who was granted the visa. When the program is fully operational, it will also be used at border crossings and at exit kiosks, which will essentially check people out when they leave the country.
This last piece of the program is critical. Some of the Sept. 11 hijackers had overstayed their visas, a problem the government has never done a good job of tracking. Indeed, the government has a poor record in fulfilling most Congressional mandates relating to information systems and immigration or border security. That has to change. The security benefits of the program begun this week will be lost if the task is left half-done.
Failing to provide all the equipment and personnel needed to do the job right could prove the biggest threat to the system and could deter foreign visitors. Overly long waiting times at customs or excessive delays in processing visa applications would make foreign visitors feel far more unwelcome than a quick scan of their index fingers.
