The Sugar Bowl, won by Louisiana State over Oklahoma Sunday night, contained the following: 111 replays, 163 informational graphics, 262 changes in the corner score box (down and yardage, statistics), 86 crowd or marching band shots, 120 cuts to the coaches, 28 shots of cheerleaders and 20 sideline reports.
Oh, and 16 minutes 28 seconds of live action generated by 161 plays, or 8.1 seconds per rush, pass, punt, extra point, field goal or kickoff.
Through the prism of obsessive stopwatch analysis, that means that only 7.3 percent of the 3-hour-43-minute game contained real-life movement. It's not a lot, but any more might require on-field triage.
Throughout the game and during halftime, ABC and its local stations left the Louisiana Superdome 25 times to show 79 commercials (can we ever shake the memory of Snoop Dogg in a series of Nokia commmercials?) and took 35 other diversions to promote its or ESPN's programming 48 times (have you heard enough about ''According to Jim,'' the new ''Celebrity Mole'' and ''I'm With Her''?).
Had there been the time to comb the pixels of the game, one might have even found a camera shot that lacked an on-field logo or a stadium sign that didn't proclaim the bowl's title sponsorship by Nokia.
The experience of watching a major televised sports event is a miracle of sorts. No other type of programming contains so much. But that is sometimes the problem. The combination of technical adroitness and high network rights payments has created broadcasts that are more cluttered than a spring break motel room.
Games are more jam-packed than ever with commercials, promotional messages, on-screen graphics and bottom line scrolls (which inform ad nauseam, frequently telling us what they just told us seconds before or promoting a coming game). There are more technical toys than ever to deploy, more angles to display, more close-ups of sweaty linebackers to zoom to, more first down lines to insert electronically.
Announcers must stop what they are doing to read promos for their networks' prime-time programming, which rankles ABC Sports' Keith Jackson, who called the Rose Bowl.
''It just interrupts the flow and takes you away from your train of thought,'' he said yesterday by telephone. ''It's much more than it used to be, mainly because rights fees have accelerated to such a degree. With Disney owning ABC, the money crunch comes down from the top.'' The promos, he added, ''are often badly written and badly produced.''
Jackson was pleased by a new agreement between ABC and the Rose Bowl to limit the use of videotaped clips from the network's prime-time shows to accompany his voiced-over ''drop in'' promotions. ''There were no pictures of the 'Alias' lady undressing,'' he said.
The Rose Bowl, in talks last year with ABC, limited the number of sponsored enhancements (like the screen-blocking Dodge Defensive Playbook in the Sugar Bowl) during the game and shifted some to a slightly longer halftime.
''It's all designed to keep the game as clean as it can be while recognizing that ABC is paying a lot of money,'' said Mitch Dorger, chief executive of the Rose Bowl.
College games are encumbered by overly long halftimes and the stopping of the clock at first downs, even when they are achieved inbounds. Assuming that half the first downs in the Sugar Bowl were made inbounds, and the clock were running, the game could have been three minutes shorter (based on an average of 14 seconds before the clock resumed ticking after the first down). Then knock off eight minutes from halftimes that are more than 20 minutes long. That would make the games more tolerable.
As it is, the Bowl Championship Series games averaged 3 hours 39 minutes, a figure saved by the relatively short 3:14 for the Rose Bowl, the best-played of the four. The longest, the Fiesta Bowl, clocked in at a bloated 4:01.
Meanwhile, the four N.F.L. first-round playoff games averaged 3 hours 15 seconds each. Pro games are shorter, in part, because of shorter halftimes and no clock stoppages on first downs made inbounds. And N.F.L. teams, with more talent and more experience than college teams, also play more precisely and efficiently.
Still, the N.F.L. games had plenty of clutter, too.
Indianapolis's 41-10 victory over Denver featured 133 replays, 141 graphics, 222 changes to the corner score box (95 alone in the Colts' 17-point second quarter), 107 shots of the coaches and 80 fan shots. CBS broke away for commercials 29 times, showing 78 advertisements, and offered 34 promotions for its other programming.
The Colts' dismantling of the Broncos produced 12 minutes 18 seconds of real-time action. The 132 plays averaged 5.6 seconds each.
One could argue that replays constitute an alternate form of action because they show what you just saw but this time at slower speeds or from different angles. So if one figures that each replay takes 5 seconds, the amount of action in Indianapolis's triumph would soar by 11 minutes.
Tennessee's 20-17 victory over Baltimore, on ABC, had plenty of action (16:48, or 6.9 seconds per play), 108 replays and 56 coach shots. And there were lots of commercials (67) and promotional messages (29).
While automotive advertising dominated all the games, the best clash of brands occurred in the Denver-Indianapolis game when a first-quarter commercial for Viagra, a sponsor for Major League Baseball, was matched in the second quarter by a commercial for its competitor Levitra, a sponsor of the N.F.L.
TV SPORTS
