Gjetost is an artless cheese. It has no crystals, no shards, no holes, no rind, no mold. It is not smudged with ash nor washed with Cognac. Caves do not age it.
In fact, gjetost (pronounced YEH-toast) is more like fudge than cheese. A product of Norway, it is made by boiling the whey left over from traditional cheese production. It is stirred and condensed over heat until reduced to one-quarter its original volume. The sugars in the lactose caramelize, and the cheese becomes thick enough to pour into rectangular molds. The finished gjetost emerges from its supermarket wrap squeaky clean, with an all-body tan and shiny creases on its face. Its semifirm compact texture, which bears a trace of peanut butter's sullen mouth feel, has a rich salty-sweet caramel finish.
To earn the classification gjetost, this cheese must contain at least 10 percent goat's milk whey (in Norwegian, gje means goat). The remaining milk may come from cows.
Gjetost made with a combination of goat and cow milk and the odd drop of cream (sold in this country under the brand name Ski Queen) is milder than Ekte gjetost, which is produced from 100 percent goat's milk whey.
Ekte, sold under that label in the United States, has more textural reserve than Ski Queen, a rounder balance of flavors and a bright, barnyardy tang.
Gjetost might not be taken seriously in the world of cheese, but do not tell that to the Norwegians, for whom it has a cradle-to-grave appeal. Gjetost is eaten for breakfast on rye crisps, secreted into lunch boxes and served for dessert with fruit.
Its admirable melting qualities reduce it frequently to the creamy molten state from which it came.
Ski Queen gjetost is $8.99 pound at Murray's Cheese Shop, 257 Bleecker Street (Cornelia Street); (212) 243-3289. Fairway Market, 2127 Broadway (74th Street) sells 8-ounce packages of Ski Queen for $4.29; (212) 595-1888. Ekte gjetost is $8.90 for a block just over a pound at Scandia Food and Gifts, 1685 First Avenue (87th Street); (212) 369-7323. Scandia, which also does mail order, is at www.scandiafood.com.
GJETOST DESSERT TARTLETS  Time: 30 minutes
3 tablespoons sugar
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon ground cardamom  2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon unsalted butter, melted  10 slices very thin whole-wheat sandwich bread  2 tablespoons heavy cream  4 ounces gjetost, preferably Ski Queen, in thin slices  4 teaspoons light brown sugar
1/2 teaspoon Cognac plus  1/2 teaspoon water (or  1/4 teaspoon vanilla extract, plus  3/4 teaspoon water)  20 pecan pieces or small sage or basil leaves.
1. Combine sugar and spices in small bowl, and stir well. Set aside. Brush inside of 20 1-inch tartlet forms ( 1/2 inch at base), or other small metal forms lightly with butter. Dip interior of each buttered form in sugar, shake to remove excess, and place on baking sheet. Set aside.
2. Place bread on cutting board, and flatten evenly with rolling pin. Cut out 2 rounds from each slice with 2-inch biscuit cutter. Brush rounds lightly with butter, and press firmly, butter side down, into sugared molds. Trim excess with scissors. Line molds tightly with individual rounds of aluminum foil or empty tartlet forms, and return to baking sheet.
3. Heat oven to 425 degrees. Combine cream, gjetost and brown sugar in top of double boiler set over simmering water, and heat until cream bubbles around edges, about 3 minutes. Stir in Cognac and water. Whisk until cheese has melted and mixture is smooth. Cover, and keep warm.
4. Bake tartlet shells 5 minutes. Remove sheet pan from oven, and reduce heat to 375 degrees. Lift foil linings off tartlet forms. Spoon 1 scant teaspoon gjetost filling into each tartlet (do not overfill), return pan to oven, and bake until filling is bubbly, 3 to 5 minutes. Remove from oven, and press nuts or herbs lightly onto surface of each tart. Cool slightly, and lift out of forms. Serve tartlets warm or at room temperature.
Yield: 20 1-inch tartlets.
Note: Doubled, or even tripled, this filling may be used as a dessert fondue. Serve with ripe strawberries or banana slices. Fondue may be thinned with cream or water.
Correction:  January 14, 2004, Wednesday  An article last Wednesday about gjetost, a kind of Scandinavian cheese made in part from goat's milk, misstated the part of its name that means goat in Norwegian. It is gjet, not gje. (Ost is Norwegian for cheese.)
