The president of one of Hollywood's leading unions, the Writers Guild of America, West, resigned early Tuesday morning after a 13-hour meeting of the union's board of directors that was called to debate her eligibility to hold her office. Around 4:30 a.m. the president, Victoria Riskin, who was re-elected in September to a second two-year term, said she had decided to step down ''rather than have the board be in conflict.''
''I am disappointed in the staff,'' she said in an interview on Tuesday, alluding to what she believed was a lack of support. ''And I am sorry for the membership.'' A guild member who was present said the board was not in conflict but that it took a long time ''to be exhaustively thorough.''
The upheaval at the union comes on the eve of critical negotiations with Hollywood studios and television networks over a new three-year contract on conditions for entertainment industry writers. The current contract expires in May.
The guild's vice president, Charles Holland, took over as president and is expected to lead the negotiations with the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which represents the studios and television networks. Mr. Holland will hold the presidency until the next general guild election in 2005.
The marathon meeting began at 3:30 p.m. on Monday as most of the 19-member board debated the recommendations of the inquiry into Ms. Riskin, conducted by an independent investigator and labor law expert, William B. Gould IV, a former head of the National Labor Relations Board.
In his report to the board, Mr. Gould recommended that Ms. Riskin step down, saying she had been ineligible to run for president of the union because she had not fulfilled the requirements to maintain active status as a union member.
Eric Hughes, a guild member who ran against Ms. Riskin in September, and Ronald Parker, another member, had called for the inquiry, saying that Ms. Riskin had been granted a bogus deal -- an option to rewrite the classic 1947 film ''Magic Town,'' originally written by her father, Robert Riskin -- to maintain her active status.
In the interview on Tuesday Ms. Riskin acknowledged that she had obtained a contract for the rewrite partly to maintain her active status but that she was following union guidelines.
''We had an extremely strong argument that basically said the guild was not following its usual and customary practices'' in considering her candidacy ineligible, said Ms. Riskin, who hired a lawyer, Larry Feldman, to represent her in the dispute. Mr. Feldman argued this point of view before the board late Monday night. But Mr. Parker, who was not at the meeting, disagreed with her account.
''It was a sweetheart deal,'' he said. ''I showed in my testimony that the guild's membership director laid out a map to show her what she needed to do to legitimately qualify,'' he said. ''It was a sweetheart deal, but if she'd actually have done the work, she actually would have qualified.''
Mr. Gould said the writing contract was valid but that Ms. Riskin was not paid for the writing work.
John Wells, a former guild president and one of Hollywood's most prominent television writers and producers, said the union could come through this crisis and still be successful in the coming negotiations.
''Vicky's done a great job,'' he said in an interview. ''One of the difficulties in all this is how you choose to do the job. She chose to do it full time, and didn't pursue her career over the past few years. Constitutionally it's clear that the board had to take the action that it took. Certainly you'd prefer this have never happened, but we've not yet entered negotiations. For everyone, it's better to have this transition happen before negotiations.
The Writers Guild of America, West -- the West Coast arm of the union -- represents some 9,000 film and television writers on everything from health benefits to the residuals they earn from reruns. Negotiations over a new contract are expected to start in the next few weeks.
Among the critical issues on which the guild will be seeking concessions are DVD sales, which have exploded into a multibillion-dollar business. Writers now receive 1 cent on the dollar per DVD. The union also plans to seek concessions from the studios for writers on reality programs, documentaries and in animation.
