The Baltimore Sun said yesterday that the publisher had replaced its editor, William K. Marimow, an unexpected decision that surprised even those at the higher echelons of the newsroom, who received little explanation.
In an e-mail message that greeted employees of The Sun, including senior editors, as they arrived for work yesterday, the publisher, Denise E. Palmer, announced that she had hired Timothy A. Franklin, the editor of The Orlando Sentinel, to be editor of The Sun, as well as a senior vice president. Ms. Palmer, who became the publisher of The Sun in September 2002, then wrote: ''Tim will succeed Bill Marimow, who is leaving The Sun after a decade at the newspaper.'' Mr. Marimow had been editor since 2000.
After praising Mr. Marimow, 56, for his role in the three Pulitzer Prizes that the newspaper won during his 10-year tenure as a senior editor, Ms. Palmer said of Mr. Franklin, 43: ''I know that Tim will bring great passion and strong leadership for producing excellent journalism and serving our readers.''
Both The Sun and The Sentinel are owned by the Tribune Company, which bought The Sun as part of its purchase of Times Mirror in 2000.
During a contract dispute last year at The Sun, The Sentinel was identified by the Washington-Baltimore Newspaper Guild as one of several Tribune newspapers that had sent editorial staff members to Baltimore for training in the event of a strike.
Word of the departure of Mr. Marimow, who was respected in the newsroom and was seen as a mentor to young reporters, seemingly caught everyone at The Sun off guard. Several reporters spoke openly about wanting to stage a byline strike or to wear black ribbons in protest.
In an impromptu gathering of about 50 newsroom staff members not long after the e-mail message was sent, and later at a hastily arranged Champagne toast, Mr. Marimow said he had been dismissed by Ms. Palmer late Monday afternoon.
''The only thing he would say is that it was the publisher's prerogative to choose her editor,'' said Michael Hill, a writer for the newspaper's Sunday Perspectives section, who has worked at The Sun for more than 30 years.
In a phone interview last night, Ms. Palmer, who has worked for the Tribune Company for 23 years, did not cite any specific disagreement with Mr. Marimow but said her decision was based on ''style, chemistry, personality, fit.''
''I call it relationship,'' she added.
Later, Mr. Marimow said he would ''let Denise Palmer's words speak for themselves.''
Ms. Palmer's explanation, repeated in conversations with newsroom employees during the day, did not appear to satisfy many reporters.
Some speculated that a contributing factor was Mr. Marimow's discomfort with the company's efforts to raise profit margins. Last month, The Sun laid off several employees -- a Sun vice president, Mireille Grangenois, said the figure was ''roughly 14'' -- in its circulation, production and information technology departments. Mr. Hill said that Mr. Marimow had told him afterward of his displeasure with the dismissals.
Last year, under Mr. Marimow's leadership, reporters from The Sun were nominated as finalists for the Pulitzer Prize in three categories. One of those was Diana K. Sugg, who won in the category of beat reporting for her coverage of the intersection of people and medicine.
''I feel sick to my stomach,'' Ms. Sugg said yesterday.
Mr. Franklin, who was editor of The Sentinel for three years, played a lead role in the newspaper's successful effort to gain access to autopsy photos of Dale Earnhardt, the race car driver who was fatally injured in 2001 at the Daytona 500.
A Sun news release cited Mr. Franklin for redesigning The Sentinel, expanding its bureaus in Washington and Puerto Rico, expanding its investigative team and helping create a weekly bilingual newspaper.
