He Admits Betting On Baseball, Too
ALEC BALDWIN's private life as a vainglorious target of tabloid headlines may finally be eclipsed by his professional life as an actor.
Later this month, Mr. Baldwin, nominated for his ferocious performance in ''The Cooler,'' faces ALBERT FINNEY, TIM ROBBINS, PETER SARSGAARD, KEN WATANABE and WILLIAM H. MACY for the Golden Globe award for best supporting actor.
In ''The Cooler,'' Mr. Macy plays bad luck incarnate, and Mr. Baldwin, the casino owner who employs Mr. Macy's mister pitiful to ''cool'' customers' hot streaks.
Yet only Mr. Baldwin and MARIA BELLO (for best supporting actress, as Mr. Macy's love interest) were nominated for Golden Globes for ''The Cooler.'' Mr. Macy, the film's star, was nominated for another film, ''Seabiscuit.''
In ''The Cooler,'' Mr. Baldwin said yesterday by telephone, ''Bill plays a more measured character, and the two of us, playing the flashier roles, got the nominations.''
In ''Seabiscuit,'' in which Mr. Macy plays a wiseacre radio broadcaster, Mr. Baldwin said, ''Bill did to TOBEY MAGUIRE and JEFF BRIDGES,'' that film's stars, ''what Maria and I did to him'' in ''The Cooler.''
As Shelly Kaplow, the casino owner with the balled-up fists, Mr. Baldwin said he based his performance mainly on film characters, specifically those from ''On the Waterfront'' and ''Lawrence of Arabia.''
''Shelly was a guy trying to protect his own little world,'' Mr. Baldwin said, ''so I naturally thought of Lee J. Cobb as Johnny Friendly,'' the union boss who battered MARLON BRANDO's union rebel to a pulp. Another model was Anthony Quinn as Auda abu Tayi, the hot-eyed tribal chieftain who helps PETER O'TOOLE's T. E. Lawrence. ''I love that speech in the tent,'' Mr. Baldwin said, his already deep voice deepening. '' 'Yet I AM POOR because I AM A RIVER to my people!' ''
Next month, another big-chin role looms for Mr. Baldwin. Previews begin for ''Twentieth Century,'' the Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur screwball comedy that starred John Barrymore and Carole Lombard.
ANNE HECHE has the Lombard role as Lily Garland, shopgirl turned Broadway star; Mr. Baldwin has the Barrymore role as Oscar Jaffe, imperious stage producer.
Would Mr. Baldwin ever consider anything less imperial, like Mr. Macy's sad sack in ''The Cooler''? Mr. Baldwin doesn't rule it out, but he notes that ''when it comes to gambling, I AM a cooler.''
They Used to Use Alec For the Same Thing
To most fans of SUSIE ESSMAN, she is something like the little girl from ''The Exorcist''grown up, still spewing talk foul enough to disconcert the devil, if not HBO. She plays Susie Greene, the profoundly inappropriate spouse of LARRY DAVID's agent in Mr. David's comedy, ''Curb Your Enthusiasm,'' which began its new season on HBO this week.
In real life, as in a recent benefit for Change for Kids, a charity for New York City public schools, Ms. Essman is the soul of affability.
But her profane persona precedes her, she said. Ms. Essman was in Zabar's, and a woman shoved her cellphone at her. '' 'It's my husband,' she says. 'I want you to call him a fat BLEEP.' A strange woman I have never met shoves her phone in my face so I can curse out her husband!''
Then Ms. Essman and her agent both laugh a price-of-fame kind of laugh.
They Said Alec Did That, Too
The actors who play the snug, hairy-footed hobbits in ''Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' were supposed to be the focus of a recent screening at the AMC Empire in Times Square.
Mostly they were. DOMINIC MONAGHAN, who plays Merry the hobbit, and BILLY BOYD, who plays fellow hobbit Pippin, playfully parried press questions about their love lives.
Inevitably, however, VIGGO MORTENSEN came up. He plays Aragorn, the heroic king of Middle Earth. Do you think he's sexy? our Boldface correspondent asked. A burr caught in the throat of Mr. Boyd, who is Scottish. ''Women love him,'' Mr. Boyd said, mock horror washing over his face. ''I don't get it. He stinks. He's aggressive. Every time I see him, he head-butts me.''
with Joe Brescia and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
