No one would dare to seem soft on terrorism these days. But the new security measures imposed on travel to the United States have sparked strong and starkly different reactions around the world, veering from loud cheering to swift retaliation.
In a sense, the response provides a fresh global analysis of the trauma of Sept. 11, 2001, as countries and airline companies, unions and associations frame their views according to their perceptions of their own vulnerability to terrorism and of the likelihood that a plane could be transformed into a guided missile against the United States.
Rather than one deep divide, in which players line up either with or against the United States, several fissures have been exposed.
Biometrically coded identification like fingerprinting is either the only reliable way to track passengers or a racist act that violates human rights as it singles out citizens of certain countries. A plan to install armed marshals on some airplanes entering the United States is accepted by countries like Israel, which has long used the practice, but is opposed by countries like Portugal, Sweden, Denmark, South Africa and Thailand, which view it as potentially chaotic and dangerous.
Some critics of the new measures are suspicious that they are part of a crass political campaign by the Bush administration to keep Americans on guard at least through November's presidential election.
There is widespread agreement, however, that coming to the United States will not be more enjoyable because of what William Gaillard, head of communications at the International Air Transportation Association, calls ''the hassle factor.''
''People are not afraid of flying, but all these security measures take the fun out of flying; it's as simple as that,'' Mr. Gaillard said in Geneva, where the trade group that represents most international air carriers has its European headquarters. ''Is the Bush administration trying to make a point in an election year?''
Michel Ayral, an air transport director for the European Union in Brussels, described the carrying out of the new security measures in a telephone interview as ''unilateralist and impetuous.''
Part of the difficulty in analyzing the new American security measures is figuring out just what they are. One component is the new procedure that went into effect on Monday that requires the fingerprinting and photographing of visitors from most countries around the world. Citizens of 27 countries, including Australia, Japan, New Zealand, Singapore and most European nations, are exempt on tourist visits less than 90 days.
The other component is emergency measures linked to intelligence that terrorists had plotted to commandeer planes. Those included the cancellation or delay of about a dozen flights since Dec. 24 and a requirement that certain flights to the United States carry armed marshals.
In some countries, the fingerprinting requirement has tapped into deeply rooted resentments of the United States. A Brazilian judge was so furious that Brazilians would have to be fingerprinted and photographed that he took revenge.
''I consider the act absolutely brutal, threatening human rights, violating human dignity, xenophobic and worthy of the worst horrors committed by the Nazis,'' the judge, Julier Sebastiao da Silva, said last week in a court order subjecting all Americans entering Brazil to the same practice.
At a State Department briefing on Tuesday, a spokesman, Richard Boucher, said the United States had officially complained about the order.
On the other end of the spectrum are countries like France, which has long fought its own battle against terrorism. For Nicolas Sarkozy, the French interior minister, who owes much of his popularity to a tough approach to crime and terrorism, the American measures do not go far enough. ''We share the analysis of the American services that we live in a very tense period and what is required is increased vigilance,'' Mr. Sarkozy said last Friday. ''I prefer that we are reproached for having too many security measures than too few.''
A senior official in Mr. Sarkozy's office said the State Department had rejected a French proposal last summer to require fingerprints not only on visa requests, but also in all passports. Last November, France adopted a law that foreigners needing visas be fingerprinted and photographed at French consulates.
The most contentious part of the new security scheme is the use of armed marshals. The United States first deployed them some 30 years ago in response to hijackings to Cuba. The number was increased sharply after Sept. 11, 2001.
Germany began to use air marshals on flights to the United States and elsewhere soon after Sept. 11, a spokeswoman for Lufthansa said. Britain and France, by contrast, deployed their first air marshals in the last few weeks.
Switzerland has been using air marshals since 1970, when specially trained undercover police and army recruits began to board random international flights. ''The best measures are when you know tough measures exist, but you don't tell the potential terrorist what to expect,'' said Christian Frauenfelder, a spokesman for the pilots' union Aeropers.
Some countries and airlines have announced that they will ground their planes rather than succumb to American demands that they put armed marshals aboard them.
''We don't need additional security in the sky,'' said Rich Mkhondo, a spokesman for South African Airways, the national carrier, which has 28 round-trip flights a week to Atlanta and New York. Thailand's prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, told reporters on Tuesday that he would not allow armed guards on his country's national carrier, Thai Airways. ''We don't need to go that far since we always conduct proper checks from our end and our planes stop at one destination,'' he said.
Most police officers in Britain patrol unarmed, yet the government is defending the American demand that flights into the United States carry armed sky marshals. British Airways objected strongly and the pilots' union initially opposed the directive, but the union is now trying for concessions. The government has already said that pilots will be informed when a marshal is on board and that marshals will not outrank the flight crew. The union wants assurances that pilots and crews be given the choice not to fly on planes that have air marshals.
In Israel, citizens are used to heavy security and rarely complain about it. Strict security in Israel and on El Al flights mean that ''terrorists have long since moved on to other airlines,'' said Boaz Ganor, head of the International Policy Institute for Counterterrorism in Israel.
After a rash of airline hijackings involving Israel, or planes flying through Israel, the national carrier, El Al, began putting sky marshals on flights in the early 1970's. Shortly afterward, an air marshal prevented an attempted hijacking.
Aviation experts emphasize that it is crucial to balance security with prudence and common sense.
''There are two goals in aviation security: one is to make sure no act of terrorism can occur; the other is to make sure the flow of aviation commerce is maintained,'' said Frank Costello, a lawyer who specializes in aviation at the Washington law firm Zuckert, Scoutt &amp; Rasenberger. ''It is difficult to reconcile the two. If terrorists can shut down the system, it probably does more to furthering their goals than doing harm to an aircraft.''
