The government is proposing a rule aimed at giving consumers better estimates of the total cost of a home loan, but the mortgage finance industry and even consumer advocates have expressed concern that the measure is being rushed.
Without providing any specifics on the rule, which would overhaul the mortgage application process, the Department of Housing and Urban Development submitted what it called a final version last month to the Office of Management and Budget.
A version of the rule proposed a year and a half ago would have required lenders to offer a single price for the various costs of processing the mortgage -- including such expenses as appraisals and title insurance -- or to stick much more closely to initial estimates of those costs.
HUD has estimated that a new rule would save home buyers $700 each on their loans, or $8 billion a year. That is more than a sixth of the $50 billion that HUD says Americans spend each year in closing costs.
HUD was flooded with nearly 43,000 letters of comment on the initial proposal, far more than it had ever received. Most approved of HUD's intentions -- to make borrowing simpler for prospective homebuyers -- but few agreed on the specifics of what a new rule should do. Mortgage brokers and bankers, appraisers and title insurers, real estate agents and consumer groups alike had been waiting for the revised rule.
''While we all may disagree on what the final rule should look like, we all agree that the stakes are too high for everybody for us not to get this right,'' said Stephen O'Connor, vice president of government affairs for the Mortgage Bankers Association.
A.W. Pickel III, president of the National Association of Mortgage Brokers, put it this way: ''What HUD did flies in the face of democracy. They issued a final rule during Congress's recess.''
HUD defended its submission, pointing out that it spent a year and a half drafting its final proposal. In addition, it accepted public comments on the original rule for 90 days, rather than the usual 60, and asked 30 specific questions.
In written testimony submitted to a hearing of the House Small Business Committee yesterday, John C. Weicher, assistant secretary for housing, said he could not comment on the new rule but assured the committee, ''We carefully considered all comments offered by the public, including the comments offered by settlement service providers such as title agents, brokers, appraisers, credit bureaus, consumers, and others.''
He added: ''I can also assure you that there has not been a rush to promulgate this regulation, but rather a deliberate and careful effort.'' The committee hearing was called by Donald A. Manzullo, Republican of Illinois, who has been an outspoken critic of the proposal.
HUD has not disclosed how the new proposal differs from the original. The budget office can review the measure for 90 days, and approve it by making it public in the Federal Register. Until the office approves or returns the proposal, the housing agency is prohibited from disclosing the details. The White House has endorsed a revision of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974, sometimes called Respa. Just hours before the final rule was submitted on Dec. 16, President Bush reiterated his support. ''We have proposed new rules to make it easier for buyers to shop around and to compare prices on closing costs, so they can get the best deal and the best service possible,'' he said at a bill signing at the agency.
Mel Martinez, who introduced the measure, resigned as the secretary of the housing agency in December to run for the Senate in Florida. Many industry professionals had expected the measure to fade with his departure.
The agency has said its chief objective is to simplify home buying by bundling a loan's closing costs and the points charged on the loan or by guaranteeing an interest rate. Ideally, borrowers would then be able to shop for loans based simply on the interest rate and the cost of the loan. Furthermore, they would no longer be surprised by additional costs or new rates at the closing table.
''Most people hold their noses, and they close their eyes, and they pay the extra hundreds or extra thousands of dollars in unanticipated costs,'' said Brian Sullivan, a spokesman for HUD. Commenting on the original rule, he said: ''One of the things that we've tried to build into this proposal is more certainty for consumers at the front end of the process.'' Consumer groups have supported changes in how mortgage costs are presented to consumers but have said they are concerned about several details. A consortium including the Consumer Federation of America and the Consumers Union told the Office of Management and Budget that it would only support a rule that included guarantees on interest rates and closing costs.
''A myriad of important details must be worked through to ensure that the rule does in fact protect consumers, instead of simply providing a shield behind which mortgage originators can hide inappropriate, unfair and illegal activities,'' the groups said in a letter.
Consumer advocates worry that any measure could aid predatory lending by obscuring the components of a loan. They have suggested that certain types of loans, like those that carry a prepayment fee, continue to require a list of each of the items that make up the loan's pricing. HUD has acknowledged that the original rule did not address predatory lending, saying that it lacks the authority. It has not indicated whether the final rule will address the issue.
