Two years after nearly going to war, India and Pakistan announced Tuesday that they had agreed to restart formal peace talks in February, an extraordinary turn in relations between two countries -- and now nuclear powers -- that have been at odds for more than half a century.
A joint press statement released by the two countries' foreign ministers said they had agreed to a ''composite dialogue'' on all issues between them, including the disputed, and divided, territory of Kashmir.
Pakistan, which has backed an Islamic separatist insurgency against India in Kashmir, said it would not permit Pakistani territory to be used to support terrorism, its first such direct assurance to India.
Since they were carved out of the British Empire in 1947, Hindu-majority India and Muslim-majority Pakistan have gone to war three times. Both countries have nuclear arsenals, making their continuing tension perhaps the world's most perilously volatile relationship.
The agreement on the joint statement -- which was largely unexpected when a regional summit meeting started here last weekend -- came after an hour-long meeting between Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India and Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's president, on Monday, and other less publicized negotiations by both sides. It was sealed by a telephone call from Mr. Vajpayee to General Musharraf Tuesday morning.
''History has been made,'' General Musharraf said in a press conference at the presidential palace after the agreement was announced. ''We never reached in the past where we have reached now.''
In the six simple paragraphs released Tuesday, the two leaders managed to stitch a mutual satisfaction that had eluded them for years.
For each leader, the statement represented a culmination of processes unleashed by both personal vision and geopolitical pressure. Last April, Mr. Vajpayee, 79, who has long made clear that he would like peace with Pakistan to be his legacy, offered India's neighbor a ''hand of friendship'' after almost two years of estrangement, saying he wanted to make one last attempt at peace.
General Musharraf pledged to crack down on militants whom Pakistan has long supported and who have been blamed for at least one of the two assassination attempts that nearly killed him last month. His assurance appears to complete the U-turn he made after Sept. 11, 2001, when he abandoned Pakistan's support for the Taliban government in Afghanistan and instead pledged it to the American hunt for Al Qaeda.
In turn, Pakistan won the dialogue it has long sought on Kashmir, the former princely state that acceded to mostly Hindu India at the time of the 1947 partition. Pakistan has insisted for more than a half-century on the right of self-determination for the mostly Muslim Kashmiris, or at least discussion of their status.
India, which controls two-thirds of Kashmir, having lost the rest to Pakistan in a war after the partition, has resisted any such negotiations. It has argued that Kashmir is an integral part of India, and, as its only Muslim-majority state, proof of its secular identity.
India, for its part, got the first public written commitment from General Musharraf that he would not allow terrorists -- a reference to the anti-Indian insurgents Pakistan has termed freedom fighters -- to operate from Pakistani soil.
''Prime Minister Vajpayee said that in order to take forward and sustain the dialogue process, violence, hostility, and terrorism must be prevented,'' the statement said. ''President Musharraf reassured Prime Minister Vajpayee that he will not permit any territory under Pakistan's control to be used to support terrorism in any manner.''
India's foreign minister, Yashwant Sinha, said the assurance combined with a ''certain situation on the ground'' -- a reduction in infiltration into Indian-controlled Kashmir and militant activity there -- gave India the confidence to proceed.
''There would be no joint press statement if the satisfaction was not there,'' Mr. Sinha said.
The two nations had nearly gone to war after India said that Pakistan was responsible for an attack in December 2001 on Parliament in New Delhi.
In the nine months since Mr. Vajpayee's speech, the two sides have engaged in a series of confidence-building measures intended to improve relations, including the restoration of diplomatic and transport links and a cease-fire along the front line that divides Kashmir.
General Musharraf had tried to compartmentalize Pakistan's support for Islamic militancy in Kashmir, half-heartedly cracking down on Kashmiri groups, and failing to end the infiltration of insurgents from Pakistan into India.
With the agreement, he has implicitly agreed to abandon the waging of a proxy war in Kashmir, although only time will show whether he has both the will and power to fulfill that pledge. At his news conference, he also vowed that Pakistan would adopt more measures to crack down further on religious extremism in Pakistan.
''Any extremism, any terrorism from here will not be allowed,'' he said, adding later, ''We have to take to task any extremist here of whatever shape and color -- and we'll take them to task.''
He credited Mr. Vajpayee's ''vision'' and ''statesmanship'' for the agreement, and the flexibility both sides had shown in negotiations. Asked whether friendship with India -- the nemesis on which generations of Pakistanis, and more importantly the Pakistani Army, have been raised -- was part of his ''strategic vision,'' General Musharraf looked taken aback.
''Of course,'' replied the general, whom India blamed for orchestrating an incursion into its part of Kashmir five years ago.
He elaborated by saying that South Asia, home to one fifth of the world's people and half its poor, was the only region of the world where governments were not cooperating for the benefit of their people.
''It is the India-Pakistan relationship that is acting as an obstacle'' to the region's uplift, he said.
At a summit meeting of seven regional leaders, including those of India and Pakistan, that ended Tuesday, it was clear that the global economic environment was forcing change on South Asia. The seven leaders spoke of their concern about how to cope with new trade arrangements, and the need to resolve differences to enable formation of a regional trade bloc.
Pakistan agreed to join a regional free trade agreement the leaders signed Tuesday, which would lower tariffs over 10 years. Previously, Pakistan had resisted regional economic cooperation until its dispute with India was resolved.
General Musharraf faces other pressures as well. His government has been grappling with a series of damaging disclosures on his country's role in the spread of nuclear technology, and the Tuesday agreement, sure to generate international goodwill, may provide a welcome distraction.
General Musharraf also has earned the enmity of Islamic extremists angered by his support for the American war on terrorism and perhaps as well by his gradually growing flexibility on Kashmir. A suicide bomber identified in one of the assassination attempts last month was linked to a Kashmiri militant group, Jaish-e-Mohammad. The sophistication of the second attempt has prompted concern that Al Qaeda could be involved.
The attacks suggested that General Musharraf could now be forced to face up to the connections between Kashmiri militant groups and the terrorists he has vowed to uproot.
While he said Tuesday that the agreement was a victory for moderates in both India and Pakistan, General Musharraf acknowledged that he would face ''fallout'' from extremists wedded to separating Kashmir from India. Many of those extremists were trained or supported by Pakistan's intelligence services.
General Musharraf appeared unconcerned about his personal safety. ''I have nine lives -- I haven't consumed them all,'' he said.
The language used Tuesday was a far cry from the hostile rhetoric that preceded, and followed, their last meeting, at Agra in 2001.
''Please don't look at this document as a victory for one side or the other,'' Brajesh Mishra, the Indian national security adviser, said in a theme echoed repeatedly Tuesday. ''It is a win-win situation.''
The statement did not refer to the wishes of the Kashmiri people, weary after 15 years of conflict between two hostile giants. Instead, it said that ''the two leaders are confident that the resumption of the composite dialogue will lead to a peaceful settlement of all bilateral issues, including Jammu and Kashmir, to the satisfaction of both sides.''
But Umar Farooq, a Kashmiri leader in Srinagar, in Indian-controlled Kashmir, said the process was now ''moving in the right direction,'' and at the appropriate gradual pace.
