''I show up every day, blow a whistle, yell 'Change!' '' Holy Cross Coach Paul Pearl said of his role in guiding the Crusaders to the top of the Atlantic Hockey conference.
Pearl, in his ninth season at his alma mater, said his team's surprise success -- they were picked to finish fourth in coaches and news media polls -- is attributable to ''very good goaltending, good team defense and timely scoring.''
''I would think that's bordering on cliché-ish, because that's what most teams need, but we've gotten that this year,'' he added, in a telephone interview from his office in Worcester, Mass.
Goaltender Jimmy Quesada leads Atlantic Hockey with a goals against average of 1.68. He and his backup, Ben Conway, both sophomores, are Nos. 1 and 2 in the league in winning percentage, Quesada at 8-1-0 and Conway at 3-0-1.
Lost to graduation was Brandon Doria, offensive player of the year in the Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference -- in which Atlantic Hockey member teams played until this season. But there were enough returning players who could score. Six of the seven top scorers in the conference are Crusaders.
Two freshmen, Jimmy Sixsmith, a forward, and John Landry, a defenseman, lead the league's rookies in scoring at their positions, as well.
Choosing to play its out-of-conference games later in the season, Holy Cross (12-4-2, 11-1-1 Atlantic Hockey) has played more league games than any other Atlantic Hockey team and has two victories over the defending champion, Mercyhurst. But it has yet to face Quinnipiac, a perennial contender.
Pearl is hoping that Holy Cross, with an enrollment of 2,700, will become known as much for its ice hockey success as for its basketball; Bob Cousy, an alumnus, is in the Basketball Hall of Fame.
For now, Pearl just wants to win the Atlantic Hockey title and the postseason tournament. And he determinedly plays down his contribution as coach. ''You're not splitting atoms in hockey,'' he said. ''It's not like football where you're setting up plays. We've got some smart players that can make plays.''
OFFENSE REDISCOVERED -- Two national powers that had struggled early met in St. Paul, and although neither Boston University nor Minnesota came away with a much-needed victory, the hockey was spirited and the goals abundant.
Boston University, whose forwards had been hard-pressed to find the net with their shots during several stretches before the holidays, scored the game-tying goals each night last weekend as the Terriers (5-5-6, 2-4-2 Hockey East) and the Golden Gophers (9-8-3, 4-7-1 Western Collegiate Hockey Association) skated to consecutive 5-5 ties.
WORLD JUNIORS  Parise May Be Playing at Home
North Dakota's Ralph Engelstad Arena will be the site of next year's world junior championships. Zach Parise should be right at home. Parise, the most valuable player of this year's tournament, won by the United States, will be a junior at North Dakota if he does not turn professional. The first-round pick of the Devils in last spring's National Hockey League draft (17th pick over all), Parise is the son of the former Islander J. P. Parise.
Boston College's Patrick Eaves, whose father, Wisconsin Coach Mike Eaves, coached the United States junior team, was the second-leading American scorer with a goal and five assists. Stephen Werner of UMass scored five goals for the United States.
Al Montoya of Michigan was named best goaltender of the tournament.
WOMEN  Dartmouth Sweeps Season Series
Third-ranked Dartmouth (10-1-1, 4-0-0 Eastern College Athletic Conference) defeated No. 8 New Hampshire, 4-1, to take the season series. Dartmouth won the Dec. 12 meeting, 4-2. In that game, the Big Green's leading scorer, Cherie Piper, sustained a concussion in a collision with the boards; she has not played since. In Saturday's rematch, New Hampshire's Debbie Bernhard slipped and hit the boards headfirst in a similar manner. She was able to leave the ice under her own power.
Tenth-ranked Providence was tripped, 2-1, by Minnesota State, which climbed into the top 10 in the United States College Hockey Online Poll, replacing Providence.
All eyes will be on Duluth next weekend, when top-ranked Minnesota visits defending N.C.A.A. champion Minnesota-Duluth for two games. Minnesota-Duluth (9-6-1, 5-3-0 W.C.H.A.) is No. 4.
Slap Shots
FINDLAY CHANGING -- The northwestern Ohio university announced yesterday that it was converting its men's and women's ice hockey programs to club sports at the end of this season. The university said it wanted to redirect financial resources to academics. Hockey has been an intercollegiate sport at Findlay for eight seasons; the Oilers have been in Division I for five years. Findlay's decision will leave College Hockey America with five teams, which could result in the conference's losing its automatic bid to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
LONGEST-GAME REMATCH -- Bowling Green and Minnesota-Duluth met for the first time since 1984, when their N.C.A.A. championship game went into four overtimes and set a record for championship game time (97 minutes 11 seconds). Bowling Green won, 5-4, but the results were different in Duluth last weekend. The host Bulldogs (11-8-2, 7-5-0 in W.C.H.A.) won by 6-1 Friday and 5-4 Saturday. Both teams will observe the 20th anniversary of the N.C.A.A. title game with reunions this season.
COLLEGE REPORT  Correction:  January 10, 2004, Saturday  The College Report in the sports pages on Wednesday, about the recent success of the Holy Cross hockey team, misstated the given name of the goaltender. He is Tony Quesada, not Jimmy.
