WHEN a group of city slickers rides a herd of rented horses to dinner, the jokes tend to be predictable.
''I'm so hungry I could eat a horse,'' one diner says, looking at the plastic tablecloth. A paper napkin is spread over his lap, and he is clutching his pig-iron utensil in his hand as if it were a pitchfork.
''You probably are,'' says another.
''I can see the whip marks in this meat where the jockey was hitting it,'' says the first, staring into his carne asada.
''This isn't a restaurant, it's a glue factory,'' a third companion says. ''It's not the first time I've taken a horse to dinner and it's probably not the last.''
Los Angeles is a town packed full of beautiful little culinary secrets. One of them is the Friday night dinner ride through Griffith Park, beginning at the Sunset Ranch at the base of the Hollywood sign in the Santa Monica Mountains. Although there are other stables that offer rides on the park's trails, the Sunset bills itself as the the only horse ranch in Hollywood.
For $45 a person, the ranch offers guided trail rides to a restaurant in the San Fernando Valley. The ride is strictly a Friday night special, first come first served, but groups of 10 or more can reserve private rides Sunday through Thursday.
Those who weigh more than 240 pounds need not attend as they are considered detrimental to the horses' well being.
Our guide is an hour late. She shows up in a bikini, apologizing profusely for having sneaked off to the beach without taking rush-hour traffic into account.
Nevertheless, the evening is a splendid one. With the concrete Los Angeles jungle disappearing behind the crags and chaparral, the rider is greeted with the sight of hummingbirds and hawks, the smell of eucalyptus and sage, the warmth of horseflesh between his legs and the taste of wild grasses between his teeth. The ride is a tonic for the twisted and sour guts that come with urban living.
The trip, 3 1/2 miles, 90 minutes each way, mostly on dirt paths, meanders underneath the Hollywood sign through a canyon and into Burbank, where riders tether their mounts at the Viva Fresh Mexican Restaurant, near an equestrian center with stables and show grounds.
Dinners range from $6 to $12 and are not included in the ride fee. Despite the wisecracks, the food is decent yet unsurprising Mexican-American fare and the portions are generous. The margaritas are muscular. There is a fully stocked bar and on Fridays there is live music.
Riders can drink all they want, a dinner companion remarks. The horses know the way home.
The ride back is a spectacular one, especially if you have planned your trip to coincide with a full moon. The light through the stand of pines darts like silver fish, the Los Angeles River shimmers beautifully and as you make your way up the pass, the sound of traffic completely disappears.
Hooves kick up a haze of light dust and your imagination wanders. Your riding companions appear to you as the doomed troubadours.
The guide shares the lore of Griffith Park. It occupies land that was once a rancho owned by a man named Don Antonio Feliz. When he died of smallpox in 1863, leaving nothing to a niece who lived with him, she supposedly cursed the land.
A series of disasters befell its subsequent owners, until 1896, when its last private owner, Col. Griffith J. Griffith, donated it to the city on the promise that there would always be horse trails there.
A few years later, Colonel Griffith, in an alcoholic stupor, shot his wife, and was sent to San Quentin. Our guide says his ghost wanders here. The colonel was buried in nearby Hollywood Forever Cemetery and legend has it that no one has ever left flowers at his grave.
When you arrive back at the ranch it is near midnight. The moon sits in black velvet and your meal is fully digested. You tip the guide for her effort.
Then it is back into the car and even at this hour of night in Los Angeles, there is traffic.
