''Pure democracy'' is what some people are calling it -- massed, peaceful crowds of outraged citizens rising up, with cheers and chants and thrilling courage, to force an abusive leader from his perch on power.
It happened in the Philippines in 1986 with the ouster of Fredinand E. Marcos, when it gained the nickname people power. It has happened repeatedly since then, notably in Serbia when a mass movement forced Slobodan Milosevic from power in 2000.
Six weeks ago it happened here in Georgia with the unexpectedly quick ouster of Eduard A. Shevardnadze from the presidency, driven by public fury over a parliamentary election that people were convinced he had stolen from them.
For those who believe in justice, in the will of the people, in the triumph of good over evil, there is no political moment more inspiring than the one that arrived near midnight on Nov. 24 when Mr. Shevardnadze caved in and the streets of Tbilisi were filled with cheers and fireworks.
''I have a sort of nostalgia already for those times,'' said Tiko Ninua, 21, a student here. ''It was difficult to stand there every day in the rain. But there was somehow a wonderful feeling that we were all together and all were doing something for our country.''
But popular revolts like this can create new problems of their own. It is a risky thing to break the rules, even in the best of causes. Precedent is powerful, as the Philippines have since discovered, and rule-breaking can be tempting when the democratic process bogs down.
As in the Philippines, a disenfranchised elite may fight back to hold on to influence and wealth. The public, feeling empowered, may seek to repeat its role in overriding the government. The military, which has the final say in any undemocratic shift in power, becomes more dangerous.
On the final day of the uprising in Georgia, military commanders chose not to move armor into the streets of the capital. When unarmed protesters stormed the parliament building, chasing Mr. Shevardnadze out the back door, they passed unchallenged through ranks of thugs, interior ministry forces with linked shields, state security troops and the presidential security detail.
In the Philippines, the military played a comparable role in forcing Mr. Marcos from office, and the country has remained a jittery place ever since, subject to continuing coup threats, coup rumors and coup attempts. Georgia's new president, Mikhail Saakashvili, too, will find himself beholden to the armed forces.
There have also been a ''people power 2'' and a ''people power 3'' in the Philippines, both in 2001. One of these forced out an unpopular but democratically elected president, Joseph Estrada, when a Senate impeachment process failed to remove him.
The democratic system had let them down, Filipinos said, and needed a course correction. Again, it was the generals who had the final word, and Mr. Estrada's successor, Gloria Macapagal Arroyo, has been dogged by a restive military and by angry supporters of Mr. Estrada.
''We've had problems with legitimacy here since Edsa 1,'' said a political scientist, Alex Magno, speaking by telephone from Manila and using the local name for the uprising in 1986. ''Every group thinks it can speak for the people by mounting a mutiny or mounting a riot.''
If democracy is defined simply as an exercise of public will, people power might indeed be called its purest form, like those talent shows in which the winner is determined by a meter registering the volume of applause.
It could also be called -- as it has been by those on the losing end -- mob rule or anarchy or coup. Those besieged leaders have sometimes seen fit to restore order by massacre, as they did in Myanmar, the former Burma, in 1988 or in Tiananmen Square in Beijing the following year.
One reply is that if this is a coup, it is a countercoup, a last resort after a leader has disenfranchised his people by repressing their freedoms, silencing their voices and stealing their votes, as Mr. Shevardnadze did.
But volume can be a tricky thing. The daily demonstrations that brought down Mr. Shevardnadze after just three weeks generally numbered 1,000 people or fewer. They never grew bigger than 35,000 in this nation of close to five million people.
Mr. Saakashvili was elected on Sunday, for example, when more than 1.5 million people cast ballots for him, and he praised that outcome as proof of ''the very high unity of the Georgian people'' -- something that could only have been guessed at without a formal vote.
It may not have been a constitutional process that brought him to power, but there was tough-minded strategy, organization and hard work behind the chanting crowds in the streets.
''I don't know if this is a new political science, but I do know that there are a number of lessons from a number of cases about what works and what doesn't,'' said Sarah E. Mendelson, a senior fellow in the Russia and Eurasia program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington.
In Georgia, she said, ''people had public opinion surveys, they had data, they followed a disciplined approach to doing election observation, they got the results and they stuck with a recipe that has been used in other places.''
Ms. Mendelson has distilled the ingredients of a successful popular uprising: the training, funding and international support of opposition groups; the forming of a united coalition with a clear message; access to some form of media; the production of a quick parallel vote count; and, in the end game, the restraint of government security forces.
From this close perspective, the democratic process involved was something other than pure. The same creativity and energy will be needed now to deal with the special problems it produced.
LETTER FROM ASIA
