A 120,000-square-foot office and retail building being completed in Jamaica Estates, Queens, illustrates how an aging structure with high vacancies and little curb appeal can be transformed into a profitable complex that has drawn national tenants, among them a Barnes &amp; Noble bookstore scheduled to open in May. The building, known as Utopia Center, is at 176-60 Union Turnpike at the corner of Utopia Parkway.
The original 52,000-square-foot structure built in the 1960's first housed a bowling alley. Later it was converted to office and retail space, accommodating first a Bohack then an A.&amp;P. supermarket, and, more recently, a Pergament Home Centers store as its anchor tenant.
Access to the supermarkets and later to Pergament was always awkward. Because of the slope of the site -- an 18-foot change in grade from west to east -- supermarket customers had to have their groceries hauled down by conveyor belt for pickup at the street level below to prevent runaway shopping carts.
The transformation of the property began seven years ago. James A. Randall, then president of Bankers Federal Savings, a Manhattan bank that was sold in 1997 to what was then the Dime Savings Bank, and Doron Nissan, one of the bank's senior vice presidents, were offered a $7 million purchase option on the building held by an investor who was unable to complete the deal himself.
At the time, the building had 8,000 square feet of vacant space and Pergament, which subleased its 20,000 square feet from A.&amp;P., was paying $13 a square foot annually in an area where retail rents were closer to $40 a square foot.
The two partners, however, saw the potential in what was to be their first real estate venture. The property was at an important crossroads served by several bus lines and close to both the Grand Central Parkway and the Long Island Expressway. Across the street was the 100-acre campus of St. John's University, with a student population of 12,000. Several hospitals were close by, making the site attractive to medical tenants.
The surrounding residential neighborhood is one of the most affluent in Queens. Furthermore, the building's 56,000-square-foot site included outdoor and garage parking for 84 cars, space that could be relocated to make room for additional construction.
The partners paid the investor $600,000 for his option and signed the $7 million purchase contract with Alex Demitriadis, the building's owner, in April 1997.
''We had three major development challenges,'' Mr. Nissan said. ''What could be done with the Pergament space to make it more customer-friendly? What opportunity was there to create more income-producing space? And how could parking be relocated to accommodate new construction?''
The pieces began falling into place one by one. A $600,000 buyout of the A.&amp;P. master lease was negotiated to occur simultaneously with the closing. Pergament agreed to terminate its sublease for a $1 million payment, opening the way to reconfiguring its space and building a new entrance for the next tenant.
Citibank, which occupied 4,100 square feet in the building, agreed to move into a larger, more centrally situated space of 5,500 square feet. For the second-floor offices, the partners immediately attracted as their first new tenant St. John's University, which took 16,000 square feet.
Joined in 2002 by a third partner, GII Construction of Wantagh, N.Y., which provided both equity and construction expertise, the partners were ready to begin the expansion phase of the venture. The G.M.A.C. Commercial Mortgage Corporation of Manhattan provided a $23.5 million construction loan that also paid off an existing $7.2 million mortgage.
The building has been extended from 260 feet to 448 feet along Union Turnpike on land formerly occupied by the parking lot, providing 31,000 square feet of additional retail space on two levels. Two garage floors and rooftop parking above hold 190 cars.
The new retail space is fully leased, with Barnes &amp; Noble taking 27,000 square feet and Sprint Spectrum taking 4,000.
The garage under the original building has been converted to 35,000 square feet of offices that have attracted mostly medical tenants.
On the street level, a 9,200-square-foot Thriftway Pharmacy, which opened in November, occupies part of the old Pergament space, but with a completely new entrance with easy access. Other new retailers include another national tenant, Cold Stone Creamery, which opened in September.
Of Utopia Center's 60,000 square feet of office space, 19,000 are still available. Of its 60,000 square feet of retail space, a 5,100- square-foot corner space at Utopia Parkway is still vacant.
Annual office rents have ranged from the mid-$30's at the concourse level to the low $40's on the second level; retail rents are $45 to $60 a square foot. Mr. Nissan said the building was expected to be fully completed by early spring, and fully rented by the summer.
Regional Market | Queens
