The Islanders played well enough to win Tuesday night. They seized a lead after spotting the Flames a goal and they created numerous chances to challenge Calgary goalkeeper Jamie McLennan.
But as they discovered in the bleak days of early December, they are not good enough to overcome dips in intensity and ill-timed penalties against quality opponents. Not even at Nassau Coliseum.
A delay-of-game penalty on goalie Garth Snow for accidentally sending the puck into the stands and a hooking call on Shawn Bates came 1 minute 8 seconds apart midway through the second period, giving the Flames a two-man advantage on a night the Islanders' defense was already spotty.
Jarome Iginla hammered a slap shot from the middle of the left circle that clanged against the crossbar and into the goal to put Calgary ahead, 3-2, with six minutes left in the period.
The score held and the Islanders lost at home for the first time since Dec. 4, seven games ago.
''There were periods when we got sloppy or sleepy, whatever you want,'' Coach Steve Stirling said. ''They worked all night. We worked in spurts.''
Calgary (21-12-3-3) collected its sixth straight road victory -- and second in two nights -- and pushed the Islanders (19-17-3-1) into a three-game rut without a victory.
''We just seemed a step behind in getting the rebound,'' said the Islanders' Dave Scatchard, whose team had 33 shots on goal to the Flames' 34.
Iginla's other goal, 6:31 into the game, gave the Flames a 1-0 lead. He nearly had a hat trick but a later blast was nicked by Oleg Saprykin to tie the game at 2-2.
The Islanders, who pride themselves on their democratic scoring, got nearly all their players on the ice involved in scoring the go-ahead goal in the second period. Jason Blake raced out on a long rebound and made a reverse pivot to lateral the puck to Scatchard. Scatchard fired a slap shot from straight on, Arron Asham nicked it and Blake followed through on the rebound off McLennan for a 2-1 lead.
The Flames blasted away the euphoria less than two minutes later.
Down by 1-0 early in the second period but swarming the goal, the Islanders finally got results. Mariusz Czerkawski rushed the crease and fired a shot. He leaped to avoid the fallen McLennan and Mattias Weinhandl flicked in the rebound to tie the game at 1-1 .
SLAP SHOTS
Flames goaltender JAMIE McLENNAN, a Canadian who once played for the Islanders, faced the Canadian flag and had his back to the American flag during ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' Fans booed and some yelled for him to turn around as McLennan shifted back and forth on his skates. About halfway through, he turned to face the flag and the fans cheered. ''I figured the flags were on both sides,'' he said later.
HOCKEY
