An Army Corps of Engineers official overseeing Halliburton's imports of fuel into Iraq from Kuwait has found that the company has ''continued to negotiate the best price possible'' for the fuel and has also provided information indicating that the prices paid are ''fair and reasonable.''
Halliburton, the giant Texas oil services concern, has been under fire since the disclosure last month that Pentagon auditors found evidence that its Kellogg Brown &amp; Root subsidiary allowed a Kuwaiti subcontractor to overcharge the government by at least $61 million.
Halliburton did not profit from overcharges, officials have said, but the disclosure has led to calls for the company to repay any overcharges.
But on Dec. 19 -- after the disclosure of the auditors' preliminary findings -- the head of the Army Corps signed a waiver allowing Kellogg Brown &amp; Root to continue to buy gasoline and other fuel from the Kuwaiti contractor, Altanmia, without submitting the cost and pricing information that otherwise would be required by federal contracting rules. The waiver, signed by Lt. Gen. Robert B. Flowers, was reported on Tuesday by The Wall Street Journal.
On Tuesday, officials with the Army Corps cautioned that the waiver did not absolve Halliburton of liability for any overcharges.
''We're still awaiting the outcome of the audit to see what they've determined,'' said a spokeswoman for the Army Corps, Carol Sanders. ''The waiver does not relieve KBR of their responsibility to charge the government a fair and reasonable price for the fuel purchases.''
Gordon Sumner, the Army Corps contracting officer who found that the prices were ''fair and reasonable,'' wrote in the waiver request that officials at the Kuwaiti Petroleum Company had blocked efforts to export fuel from Kuwait to Iraq using anyone other than Altanmia, even though other companies had made more favorable proposals.
Altanmia has refused to provide cost and pricing information because doing so would violate Kuwaiti law, according to the Army Corps.
Last month, the deputy director of the Defense Contract Audit Agency, Michael Thibault, said the draft report by the agency recommended that the Army Corps seek reimbursement. The preliminary findings, Mr. Thibault said, involved ''potentially very substantial'' overcharging.
In a statement on Tuesday, the agency said the Army Corps had promised to provide auditors with information establishing that the prices paid for the subcontracted fuel deliveries were fair and reasonable. Once that is received, ''that will conclude the D.C.A.A. audit work on this issue,'' the statement said.
Democrats in Congress attacked the waiver on Tuesday, saying it would sabotage efforts to recover improper overcharges. ''The Defense Department is ignoring their own audit that showed Halliburton had bilked taxpayers out of $61 million,'' said Senator Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey.
Wendy Hall, a Halliburton spokeswoman, said, ''The facts show that KBR delivered fuel to Iraq at the best value, the best price, and the best terms and in ways completely consistent with government procurement policies.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: COSTS
