Gary Anderson stepped out of a trout stream in Colorado in September, took a flight here for a tryout and looked as if he was still in his prime. Anderson, a 44-year-old place-kicker, walked on to the Tennessee Titans' practice field, eight months after his supposed retirement from the National Football League, and kicked 19 balls between the uprights in 20 attempts. His only miss was from 50 yards.
Two other kickers, who auditioned for the job after the Titans' Joe Nedney sustained a season-ending knee injury in the team's first game of the season, had no chance.
''It was pretty amazing,'' Craig Hentrich, the Titans' punter and holder, said. ''Everything was right down the middle, right down the middle. He never really left the center pole the whole warm-up other than that 50-yard miss.''
Anderson wears jersey No. 1, but as far as the Titans are concerned it could be No. 911. A club that is usually in the playoff hunt, Tennessee was desperate for a kicker who was poised enough to win close games, especially in the playoffs.
After reluctantly stepping out of retirement, Anderson kicked a 46-yard field goal with 29 seconds remaining last Saturday to lift the visiting Titans to a 20-17 first-round playoff victory over the Baltimore Ravens. His next retirement date is at least one game away because Tennessee plays at New England in the American Football Conference playoffs on Saturday night.
''It just sounded like that one unique opportunity,'' Anderson said of his return to football in September. ''I hadn't officially retired yet just in case something attractive enough happened to surface.''
Anderson, who is the N.F.L.'s career leading scorer (2,346 points), first declined the Titans' request that he audition. He had set up a fly-fishing business and he was happy at home with his wife and two teenage sons.
Anderson agreed to try out when Tennessee said it would allow him to fly home to Minneapolis after games and stay there for a few days. N.F.L. teams typically take Tuesdays off, and Monday is heavy with film study; Anderson said missing the film study did not affect him much.
Anderson, who is the league's oldest active player, made all 42 extra-point attempts this season and hit 27 of 31 field-goal attempts in 15 games.
''He's been a blessing for this organization,'' Hentrich said.
Anderson trotted out to the Titans' practice field Tuesday in gusty and chilly crosswinds that he said made the balls he kicked feel like cold stone, not forgiving leather. He hardly noticed the inconveniences.
Wearing his helmet with the familiar single bar face mask, which he brought with him from Minneapolis in September, Anderson kicked about 30 times from either the 35- or 40-yard lines. He did not miss.
Anderson has seldom missed many kicks, even in worse weather. He played 13 seasons with the Pittsburgh Steelers (1982-94) and went to the Pro Bowl three times.
In perfect conditions indoors at the Metrodome in Minneapolis, where he played for the Vikings from 1998 to 2002, Anderson became the first N.F.L. kicker to go an entire regular season without missing a kick; he made all 35 field-goal attempts and all 59 extra-point attempts in 1998.
Anderson played soccer in his native South Africa until his father, a minister, moved the family to the United States because of apartheid. For someone who did not kick a football until he was 18, Anderson has had quite a career.
That career will culminate with certain induction into the Hall of Fame, though Anderson said Tuesday that he was not sure under what banner he would enter: the Steelers or the Vikings. He is certain that he will not be back in the N.F.L. again next season, even if it means conceding his career scoring mark to his friend Morten Andersen, the kicker for the Kansas City Chiefs, who is 43 and who said he wanted to kick until he was 50.
''I have a lot of things in my life much more significant than those kinds of things,'' Anderson said. ''Physically I could play for a number more years if I so desired, but I've made a family decision. They're not going to get me off that stream next year.''
PRO FOOTBALL
