Construction is to begin later this month on the second phase of what its developers call a new model for Main Street.
It is Bay Street Emeryville, a street densely packed with shops that are topped with housing, set in an area of heavy industry.
The $400 million project is eventually to contain 400,000 square feet of retail space, a 16-screen movie theater complex, a hotel and 326 housing units, and is a striking example of the efforts of this small city, eight miles east of San Francisco, to redefine itself.
Bay Street stands at the confluence of several trends in commercial real estate. One is the growing attraction to developers of urban infill sites; another is developers' increased willingness to build on so-called brownfields -- former industrial locations with a history of chemical pollutants. A third is the growing popularity of open-air, street-style retail development, often with a housing component.
The project stretches three blocks, about 1,000 feet, on a narrow site with a freeway on one side and railroad tracks on the other. The shopping and residential complex takes the form of a city street that seems oddly isolated, as if the builder had lifted a street and its flanking buildings from another city with a crane and set it down in the middle of Emeryville.
The buildings range from four to eight stories tall. The retail section, with 65 merchants and 9 restaurants, opened in November 2002. Construction of the housing, which is to be on the upper stories, is to start early this year.
''Bay Street is a kind of microcosm of what we are trying to do throughout the city,'' said Patrick O'Keefe, the city's director of economic development and housing. The project, he said, exemplifies Emeryville's transition from industry to housing, shopping and entertainment.
Bay Street is visibly a work in progress. The retail part, which defines the basic form of the street, is largely finished and occupied. Above the stores are gaps where parking garages for the housing units are to be built; several floors of housing will be built above the garages. The gaps give the buildings the appearance of chests of drawers with several top drawers missing.
The city has zoned the residential portions of the buildings, starting about 30 feet above street level and continuing upward, as separate parcels belonging to the home builder.
The master developer of Bay Street is Madison Marquette, a unit of the Capital Guidance Corporation of Washington, while the residential part is to be built by MacFarlane Partners of San Francisco. Madison Marquette has not yet selected a hotel developer.
The primary financing for Bay Street comes from California Urban Investment Partners, a joint venture with MacFarlane Partners, and from the California Public Employees' Retirement System, one of the nation's largest public pension funds.
The recent history of Emeryville is not dissimilar to that of many heavily industrial cities that have found themselves with ever fewer jobs and a disappearing tax base. By 1980, ''40 percent of the city was undeveloped or vacant or blighted,'' according to John Flores, the city manager.
At that time, the departure of many businesses had left Emeryville with a dwindling tax base, and the city was nearly bankrupt, he said.
In the mid-1980's, city officials began rezoning the once all-industrial city to a variety of new purposes, especially housing, which had been neglected during the city's heyday as an industrial hub. Until the 1970's, only about 2,000 people lived in Emeryville, although its daytime population soared to 25,000. The number of permanent residents has since risen to more than 7,000.
The original idea for Bay Street was conceived in the early 1980's, according to Mr. O'Keefe. The goal was to bring in a new mix of businesses, make the city more attractive and generate new tax revenues.
Research indicated that Emeryville and the surrounding area, including Berkeley, were ''under-stored,'' according to Mr. O'Keefe. Emeryville had few shops in the 1980's, and a strong antidevelopment sentiment in Berkeley had blocked the development of many proposed shopping centers and ''big box'' retailers. Emeryville's location near three major freeways was a selling point to prospective merchants.
An open-air design in the style of a traditional Main Street would be ''a better-quality project both for the retailers and for the community'' than a conventional enclosed mall, Mr. O'Keefe said, and would be ''closer to the New Urbanism and smart growth ideas that were starting to emerge in the 1990's.''
New Urbanism and smart growth are planning doctrines that encourage mixed-use neighborhoods where the basic components of city life, like schools, shopping and transit stops, are all within walking distance of housing.
Perhaps the strongest demonstration of the city's desire to promote the project was its investment of $36 million even before it had a signed agreement with a developer. The city assembled the 20-acre site from five properties, using eminent domain in several cases, at a cost of $25.5 million. The city spent $11 million more to remove soil contaminated with traces of arsenic, lead and 45 other toxic substances, according to Mr. O'Keefe.
He acknowledged that the city took a financial risk by investing so heavily in a construction site without a developer in place.
''Frankly,'' he said, ''we could not advance the retail concept any further without getting control of the site and clearing it.''
In the 1980's, most developers shunned abandoned industrial sites, but investors and their lenders have been emboldened to take a second look at such sites because of changes in environmental law in the mid-1990's and increased protection from legal complications.
Liability insurance is increasingly available to developers who clean up industrial sites, and local governments have increasingly offered guarantees to shield developers against future lawsuits.
Victor B. MacFarlane, chief executive of MacFarlane Partners, appeared to take the contamination in stride. For developers like MacFarlane that specialize in urban redevelopment, ''it's rare that you will find a site that isn't contaminated,'' he said.
To make itself more accessible to commuters, Emeryville spent $30 million in the early 1990's to cut major thoroughfares through the city, which until then had only a patchwork of narrow roads.
The city also established a free shuttle service to carry daytime employees to and from the Bay Area Rapid Transit station a few miles outside the city in neighboring Oakland.
Wareham Development of San Rafael, Calif., built a passenger rail station for Amtrak in Emeryville on land it leased to the city, providing a connection to much of the east Bay Area.
The industrial flavor of Bay Street's architecture, intended to complement the existing landscape, is the work of Jerde Partnership International and the Charles Group International, both of Los Angeles, with David L. Hoffman, a San Francisco architect. The housing was designed by SB Architects, also of San Francisco.
P. Eric Hohmann, vice president for acquisitions and development at Madison Marquette, said that Bay Street represented the newest thinking in the way shopping should fit in to city life.
''This is the antimall,'' he said, adding, ''We would like to think that Bay Street is currently the next thing in the evolution of the shopping center.''
While retail shops are transitory and ever changing, Mr. Hohmann said, Bay Street itself will be a permanent part of the city.
Over time, he said, ''ownership of the project will change, the skins of the building will change, the retailers will change from what we have created.''
What will remain, he said, are the fundamental form of the street and the social interactions that it supports. ''I think we have created some good bones for the future,'' he said.
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
