When Jim Fassel decided to let the Giants start searching for their new coach with two games left in the season, their first phone call went to Tom Coughlin, a renowned disciplinarian they hoped would revive a franchise that the Giants' executive vice president, John Mara, described as ''in trouble.''
After a lot more phone calls, interviews with three other candidates and a short flirtation with Louisiana State Coach Nick Saban, the Giants ended up where they started and hired Coughlin yesterday.
Management spent the day negotiating the details of Coughlin's four-year, $11 million contract, which was signed in the evening. A news conference to introduce Coughlin was scheduled for this morning.
''It is a tremendous challenge, and I am looking forward to working with these players and re-establishing the New York Giants' tradition of physically controlling the line of scrimmage,'' Coughlin said in a statement. ''We want to win the battle at the line of scrimmage, eliminate the disease of turnovers and control field position of special teams.''
Coughlin, 57, was offered the job after Saban declined to pursue the position yesterday. The Giants had also interviewed the New England Patriots' defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel, and their offensive coordinator, Charlie Weis, as well as the St. Louis Rams' defensive coordinator, Lovie Smith.
''Tom Coughlin is the right person for this job,'' Mara said. ''He has experience as a successful head coach at the college and N.F.L. levels, and he is going to bring an intensity and focus and a commitment to winning that we need and want. We stayed true to a process that we felt would produce the kind of head coach we need, and it did.''
The Giants decided to go with a coach with a track record of N.F.L. success -- and someone they tried to hire as head coach in 1993 while he was head coach at Boston College. He turned down the job and became the coach of the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars in 1994, the year before they played their first games.
Coughlin led the Jaguars to the playoffs four times in his eight seasons; they reached the American Football Conference championship game twice. Coughlin's tough-minded style was known around the league and he rankled many of his players, although others swore by his methods.
His downfall in Jacksonville came after three losing seasons largely attributed to personnel decisions. Coughlin was the Jaguars' general manager as well as coach.
After the Giants collapsed to a 4-12 record this season, management sought a candidate who would change the atmosphere and give the team a spark. Wellington Mara, the co-owner, addressed the players after the final game and promised he would hire the best possible coach.
''Mr. Mara said he was going to get us the best, so I guess they believe he is the best,'' cornerback Will Peterson said. ''I'm ready to go. I'm glad they did it early rather than later.''
The Giants become the first N.F.L. team to hire a coach since the regular season ended. Atlanta, Chicago, Buffalo, Oakland and Arizona also fired their coaches, and Steve Spurrier resigned as Washington's coach. All seven teams with vacancies were interviewing many of the same candidates, although Coughlin was approached by only the Giants and the Bills.
Thanks to Fassel's insistence that the team announce his firing with two games to go in the season, the Giants had an early jump on their search. General Manager Ernie Accorsi and John Mara interviewed Coughlin for the first time on Dec. 23. After talking to Smith, Crennel and Weis, the Giants brought Coughlin to New York on Monday for another interview.
After waiting to gauge Saban's interest, the Giants offered the job to Coughlin.
''Tom Coughlin is the man we wanted 11 years ago and he is the man we wanted now,'' Accorsi said. ''Aside from his family, Tom has one interest: winning.''
Coughlin has been out of football since being fired by the Jaguars after the 2002 season. Despite his early success, the final three years were all losing seasons as the Jaguars battled salary-cap problems, unwise free-agent signings and injuries.
Coughlin will not have control over personnel with the Giants, but he will have input in the decisions made by Accorsi. The Giants have plenty of decisions to make after their disastrous season, including the issue of a pivotal contract extension for quarterback Kerry Collins and the rebuilding of an offensive line beset by injuries and inexperience. The Giants' defense could be in for an overhaul as well.
Coughlin's background, though, is as an offensive coach. He served as his own offensive coordinator for a time in Jacksonville and he was the receivers coach for the Giants under Bill Parcells from 1988 to 1990. He left after the Super Bowl season of 1990 to take the Boston College job. After the Super Bowl, he was already making recruiting phone calls from the locker room.
Coughlin's older son, Tim, lives in the New York metropolitan area. He worked in the World Trade Center and escaped from the second tower before its collapse. Coughlin and his wife, Judy, have another son, Brian; two daughters, Keli and Katie; and two grandchildren.
Giants players are well aware of Coughlin's reputation as a hard-line coach, an approach that will present a stark contrast to Fassel, who created a collegial atmosphere in the Giants' locker room.
''I've talked to players who have played for him and they say he holds a pretty tight line on things,'' center Chris Bober said. ''But the guys told me, if you don't have a problem with rules, with being on time and doing things his way, you won't have a problem with him. I think that's what the Giants need, someone who is going to make people accountable.''
Peterson said he was keeping an open mind. ''I don't like to characterize anybody until I meet them,'' he said. ''I'm going to see for myself. Maybe it's just what we need. I'm going to make it work. I'm just excited to get started. It's a relationship. We have to make it work.''
PRO FOOTBALL
