When three men were found murdered last July at the auto body shop where they worked in Windsor Locks, stunned neighbors and onlookers who gathered behind the yellow police tape imagined there had been a botched robbery. But court records unsealed here on Monday suggested the motive for the killings may have been the bitter ending of a love affair.
It was the end of the day on July 30 at the B &amp; B Automotive car repair shop when the men were killed. The two owners, Robert Stears, 42, of Enfield, and Barry Rossi, 43, of Suffield, and a mechanic, Lorne Stevens, 38, of Suffield, had been ordered to lie face down on the floor of the garage before being shot in the head, officials said. Mr. Rossi and Mr. Stevens were pronounced dead at the scene; Mr. Stears died that night.
Court records suggest that Mr. Stears was the target of a hired killer, and the two other men had the misfortune of being with him. The gunman, whom the police have identified as Jose Guzman, 22, of Orlando Fla., and the two men they said accompanied him, Erik Martinez, 21, of Hartford, and Michael Castillo, 19, were paid $5,000 to kill Mr. Stears, the records say. All three were charged two weeks ago with capital murder.
One man who figures prominently in the court records is Benedetto Cipriani, 48, of Meriden. Mr. Cipriani, who was last seen on Aug. 7 boarding a flight bound for Rome, was identified in an article in The Hartford Courant last month as the initiator of an alleged murder-for-hire scheme.
The night of the murders, Mr. Stears's wife, Shelly Stears, told the police she had had an affair with Mr. Cipriani, whom she had met on the Internet, for about a year beginning in 2001, the court papers say. On the day of the murders, she said, Mr. Cipriani had phoned her three times.
He was interviewed by state police detectives the day after the murders.
''I love Shelly,'' the police said he told them. ''I bought a house for Shelly because she is supposed to get divorced,'' he added.
He said he had spoken with Mr. Stears, but denied ever threatening him before the killing. When asked by the police if Mr. Cipriani was involved in her husband's murder, Ms. Stears said ''that if he was, he would not do it,'' court records showed. ''He would hire someone to do it.''
The police said they traced numerous cellphone calls between two of the defendants and Mr. Cipriani in the weeks surrounding the murders.
On Tuesday, the state police could not say whether there was a warrant for Mr. Cipriani's arrest.
Ms. Stears told the police that Mr. Cipriani had a $245,000 home built in Meriden, the court papers said. He opened a bank account for her and bought her clothes and cellphones. They would meet at least once a week, often at local motels, according to court records.
But in July 2002, Ms. Stears, who had worked at B &amp; B Automotive before being hired by a Hartford insurance company, told Mr. Cipriani she wanted to stay with her husband, she told detectives. She saw him a few more times, but Mr. Cipriani could not persuade her to continue the relationship, court papers said.
Ms. Stears denied to detectives a claim that she gave money to Mr. Cipriani for the house. But the police said a witness, Steven Molinari, told detectives that Mr. Stears confided in him about Ms. Stears's infidelity, phone calls from her lover, and the financial straits of the car repair shop, court records said.
Sgt. Paul Vance, a spokesman for the Connecticut State Police, which investigated the crime, said ''dozens of law enforcement officers worked on the case,'' including conducting extensive interviews and combing over cellphone records. A break came on Dec. 15, when a man arrested on a drug charge in New Britain offered information about the murders to the police.
The man, Jose Velazquez, 44, of Hartford, told the police then that last summer he accepted $100 from one of the defendants, his nephew and godson, Mr. Martinez, in exchange for a ride to a Wallingford grocery store. Mr. Guzman, who is known as Joey, joined them, and it was he who entered the store and returned with a roll of money, the police said Mr. Velazquez told them in a written statement.
When Mr. Velazquez asked what it was for, Mr. Martinez answered: ''Did you see the news? The three people that they found dead, Joey shot them,'' according to his statement. Mr. Martinez said he and Mr. Castillo waited in a van during the shootings. Mr. Guzman, he said, was supposed to kill only Mr. Stears, the affidavit said, but ''the other two happened to be there so he shot all three.''
