Europe's highest court ruled on Tuesday that the European Commission was wrong to fine Bayer, the German drug maker, for restricting traders from exporting a prescription drug from Spain and France, where the price is low, to Britain, where it is 40 percent higher.
The court decision was a setback to the commission's efforts to forge a single market for drugs, and could have implications for other industries where prices vary widely by country, like cars.
The commission found Bayer guilty in 1996 of restricting the import of Adalat, a heart treatment, in one member of the European Union for sale in another, a practice known as parallel trade. The commission argued that Bayer had struck agreements with French and Spanish wholesalers to dissuade them from taking advantage of the lucrative margins to be gained by exporting to Britain. Such agreements breach the union's antitrust laws, the commission argued.
The European Court of Justice said on Tuesday, however, that the commission failed to prove there were anticompetitive agreements between Bayer and the wholesalers.
''Neither the conduct of the Bayer Group nor the attitudes of the wholesalers were factors constituting an agreement between undertakings,'' the court said in a statement. It added that none of the documents submitted by the commission contained evidence proving that Bayer intended to impose an export ban on its wholesalers or that supplies were made conditional on compliance with any ban.
Bayer welcomed the decision. In a statement, it interpreted the ruling as meaning that pharmaceutical manufacturers ''are under no obligation to supply the entire European market from the member state with the lowest state-regulated prices for the product in question.''
Amelia Torres, a spokeswoman for the European Commission, said the ruling was a disappointment. Competition officials will be studying its implications for the way the commission polices other agreements between manufacturers and sellers in the European Union, she said.
Ms. Torres added that the ruling would not deter the competition department from pursuing other suspected antitrust behavior by drug companies, and insisted the ruling only reflected a lack of proof.
''The decision today in no way prejudices future commission decisions,'' she said. ''We will continue to monitor this industry carefully.'' Ensuring the free movement of prescription pharmaceuticals throughout the union ''is important for consumers, government finances and the single market,'' she added.
In August, the commission accused the British drug maker AstraZeneca of illegally restricting the sale of generic versions of its ulcer drug Losec.
Twelve drug makers have asked the commission for antitrust immunity for a sales system based on national market structures that they want to use in the European Union. The system would set a quota of a prescription drug to one country according to national demand in that country.
Ms. Torres said the commission's examination of the agreements was at ''a fact-finding stage.''
The court's decision is a blow to the European Commission's efforts to use antitrust laws to help forge a single European Union market, said Ian S. Forrester, a competition lawyer in the Brussels office of White &amp; Case.
''The commission's enthusiasm for the single market is not enough to prosecute a firm,'' Mr. Forrester said. His clients include the pharmaceutical company Pfizer.
He said the commission's argument that the parallel trade in prescription drugs made those drugs cheaper to consumers and to state health systems was ''perverse,'' given the current disparity between fixed prices to consumers in different countries. ''The only ones to benefit from parallel trading are the wholesalers and pharmacists,'' he said. ''Consumers and the National Health Service in the U.K. pay the same price for drugs regardless of where they are from.''
The impact of Tuesday's ruling will be felt by other industries, including the auto industry, where there are wide differences in prices, Mr. Forrester said. Multinational companies with national sales structures in the 15-member European Union may be encouraged by today's ruling to refuse to sell to cross-border traders who make a living from the price differentials.
''After today's ruling, a firm is more likely to say 'no' to a free-rider salesman looking to export its goods,'' Mr. Forrester said. ''Other firms may think: 'Bayer got away with it; I'll say no, too.'''
