When Marlene Negron left Lima, Peru, for the United States two and a half years ago with a temporary work visa, she intended to return to her homeland with money to buy a house and escape a life of poverty.
That was the plan, anyway.
But in a sense, she only traded one set of problems for another. In New York, she got involved in an abusive relationship in which she had a son, Adalberto, now a year old.
It was only last April that she was able to extricate herself and her infant son from those difficult times, and make real strides toward that better life she had once imagined. She did so with the aid of Safe Horizons and Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Ms. Negron, now 31, told her story as she sat in a Catholic Charities office in the Bronx after looking for clothes in a thrift store nearby. Adalberto toddled around the office and smiled joyously, before his mother picked him up to feed him.
Ms. Negron said she had traveled to Virginia from Lima in July 2001, part of a group of dancers and musicians performing pieces from their native folklore.
But the show was over after three days and Ms. Negron traveled to New York to stay with friends and earn more money before returning to Peru.
''In August I met Adalberto's father,'' she said in Spanish, as translated by her Catholic Charities caseworker, Sylvia Morales. ''I started working in a clothing store in Queens. He worked there.''
She started dating her co-worker and in September her friends asked her to move out of the apartment they shared.
''They wanted me to pay $600 a month and I was only making $400 a month,'' she said.
With her rent beyond her means, her visa near expiration, and her other son, Luis Alberto, now 15, staying in Lima with her parents, Ms. Negron planned to leave the United States. Then her boyfriend invited her to live with him in Brooklyn, and in January 2002, she was pregnant.
Ms. Negron said she had prepared to leave but ''he said that he was going to marry me.''
They married in January 2002 and moved into a bigger apartment in the Bronx. ''During that whole time he kept throwing me out and hitting me but because I was new in the country and I didn't know anyone or know where to go, I stayed with him,'' she said. ''The whole time was horrible. I didn't have anyone to turn to.''
Adalberto was born in September 2002, and Ms. Negron, not knowing what else to do, called an aunt to ask her to take the baby to her parents in Peru so she could make money before returning herself. But her husband overheard the conversation.
''He got very angry and sent for his mother from Puerto Rico,'' she said. ''She watched me vigilantly. I couldn't go out alone.''
Ms. Negron wanted to escape but did not know where to turn. In March 2003, she said, she visited a church, to try to talk with a priest to get ''spiritual guidance,'' and find a way out. She could not find a priest, but in the church office, a secretary directed her to Hopeline, a community service agency that offers information and referrals to people in distress. But Ms. Negron said that when she called she was told that they could not find a vacancy for her in a women's shelter.
Hopeline referred Ms. Negron to Ms. Morales, who placed her in Safe Horizons, a group which tries to prevent domestic violence and help victims. When Ms. Negron's mother-in-law went to a doctor's appointment one day, she left.
While Ms. Morales tried to place Ms. Negron, things were worsening.
Two weeks after her visit to the church, the baby had a cold and had not slept in a week.
''I was very tired so I asked him to pick up the baby so I could rest,'' she said. ''He hit me and kicked me and didn't care that I was holding the baby at the time. I told him, 'wait, I'll put the baby down,' so he could continue to kick me.''
In May, Ms. Negron obtained an order of protection against her husband. They are now, she said, in the process of divorcing. In August, Safe Horizons placed Ms. Negron in a one-bedroom apartment in Queens. Public assistance pays $308 a month for the apartment and she receives $120 of cash assistance monthly for the baby's needs and utilities. She also receives an allotment of $120 a month in food stamps to help feed the baby.
Catholic Charities gave Ms. Negron a sofa, a table, four chairs and a few lamps. Caseworkers also raised money among themselves to give her a gift certificate in September for Adalberto's birthday, which she used to buy diapers.
Her husband, who has weekend visits with Adalberto, has given her money from time to time for the baby.
Catholic Charities paid the $120 fee to process her worker's authorization. They have gotten her a lawyer who is helping her apply for residence under the Violence Against Women Act, so she can petition for her older son to join her.
Meanwhile, Ms. Morales is trying to secure day care for Adalberto so Ms. Negron can return to work, she hopes, in a catering business, something Ms. Negron has done in Peru.
To help her find a job, Catholic Charities used $450 in Neediest Cases money to refurbish a computer so she can practice typing and learn word processing.
''I feel very grateful because without the help I received I wouldn't have been able to get out of that violent situation,'' she said.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,941,698.44  Recorded Monday: 169,346.86
Total: $6,111,045.30  Last year to date: $6,715,839.42
