OTHER owners, those in Oakland and Pittsburgh, for example, do not feel sorry for Fred Wilpon, but they do not envy him either. Trying to keep up with George Steinbrenner cannot be fun for anyone.
That is one of the Mets' two tasks, probably the more troublesome of the two because of the city they share.
The other chore is keeping up with the rest of the National League East, not to mention the entire National League.
The Mets have sporadically done a good job of the latter, most recently in 2000, but they have encountered such deep potholes since then that the 2000 World Series is a distant, almost forgotten, memory. As a result, the Mets generally and Wilpon specifically have faced severe criticism for their way of operating.
The Mets, on an off-season basis, will try to dilute that criticism with their winter fan caravan, beginning today in Manhattan. Friendly words, however, will not match results on the field, beginning in April.
Most recently, the Mets' lukewarm pursuit of Vladimir Guerrero roused the negative passions of their fans. Here was one of the best players in major league baseball available to any team that desired him, and the Mets, seriously needing a right fielder, which Guerrero just happens to be, made him an offer he could easily refuse.
Had the Yankees needed a right fielder and a hitter of Guerrero's stature, the Mets' critics believe, Steinbrenner would have smothered him with money and he would be modeling pinstripes now. But the Mets offered only $30 million in guaranteed money for three years, considerably less valuable than the five-year, $70 million he accepted from the Anaheim Angels. In limiting their offer to three years, the Mets said they acted under medical advice that raised concern about Guerrero's back, which reduced his 2003 season by two months.
The Mets also acted under the influence of their Mo Vaughn experience, for which they can thank their former manager Bobby Valentine. Vaughn is Valentine's legacy to the Mets because he implored the Mets to trade for Vaughn even after the burly first baseman missed an entire season.
After they acquired Vaughn, the Mets watched helplessly as the considerable amount of money they owed him reached him on the disabled list. Now Vaughn is finished, but the Mets' payments are not, even though some of the burden will be lightened by insurance.
It is only speculation -- unverifiable speculation at that -- but the feeling here is had the Mets not been experiencing the costly Vaughn fiasco, they would have been willing to gamble more than three years on Guerrero. But stung badly already with an injured player, can they really be blamed for being gun shy?
O.K., the Mets' critics reply, but the Yankees would not have let a Vaughn-type experience discourage them from pursuing a player of Guerrero's ability. True, although that is the sort of act that enrages other teams. The Yankees have so much money and are so willing to spend it, they can afford to make mistakes. If they had signed Guerrero for five or six years and he had been unable to play more than two or three, so be it. It is only money.
Other teams, including the Mets, either do not take, or cannot afford to take, that approach. As much money as Wilpon has, he does not have enough to keep up with Steinbrenner. Nor does he have the economic inclination to keep up with Steinbrenner.
Throughout his ownership of the Mets, Wilpon has demonstrated reluctance to spend extravagantly. When he shared the team's ownership with Nelson Doubleday, it was Doubleday who usually was more eager or more willing to spend.
The Mets' 2003 payroll, according to players association figures, was $91 million, seventh highest in the major leagues, almost $50 million short of the Yankees' $140.6 million. This year, the Mets are shooting for a smaller figure, $80 million.
In plotting his expenditures for this season, Wilpon not only had the Vaughn experience to ponder but also the misguided acquisitions of Roberto Alomar, Jeromy Burnitz and Roger Cedeño. Those players have cost the Mets considerable dollars, for which they have received nothing in return.
Those decisions raise another issue with the Mets: the way they run the club. Wilpon is no Steinbrenner, but he has been involved in the decision-making process on players. That function is understandable when large sums of money are involved, but clubs generally do better when they let their general managers choose the players to pursue.
In the Mets' case, Jeff Wilpon, the owner's son and the team's chief operating officer, also is involved in personnel decisions, leaving General Manager Jim Duquette with a more limited responsibility of contacting clubs and player agents. Atlanta, with John Schuerholz; Oakland, with Billy Beane; San Francisco, with Brian Sabean; and Minnesota, with Terry Ryan, have fared consistently well letting their general managers do the job they were hired to do.
Maybe the Wilpons figured that the Mets did not do well under General Manager Steve Phillips the last couple of years so they would try it their way. Perhaps their way will yet work, so it should be given a chance. But experience suggests it will not. The Yankees, with Steinbrenner making some, but not all, of the player decisions in recent years, have been an exception to what has become the general manager rule.
But some baseball people expect that even the Yankees could begin to fail soon. They cite this winter's questionable moves, many of them done at the behest of Steinbrenner, and compare them to the unhappy 1980's, when he also ignored his baseball experts in deciding which players he wanted.
But just as Wilpon does not want to match Steinbrenner dollar for dollar, he would not want to match him failure for failure. The Mets have had enough of that.
On Baseball
