AN American businessman returns home to the suburbs, where his wife has prepared dinner for the family. He watches as his wife and family eat, drink and break into song. But after starting ''Take Me Out to the Ball Game,'' they switch to a traditional Turkish number.
The befuddled husband, played by Chevy Chase, takes a sip of cola, and, lo and behold, he sheds his American reserve and joins in the revelry. By the end of the 30-second TV spot, he sprouts a Turkish-style mustache.
The ad was created by the Istanbul affiliate of Young &amp; Rubicam, part of the WPP Group, for Cola Turka, one of several would-be rivals to Coca-Cola and Pepsi that have sprung up in Europe and the Middle East. It suggests that for real Turks, Cola Turka is now the real thing.
For many consumer advertisers, politics and nationalism have traditionally been touchy areas. But with widespread international concern about United States foreign policy, that may be changing.
A radio spot running in Britain for Opodo, an Internet travel site owned by a group of European airlines, provides ''language lessons'' for Britons preparing to visit America. A British voice politely provides useful phrases like ''I would like a cup of coffee, please.'' An American with a grating, exaggerated New York accent provides the translation: ''Can I get a regular full-caf semi-latte with 2 percent milk to go?''
The spot, by Leagas Delaney, concludes with the British ''You've really annoyed me'' translated as ''Have a nice day.''
A survey by Edelman Public Relations to be presented this week at the World Economic Forum, found that 66 percent of consumers polled in Germany said they were less likely to buy American products as a result of their opposition to the United States-led war in Iraq. In France, the figure was 64 percent. While 66 percent of American consumers polled said they trusted the Coca-Cola brand, only 40 percent said so in Europe, the poll showed.
''American companies have to do a better job of disabusing Europeans of the notion that they are the font of all environmental problems, obesity and wars,'' said Richard Edelman, chief executive of Edelman.
Some American marketers have been trying to turn the tables, picking up on local sensibilities in their own commercials. Happily for American multinational marketers, what consumers say and what they do often seem very different. Europeans may express frustration over United States foreign policy when asked about their perception of American companies, but when it is time to spend, they apparently tend to stick with the brands they know.
A recent survey of ''cool brands'' by Research International of London shows that in France, the ''least cool celebrity'' is President Bush. The coolest fashion brand is Levi's.
''People may criticize the Bush administration, but they make a big distinction between politics and consumption,'' said Valerie Accary, managing director for multinational clients at BBDO Europe.
In places where sensitivity to American foreign policy may run closer to home, there are some signs that the national origin of a brand can make a difference, particularly if it is backed by an advertising campaign. Ulker Group, a Turkish food company, started selling Cola Turka last summer. By December, the company says, it had about 20 percent of Turkish cola sales.
Americans, meanwhile, may have discarded some French wines, but there appears to be a failure to connect their anger over French opposition to the Iraq war and their attitude toward brands from France.
According to the Edelman survey, only 34 percent of Americans say they trust French brands. Yet when asked about French company names like Danone, which sells Dannon yogurt in the United States, or Michelin, the tire maker, Americans gave them trust ratings as high as or higher than they received at home.
But that is at least in part because they have long been positioning themselves as American brands. Some United States multinationals have taken a similar tack. Levi's long ago abandoned overtly American imagery in its European advertising. McDonald's emphasizes the local sourcing of its products and its employees in Europe, trying to sidestep its image as a symbol of American-led globalization.
To some, anti-American brand sentiments express a more general cynicism about bland marketing. ''Consumers respond to being treated as individuals rather than as part of some global community,'' said William Eccleshare, head of Young &amp; Rubicam/Wunderman Europe.
Advertising
