Trying to preserve Martin Luther King's Birthday as something more than a three-day ski weekend or another day of department store sales, people around the region gathered yesterday to mark the day by feeding the hungry, protesting the war in Iraq, and discussing the unfinished work of seeking racial justice in America.
For those who knew the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., or had the chance to hear him speak, it was a day for reminiscing. For others, especially children, it was a day to learn about a man who has passed into history, though he would have turned just 75 this year.
Politicians crisscrossed the city on what has become a kind of King Day circuit, bumping into one another at gatherings in theaters, museums and churches.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg used the day to promote his goal of overhauling the city's school system. ''Education is as much a civil right as the vote,'' he said at City Hall, noting how much work needed to be done to afford the same opportunities to all children, 50 years after the United States Supreme Court ruled segregated schools unconstitutional.
Some of the city's biggest commemorations had to turn people away. A program at the Brooklyn Academy of Music quickly filled the opera house there, leaving a line snaking out into the street. It was standing room only at the Rev. Al Sharpton's annual King Day observance at the Canaan Baptist Church of Christ on West 116th Street, which he said was the last place in New York City where Dr. King spoke before he was killed.
Elsewhere, advocates for the homeless, antiwar demonstrators and others sought to harness the day's spirit to rally the faithful and attract newcomers to their causes.
''There are still people who are hungry, still people who are poor,'' said Alexis Hall, 22, who traveled from Connecticut to volunteer at the Father's Heart Ministries food pantry on East 11th Street. ''There is the same issue of social inequality today that existed back then.''
Joel Berg, the executive director of the New York City Coalition Against Hunger, said the people who responded to his organization's call for volunteers at soup kitchens and shelters around the city had ranged from students to older professionals.
''Some of them are looking for a way to make the day more meaningful,'' Mr. Berg said. ''Others have a general frustration with things happening in our country and feel a need to do something.''
At an ice-coated Bryant Park, antiwar advocates gathered for a morning prayer vigil and then began a frigid procession east.
Matt Daloisio, an organizer of the protest, said many of those who turned out have been angry about the war in Iraq and have found parallels to the Vietnam War, which Dr. King denounced with increasing vigor in his later years.
''We're trying to reclaim the message of Dr. King, particularly the antiwar message,'' Mr. Daloisio said.
In Grand Central Terminal, travelers and shoppers paused before a large television screen showing excerpts of Dr. King's speeches and interviews with his contemporaries. As Dr. King's ''I Have a Dream'' speech echoed through the terminal, a crowd gathered around the screen. A man whispered to his child and pointed at the television. An older woman, her eyes welling up as the speech climbed to its dramatic conclusion, turned away and murmured, ''Amen.''
''You can't watch this, even today, and not be overwhelmed by it,'' said Billy Johnson of Newark, stopping on his way to see a friend in Manhattan. ''He had the grace of the Lord.''
David N. Dinkins, who was the city's first black mayor, received huge ovations at several gatherings he visited. ''We at once celebrate Dr. King's birth and acknowledge that the evils that caused his death are still at work in America,'' he said at the Canaan Baptist Church gathering.
Many people at that church said they were praying for its longtime pastor, the Rev. Wyatt Tee Walker, who was a close aide to Dr. King and has been recovering from a stroke.
Farther uptown, at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church on West 145th Street, the Rev. Dr. James Forbes of Riverside Church told the Baptist Ministers' Conference that he could not remember another time when people in this country were so afraid to express their views. ''Scared to speak up?'' he said. ''And you call this the home of the brave?''
