For a small number of bird watchers, the question is not how many species they can spot but what viruses infect the birds. In recent weeks, these bird-watching virologists have become worried about what they and the World Health Organization say is the ''unprecedented'' simultaneous appearance of an avian influenza virus in a number of countries.
The worry is that the avian influenza strain, A(H5N1), could combine with a human influenza virus to create a new strain. That strain, in turn, could cause a large epidemic in people. It might even become the seeds of an influenza pandemic that many experts agree is inevitable and possibly imminent.
Five deaths attributed to the A(H5N1) influenza virus have been confirmed in Vietnam; all are believed to be from direct contact with infected chickens and not from eating poultry or eggs. Since mid-December, the strain has killed tens of thousands of chickens in Vietnam, Japan and South Korea.
So far in the new outbreak, there is no evidence of person-to-person spread of the avian influenza virus. None of the health workers who cared for the fatal cases have become ill, said the W.H.O., a United Nations agency based in Geneva.
To protect against further transmission of the strain among birds and to humans, millions of chickens have been slaughtered in the three countries -- two million in Vietnam alone. Drastic culling is a standard way to prevent avian influenza from rooting itself in an area.
''To stamp out the disease, all infected animals have to be killed,'' said the Food and Agricultural Organization, a United Nations agency based in Rome.
Italian scientists are credited with identifying avian influenza (often called bird flu) more than a century ago. There are now about 15 avian influenza strains that usually infect birds exclusively, particularly migratory waterfowl. The strains produce a range of illness from mild to lethal. Birds that survive infection excrete the virus and can spread it widely in flight patterns.
The A(H5N1) strain was first detected in 1997 in Hong Kong, where it killed 6 of 18 infected people after passing through geese and chickens. It was a novel evolution. Until then, experts believed that avian influenza viruses had to pass through pigs before becoming a danger to humans.
Hong Kong's slaughter of 1.5 million chickens and ducks in three days, many experts say, averted a worldwide human epidemic.
In February 2003, A(H5N1) infected two people in Hong Kong; one died. These cases masked the discovery of SARS.
In a teleconference last week, W.H.O. officials asked scientists who participate in the agency's influenza network how seriously they viewed the simultaneous outbreaks of avian influenza in so many countries.
''Their belief was that this is a unique and serious event,'' said Dick Thompson, a spokesman for W.H.O. ''Their increasing concern was that there is a strong possibility that A(H5N1) could become entrenched in a region'' and serve as seeds of a new pandemic.
Widespread epidemics in birds appear to increase the opportunity for more people to become infected with avian influenza.
''Every chance is one too many,'' said Dr. Klaus Stöhr, a W.H.O. influenza expert.
Tests on the A(H5N1) virus isolated in Vietnam show that the viral genes are of avian origin, offering hopeful evidence that A(H5N1) will disappear after culling.
Influenza experts still fear the exchange of genetic material between the bird A(H5N1) strain and a human influenza virus. The swap occurs in a process called reassortment, which occurs when people are concurrently infected with human and avian influenza strains. In effect, humans serve as a virus mixing bowl.
For the reassortment to have significance for human health requires additional steps. These include transmission of the new reassorted strain from birds to humans, followed by efficient spread of that strain from infected people to many others. Risk assessments deem each such event a low probability, Mr. Thompson said.
Nevertheless, experts know the catastrophic potential.
''The only thing that has saved us so far this century is that these viruses haven't acquired the ability to transmit human to human,'' Dr. Robert G. Webster told a recent meeting of the Institute of Medicine. He is an internationally known influenza expert at St. Jude's Children's Research Hospital in Memphis.
The W.H.O. is taking a number of steps, including preparing diagnostic tests and a seed virus to make new human vaccines, in case they are needed.
Scientists are also concerned about recent research showing that mild viruses can mutate into highly virulent ones after circulating for short periods among poultry.
During an outbreak in the United States in 1983 and 1984, a different avian influenza strain, A(H5N2), initially caused a low death rate. In six months, the death rate rose to 90 percent. The outbreak ended after the destruction of 17 million birds.
In Italy from 1999 to 2001, another avian virus, A(H7N1), initially caused few deaths. But in nine months it mutated to a highly virulent one. Thirteen million birds were slaughtered.
Another worry is that other avian influenza strains have recently caused illness in humans. In early 2003, the A(H7N7) strain affected 225 farms in the Netherlands. A total of 347 people developed mild illnesses like conjunctivitis; the infection was documented in 84 of them. One veterinarian died of the disease. Three infected patients spread the virus to others.
To control the Dutch outbreak, officials killed 30 million birds and recommended that infected people receive both the influenza vaccine that was current then and an antiviral drug, oseltamivir (Tamiflu). The veterinarian who died did not take the drug, Dr. Webster said.
W.H.O. says better surveillance is needed to detect A(H5N1) in humans, farm animals and wildlife. Participants in W.H.O.'s teleconference last week urged countries to adopt avian influenza surveillance systems like Hong Kong's, which the experts considered a model.
But even with improved surveillance, the experts said it would be hard to determine the geographical extent of the avian epidemic.
To determine how closely the current A(H5N1) strain is related to the ones that caused earlier cases in Hong Kong, scientists are studying the molecular structure of the virus.
The findings may help answer a crucial question: why is the outbreak happening now?
Some doctors suspect that such detection reflects in part the greater efforts being made to monitor new and emerging diseases. Experts also believe that large live-bird markets and changes in agricultural practices are significant factors.
THE DOCTOR'S WORLD
