As far as I know, I am the only vice president for romance in the entire world. You wouldn't believe how readily business travelers on the plane put aside their laptops and BlackBerries to tell me intimate details of their love life or lack thereof. My favorite conversations start when someone makes a disclaimer to me about dating such as, ''I'm too busy to date, I'm running a company.''
I often peek over my seatmates' shoulders to glance at what they're working on and at their ring fingers. If they're checking me out too, I'm typically editing a press release I've written, like ''Singles Vote Mel Gibson as Actor With Sexiest Rear.''
Sometimes I forget how unusual my profession might seem to other passengers. Once I was flying from San Francisco, where I am based, to our Dallas headquarters. We were going to review acceptability standards for the photos that singles wish to post online with their dating profiles. So I'm sitting on the plane with other business executives, and I pull up this large Power Point presentation demonstrating pages and pages of the types of photos that would probably be rejected as too provocative: women with varying degrees of cleavage and scantily clad men, often in unusual, if not entertaining, poses. I'm so engrossed in work that I'm oblivious to the fact that I'm on a very crowded plane, taking fast and furious notes about large, hard-to-miss photos that people might deem X-rated.
In a perfect world, the flight attendant would have saved my reputation with an announcement like, ''Attention, the woman in the Match.com baseball cap is not entertaining herself with nudie photos; this is work, a strategic business decision.''
Londoners have the best dating vocabulary. In New York, we kiss, but in London they snog. Here we say, ''Do you like him?'' but in London, they say, ''Do you fancy him?'' Some people think the British are uptight, yet their words are so playful and inviting of romance. When they say, ''I pulled a man,'' it's almost as if you had a string and slowly, maybe without his being aware, caught his attention and pulled him across the bar and hooked him.
Whenever I fly to our international headquarters in London, I love to engage British people in conversations about dating, to extract a ''fancy,'' especially from buttoned-up businessmen. The sexy British accent is the icing on my already delicious cake.
The biggest complainers about dating are New Yorkers. It seems counterintuitive, since they are in the social city that never sleeps.
The most romantic hotel in which I've ever stayed for business is the Regent Beverly Wilshire in Beverly Hills. I was managing Match.com promotions for a reality dating show. The air was infused with that great sense of possibility that at any moment your life could change, the star of your dreams could trip over your shoe. And my suite was the largest I've ever had, with a lovely doorbell that chimed when room service came.
All the underground trains on which I have ridden, in Washington, New York and London, are romance killers. But on a plane, after you work to catch your flight, the doors close, the drinks come out, dinner is served, the movie comes on, you take a deep breath and say hello to your world. You check out your seatmate. It's surprising how much someone will open up to you when you put the work away and realize you are sitting next to a real person who has a life story to tell.
Here's my fantasy for the world of business travel: When you book your flight, the agent asks if you'd like to sit in the singles section. The question would be: ''Aisle, window or single?'' I invite any airline that wants to organize that to give me a call.
Frequent Flier
