When Dawn Merrick returned home at 2 a.m. after her shift as a security guard at City Hall last spring, her baby sitter had frightening news. Two of her daughters, 12 and 13 years old, had been out and unaccounted for until moments earlier.
Ms. Merrick had warned the girls again and again that they were not supposed to be on the streets at that time. She had even once taken them to the police station for a warning lecture. If someone reported they were running around at that hour, Ms. Merrick knew, she could be arrested for neglect.
Furious and determined to make the lesson stick, Ms. Merrick recalled, she beat both of them with a cable wire. Neighbors called the police. Ms. Merrick was arrested. All six of her children were sent to foster care.
She spent some time in jail and even more in Family Court; the lost hours cost her her job. Still, Ms. Merrick said, she was determined to do right by her children. She quickly completed courses on anger management and proper child-rearing. And by mid-June her social worker said she was almost ready to get the children back.
But there was one problem: Ms. Merrick lived in a one-bedroom apartment in the Bronx. And to get all six children back, the foster care agency said, she had to have at least three bedrooms, an unimaginable expense for her. This is why her children, taken last May, are still in foster care today.
This bind is all too familiar to troubled families in New York City, said Steve Banks, associate attorney in chief of the Legal Aid Society, which frequently represents the children. ''You rarely lose your kids because of housing problems,'' he said, ''but you can't get them back because of housing problems.''
Obviously, Mr. Banks said, it is not healthy for most children to be kept from their parents. And, he said, taxpayers feel the pain too, since keeping a child in a foster home costs about $1,340 a month. Yet lawyers who represent parents say the shortage of vacant apartments for low-income tenants in the city means hundreds of parents are unable to reunite with their children solely because of housing.
Yes, the city has rent subsidies to help such parents, the lawyers say, but either they are not enough to get a large apartment or they are attached to a thicket of red tape. A common Catch-22, the lawyers and other advocates for the poor say, is that parents cannot get large taxpayer-supported housing units if their children are not in their custody, particularly when they apply for those apartments by entering the city's homeless shelters, and they cannot collect welfare for children who are not at home. But parents often cannot get children back without housing that puts girls, boys and parents in separate bedrooms.
William C. Bell, the commissioner of the Administration for Children's Services, said his agency did not track how many children remain in foster care waiting only for their parents to get new housing. But, he said, the agency has an obligation to return the children to the safest environment possible. An apartment that is too small may have contributed to the stress that caused the abuse in the first place, he said. Nonetheless, Mr. Bell said, the problem is being solved, not getting worse.
In October 2002, the agency began a program for families whose reunions were blocked only by the housing requirements, giving them priority for Section 8 vouchers under the federally subsidized housing program. Since then, the agency has forwarded the applications of 875 families to the City Housing Authority, which distributes the vouchers.
The city does not yet track how many of these families have subsequently obtained the vouchers or housing, but Mr. Bell said he was confident that many of the obstacles had been removed. ''We think that every family that needs it will have access to Section 8,'' he said.
To the lawyers, the child welfare agency's goals are high-minded, but they must be realized by multiple bureaucracies, and frequently, that does not happen.
Ms. Merrick, for example, received a Section 8 voucher for a three-bedroom apartment last spring, even before her children were taken away, but she searched for eight months before she found a landlord willing to accept the voucher payment of $1,591 a month. But she was not working, so she could not afford the security deposit of one month's rent. Ms. Merrick said that her welfare caseworker would not give her the money for the deposit because her children, still in foster care, were not on her public assistance family budget.
Ms. Merrick said that only after she got a new social worker did she receive the money for the deposit. She is scheduled to get the apartment and her children on the first of February.
Lisi de Bourbon, a spokeswoman for the Human Resources Administration, said that the agency could not comment on Ms. Merrick's case because of privacy laws, but said that if she had been denied the deposit, the denial was a rare aberration not in keeping with agency policy.
Ms. Merrick and her children have paid a price for the wait: she says one daughter's face was burned when the foster mother left chemical straightener in her hair too long. But the speed with which she negotiated the system is, by some other mothers' experiences, a triumph.
Mothers like Tara Rowley, who was cleared to take her daughter, Champagne Hazel, from foster care in 2000, have been trying to get subsidized housing for years. Ms. Rowley, who has worked only sporadically since 2000 and cannot pay rent anywhere on her own, said that at one point, her foster care caseworker told her to enter the city's homeless shelter system to qualify for housing. Ms. Rowley said that she could not get in because she was living with a friend.
Other mothers have used the shelter system as a way to reunite with children, but they say this path is not easy, either.
Technically, the Department of Homeless Services has no rules preventing a mother from regaining custody of her children while in a homeless shelter, but Family Court judges and foster care caseworkers tend to frown on reuniting families in shelters. Yet the department will arrange permanent housing only for the number of family members in the shelter.
Linda I. Gibbs, the city's commissioner of homeless services, said it did not make sense to ''reunify unto homelessness.'' She said the city's Section 8 voucher system for subsidized rent was ''a more appropriate and supportive program.''
But this can take months or years. For starters, a mother cannot apply for Section 8 vouchers on her own; her child's foster care agency has to fill out an application, a process that is supposed to take weeks but often takes longer. Then the application must be processed by the Housing Authority, a step that can routinely take several more months.
For this very reason, the Administration for Children's Services says, it encourages mothers to start thinking about housing a year before they are supposed to be reunited with children. But for many parents, a year would be speedy.
Gwendolyn T. Smith's five children were taken into foster care in 1998 after she was found to be using cocaine. Ms. Smith moved out of her two-bedroom apartment in Brooklyn to join a residential drug treatment center, where she graduated last year. She was cleared to get her children back last January, but on her $7-an-hour salary as a home health care aide, she cannot afford a three-bedroom apartment, which the children's services agency says she needs to get all her children back.
Ms. Smith said that for months, the only help the agency offered her was a rental subsidy of $300 a month, a rate set by the state in 1988 and not raised since. She had not even heard of the Section 8 program until this summer. She is now waiting for the vouchers to come through. For Ms. Smith, who has already been away from her children for five years, the extra waiting is torture.
Jessica Marcus, a lawyer with South Brooklyn Legal Services who is representing Ms. Smith in court, said, ''There just is not a sense of urgency to get them into a home.''
