New York State approved the construction of three Indian casinos for the old resort areas here in the Catskills more than two years ago, and people in the area practically began to count the money they expected to get from gamblers and construction projects and new jobs.
But little has happened since then.
The Catskills casinos are bogged down in the same legal and cultural quagmire that has bedeviled the state's relations with Indian tribes for generations: land ownership, taxes and sovereignty.
''There's been a lot of talk and a lot of hype, but no action,'' said William Darwak, the Ulster County administrator. ''No money, either.''
Still, the state and the tribes are continuing to negotiate, and officials concede that even some of the most promising projects now being discussed still face many hurdles. Some of those hurdles are being put up by the state, some by the tribes, and others by the federal government. Part of the delay may be related to the potential richness of the prize. Experts say a major casino in the Atlantic City style about 90 miles from Times Square would probably do about $1 billion a year in business. Since all the interested tribes must agree to revenue-sharing plans before they can get state approval, casinos that rich would mean hundreds of millions of dollars a year for state and local governments.
With that kind of money at stake, seven tribes, including ones from Canada and Wisconsin, are in the running to build a casino in the Catskills, and five have already bought land, or have options to do so in Sullivan and Ulster Counties, the only two counties in eastern New York authorized to have casinos. Although Indian casinos are unpopular in many places -- the horse racing industry in Saratoga is involved in a suit to block casino gambling in the state -- the tribes have found a warm welcome from Catskills businesses hoping that casinos would mean a return to the glory days of the Borscht Belt resorts, and then some.
''We'd like to see which tribes are going to be the winners,'' said Jacqui Leventoff, president of the Sullivan County Chamber of Commerce. ''We stand squarely behind them. We have helped every single one that has asked. We don't care who gets here as long as someone breaks the ice and comes in with a casino.''
Gov. George E. Pataki has made it clear that he does not want to repeat the mistake he says his predecessor, Gov. Mario M. Cuomo, made in granting a license to the Oneidas for a casino in Verona, without first making the tribes settle their claims to tens of thousands of acres in upstate New York, claims that have already been upheld by the courts.
The Pataki administration maintains that getting the land claims out of the way is critical to getting the Department of the Interior to agree to let the tribes create mini-reservations for gambling purposes far from their ancestral lands.
''These are complex negotiations,'' said Todd Alhart, a spokesman for the governor, ''but the key to any of the three Catskills casinos being approved by the Department of the Interior will be contingent upon them being part of a land claim settlement.''
In fact, Mr. Pataki wants more than just an end to land claims, according to the tribes negotiating with his lawyers. He also wants them to give up the price advantage Indian businesses get from not having to collect sales taxes on the gas and cigarettes they sell to non-Indians. The tax issue has become a political headache in upstate New York because Indian businesses are underselling local shops and service stations, forcing them out of business and, town managers say, pushing up local taxes. The Indians are pushing back. The Seneca Nation began an advertising campaign last year to protest the state's plan.
Since states are not allowed to collect taxes on Indian businesses, the governor wants a ''price parity'' solution to bring their prices in line with those at non-Indian businesses. Doing that would open up issues of sovereignty, a status the tribes jealously guard.
Still, the governor has made it plain that the tax issue is part of the package, said Barbara Lazore, a chief of the St. Regis Mohawk Indians at Hogansburg, N.Y.
''As of today, the land claims are still part of it and price parity is still part of it,'' Chief Lazore said of her tribe's negotiations with the state. ''We're moving forward, but these things seem to take a lot of time, and things can change.''
In May 2003, in fact, the Mohawks became the first tribe to reach a comprehensive settlement on claims and taxes and were granted a Catskills casino. A new tribal government was elected, and it rejected the agreement and reopened negotiations.
Tribal leaders complain that the state administration lawyers tend to see solutions in terms of dollars whereas the tribes put value elsewhere. They are prickly about solutions that infringe on their sovereignty, even though gambling has made their members millionaires in recent years after generations of poverty and discrimination.
''It's very difficult to negotiate with a government with respect to business issues,'' said Ray Halbritter, leader of the Oneida Nation and the force behind the establishment of its Turning Stone Casino in Verona. ''What we have here is a business opportunity in the Catskills used as bait to settle other complicated issues, involving our sovereignty and our land, which are very sensitive to us.''
In any case, Mr. Pataki does not have a lot of time. A new law passed over his objections in 2003 requires him to start collecting taxes on Indian businesses by March 1. The last time the state tried to collect Indian taxes, tribal members shut down the New York State Thruway with burning trash, and the state backed down.
While all this is going on, several lawsuits by casino opponents have won some early successes by negating a 1993 compact between the state and the Mohawks, and by raising doubts about the legality of existing and planned expansion of casino gambling in a state with a constitutional provision barring anything but charity games.
''Our contention is that the Congress allows states to enter into a compact with a tribe if they allow gaming for other purposes, but it doesn't require it,'' said Cornelius D. Murray of Albany, the lawyer for an anti-casino coalition in the state. ''Our contention is that Congress can't give state legislatures authority they don't have under their own constitution.''
The Pataki administration maintains that the Federal Indian Gaming Regulatory Act of 1988 requires states to undertake gambling agreement negotiations with tribes in good faith, with the intention of agreeing to the necessary compact. For New York tribes, that has meant agreeing to share revenues from slot machines with the state and local governments.
Earlier this year, the state got the first fruits of such an agreement, $38 million, from the Seneca Niagara Casino. Six were authorized in 2001, three in the Catskills and three in western New York, but this is the only one to open so far.
But administration officials said on the condition of anonymity that the three tribes that were closest to winning a Catskills casino were the Mohawks, the Cayuga of western New York, and the Stockbridge-Munsee band of Mohicans, of Wisconsin, a tribe with no presence in the state, although they have a land claim against the state upheld by the courts.
All three have already bought or optioned land and have begun the required environmental assessments and planning, officials said. The St. Regis Mohawks have an option to buy Kutsher's Country Club here in Monticello, the Cayuga have an agreement to put a $500 million casino at the Monticello Raceway, and the Stockbridge-Munsee have bought land in Thompson.
''We're moving ahead,'' said Mark Kutsher, president of the resort. He said he would stay on as a manager if the Mohawks get the green light.
State officials say the St. Regis Mohawks may be ready to hold a tribal referendum on a new settlement by April, but two hurdles remain even for tribes that win tribal acceptance of a deal. One, Washington would have to share in the multimillion-dollar cash settlements any land claim is likely to involve. And two, the Interior Department would have to approve taking land in trust for gambling purposes far from the tribe's historical lands.
The creation of such mini-gambling reservations has been approved by Washington, notably in Detroit, but it is still a rare event and one the Bush administration has criticized.
One of the richest prizes still unspoken for in the Catskills is the Concord resort near Monticello. Among the tribes that have visited it are the Oneida and even the Seneca, who already have three casino approvals in the western part of the state.
''The Senecas have as much right as any nation to apply for a Catskills casino,'' said G. Michael Brown, president of the Seneca Gaming Corporation, who has examined the Concord and found much to recommend it as a future casino. ''What's not to like about two championship golf courses and a sewer system already in place?''
