Howard Dean's weakness in the Iowa caucuses on Monday night and the powerful showing there by Senators John Kerry and John Edwards indicate that Dr. Dean cannot rely on his strong organization to propel him to victory in the New Hampshire primary next week, political professionals here said.
Dr. Dean, former governor of neighboring Vermont, has been in the lead in New Hampshire polls for months and had been counting on what is far and away the largest and most enthusiastic statewide organization of any candidate. He has 14 offices around the state, about 125 paid staff members, 250 full-time interns who have been in New Hampshire all month and thousands of young volunteers who come and go day by day.
But as important as organization is in New Hampshire, it is even more critical in the caucus states, and it failed Dr. Dean in Iowa.
Linda L. Fowler, a political scientist at Dartmouth, said Monday night that Dr. Dean had been promoting a new formula that involved raising money and generating momentum over the Internet and getting many who had never voted before to support him.
''That formula was untested until tonight,'' Professor Fowler said, ''and the first road test was disappointing, to say the least.''
While Mr. Kerry seemed to be in the lead in New Hampshire early in the campaign, his candidacy began to falter last fall as Dr. Dean's gained strength. But the senator's supporters said Monday night that the Iowa success could help him rebound here.
''Certainly this gives us new momentum coming back into New Hampshire,'' said Jeanne Shaheen, former governor of the state and Mr. Kerry's national campaign chairwoman. ''But people from New Hampshire like to make up their own minds, so he'll be fighting for every vote here just like he did in Iowa.''
In recent days, the race here had been shaping up mainly as a battle between Dr. Dean and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who, so that he could concentrate on New Hampshire, did not compete in Iowa. Speculation Monday night centered on whether it was Dr. Dean or General Clark who would be hurt more by any shift of voters here toward Senators Kerry and Edwards.
Just weeks ago General Clark himself was calling the New Hampshire primary ''a two-person race'' between himself and Dr. Dean. But ''I don't know what to call it now,'' he said Monday night in responding to Mr. Kerry's victory in Iowa.
Asked by reporters about competing against another military veteran in Mr. Kerry, the retired general quickly drew a distinction between his experience as NATO commander and Mr. Kerry's service as a Navy lieutenant in Vietnam.
''I've negotiated peace agreements,'' he said. ''I've led a major alliance in war. It's one thing to be a hero as a junior officer. He's done that, and I respect him for that. He's been a good senator. But I've had the military leadership at the top as well as at the bottom.''
At the Kerry headquarters on the third floor of what was once a giant textile mill on the Merrimack River here, about 200 people crowded in front of television sets Monday night, cheering wildly and pumping their fists at each new announcement of caucus results.
Across the parking lot, in a cavernous former cotton warehouse that serves as Dean headquarters, the workers sat soberly staring into computer monitors.
Over the years, the influence of the Iowa caucuses on the outcome of the primaries in New Hampshire has been mixed.
The most striking case was in 1984, when Gary Hart was a distant second in a crowded Democratic field in Iowa, winning barely a third as many votes as Walter F. Mondale. But the second-place finish was enough to call attention to the Hart candidacy among those Democrats who were cool to Mr. Mondale, and Mr. Hart went on to win in New Hampshire with 37 percent of the vote, to Mr. Mondale's 28 percent.
In 1976, Jimmy Carter's surprising victory in Iowa was one factor that helped him defeat Morris K. Udall in New Hampshire. And in 2000, Bill Bradley's rather poor showing in Iowa seemed to slow his candidacy here, and he went on to lose the primary narrowly to Al Gore.
On the other hand, though George Bush won the Iowa Republican caucuses in 1980, that did not help him in New Hampshire, where Ronald Reagan beat him by more than 2 to 1.
In 1988, the winners of the Iowa caucuses in both parties -- Richard A. Gephardt for the Democrats and Bob Dole for the Republicans -- faltered in New Hampshire, and their campaigns never regained steam.
In 2000, John McCain skipped the Iowa Republican caucuses, just as General Clark did this year. George W. Bush won in Iowa, but Mr. McCain defeated him here.
Dayton Duncan, who has been involved in Democratic politics in this state for more than 30 years and has written a history of New Hampshire primaries, said: ''Iowa is going to have an effect here. But you don't know what the effect is going to be.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEW HAMPSHIRE
