Is this a sale, or is it a final negotiating ploy from a man who never thought he could lose control of his press empire but ran into a buzz saw of opposition that culminated in an American court's stripping him of the right to use his controlling stake for his own purposes?
Rarely has an announced sale of control of a company seemed more dubious than the one announced Sunday by Conrad M. Black to bring in David and Frederick Barclay, twin brothers who control their own privately held media empire.
The ''irrevocable agreement'' would give the Barclays control of the holding company. A United States court on Friday, however, blocked Lord Black from exercising the fruits of that control, and the company the Barclays agreed to buy is a defendant in a case that could cost them more than they have already agreed to pay.
If that deal goes through as planned, the Barclay brothers would wind up with ownership of Hollinger Inc., the Canadian company that, through super-majority voting rights, had control of Hollinger International, the American company that owns The Daily Telegraph of London, as well as The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post.
The deal calls for the Barclays to pay the equivalent of $326 million to buy the controlling stake in Hollinger Inc. held by the Ravelston Corporation, a holding company controlled by Lord Black and his associates, and to buy the public shares of the Canadian company. Yesterday, the shares of Hollinger Inc. that trade in Toronto rose 3.79 Canadian dollars, to 7.69. The Barclays are offering 8.55 Canadian dollars for each of them.
The lawsuit from Hollinger International seeks more than $200 million, plus interest over 10 years that could double the amount, and names the Canadian company among the defendants. A claim is not a verdict, of course, but the Barclays must know that to complete the deal without a settlement of that suit would be to take substantial risks.
The sale can be seen as Lord Black's playing of his final card: his willingness to go away and leave the company he founded and ran with an imperial will even as his own economic stake in the enterprise was diluted through a pyramidlike control structure.
He may hope the prospect of his departure will be so tantalizing that the company's directors will be willing to negotiate a quick and favorable settlement. Alternatively, he may hope that the directors will fear that he will be out of their reach and the court's jurisdiction once the deal is completed and, for that reason, will settle. Or he may hope to grab the money before the United States courts can act.
Yesterday, he asked a Canadian court to declare that the deal with the Barclays was effective and binding. He may now regret having made Hollinger International a Delaware company, subject to United States law. But he did not do that to Hollinger Inc., and it is through selling that stake that he hopes to cash out.
The Web site of the company Lord Black founded still bears a slogan that no longer sounds as pretentious as it might have: ''Hollinger. Making News.'' But the news on the Web site is of the deal with the Barclays and the lawsuit filed by the company against Lord Black.
That suit contends that so-called noncompete payments made to Lord Black and his associates after the company sold subsidiaries were illegal even when they were approved by the board, arguing that under Delaware law a controlling shareholder has a fiduciary responsibility to act in the best interests of the company. Similarly, it argues that Lord Black and his associates were drastically overpaid through a complicated management arrangement and asks for the return of a substantial part of that money.
That lawsuit includes an excerpt from an e-mail message that Lord Black sent to an associate in the summer of 2002, when the company was under attack but he never thought he could lose control involuntarily. ''There has not been an occasion for many months when I got on our plane without wondering whether it was really affordable,'' the excerpt reads.
''But I'm not prepared to re-enact the French Revolutionary renunciation of the rights of nobility. We have to find a balance between an unfair taxation on the company and a reasonable treatment of the founder-builders-managers. We are proprietors, after all, beleaguered though we may be.''
Lord Black owns a 65 percent stake in Ravelston, whose other shares were owned by colleagues. Ravelston in turn owns 78 percent of Hollinger Inc., the Canadian company. It owns 30 percent of Hollinger International, but it has 73 percent of the voting power because of super-voting shares.
Cut through all that, and Lord Black's stake in Hollinger International was just 15 percent. But he did not view that as limiting his rights.
''These companies have always been run in the Argus tradition of proprietary businesses where the controlling shareholders take reasonable steps to ensure their comfortable enjoyment of the position they (we, in fact) have created for themselves,'' Lord Black wrote in a letter to fellow Ravelston owners in the fall of 2002 referring to one of his previous companies, as disclosed in the Hollinger suit.
''Care must be taken not to allow this to degenerate into decadence,'' he added. But things have slid from Lord Black's control. A board committee of Hollinger International was allowed to investigate, and it named Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, to do the investigation. On Friday, aware of behind-the-scenes maneuvers, the S.E.C. persuaded a federal judge in Chicago to rule that Mr. Breeden would take control of the company if Lord Black did anything to alter the power of the existing board.
Thus there is a real question whether the Barclays will get the control of Hollinger International that they bargained for, if and when the deal is completed.
Mr. Breeden and his colleagues might even try to sell Hollinger's assets, giving the Barclays their share of the proceeds after deducting any damages the company could win.
In any case, the divine right of proprietors, as Black's management theory might be known, seems unlikely to pass to his chosen buyers.
Market Place
