A federal judge presiding over a price-fixing case involving the Monsanto Company said last week that he would not disqualify himself from the case even though some lawyers in the case had said there was the appearance of a conflict of interest.
The judge, Rodney W. Sippel of Federal District Court in St. Louis, said at a court hearing on Thursday that he had been unaware that in 1997 and 1998, before his appointment as a federal judge, he was listed in court records as a lawyer representing Monsanto in a civil lawsuit at the same federal courthouse.
Judge Sippel said that despite being a lawyer of record, he did no work on the earlier Monsanto case. He also said he had no bias in the continuing price-fixing case.
''I have no horse in this race,'' Judge Sippel said in the court hearing, according to The Associated Press. ''I honestly don't care which party in this case prevails.''
Lawyers representing a group of farmers who have accused Monsanto and other big seed companies of fixing the prices of genetically modified seeds asked Judge Sippel in December to recuse himself because the earlier case was substantially related to the price-fixing case. They asserted that he could have had access to information in that case.
According to court papers unsealed on Thursday, lawyers representing farmers in their price-fixing case against Monsanto said the two cases were closely related and that documents in the price-fixing case show that in 1997, Monsanto offered to settle the earlier case in exchange for a pricing agreement.
The lawyers said that Judge Sippel never disclosed that while working as a lawyer for Husch &amp; Eppenberger, a large St. Louis law firm, he was listed for five months as one of three lawyers representing Monsanto in the earlier dispute, which was with Pioneer Hi-Bred, another big seed company that is also a party in the price-fixing case.
According to court records, Husch &amp; Eppenberger has done legal work for Monsanto in dozens of cases over the last decade, including many cases now before Judge Sippel.
Legal experts say that if Judge Sippel had been part of the earlier case, he should have disclosed the relationship, though failing to do so probably did not violate the judicial code of conduct for federal judges because the two Monsanto cases are not identical.
Some lawyers involved in other Monsanto cases that Judge Sippel has presided over say they are also considering taking action because they were unaware that he had a previous relationship with Monsanto.
''There was no disclosure whatsoever,'' Rick Brunner, a lawyer representing a farmer in a patent dispute with Monsanto, said. ''I need to advise my clients of this.''
But in at least one case, lawyers say, Judge Sippel disclosed that he had once worked for Husch &amp; Eppenberger but noted that the firm had not yet worked on Monsanto's patent infringement cases against individual farmers.
In court Thursday, Judge Sippel chided the plaintiffs' lawyers in the price-fixing case for raising the conflict of interest questions years after the case began and months after he denied the case class-action status. Judge Sippel said Thursday that the court docket listing his Monsanto representation in 1997 and 1998 had been for several years in the files of the lawyers seeking recusal.
Lawyers for Monsanto also questioned the timing of the request for recusal.
''The timing of this, combined with the fact that all the necessary information had been in plaintiffs' lawyers possession for years and the judge had denied class-action status, seems unusual, if not suspect,'' said Stephen H. Rovak, a lawyer for Monsanto in the price-fixing case.
Richard Lewis, a lawyer representing farmers in the price-fixing case, said in court that he had the court records in 1999 but only became aware of Judge Sippel's name as a lawyer representing Monsanto in November. Mr. Lewis declined to comment on Monday.
Judge Sippel, who in 1997 was the vice chairman of litigation at Husch &amp; Eppenberger, said Thursday in court that he had never talked to anyone about that Monsanto case and that he had not even read the complaint in the case.
Joseph P. Conran, the chairman of Husch &amp; Eppenberger, also said last week that Judge Sippel never worked on the Monsanto case in 1997 and 1998 but that he had been expected to do so just before his appointment to the federal bench.
Judge Sippel was listed by Husch &amp; Eppenberger as one of three local lawyers of record in the Monsanto dispute with Pioneer in August 1997, three months after President Clinton appointed him to the federal bench.
Judge Sippel was confirmed by the Senate in November 1997 and removed as a Monsanto lawyer on Jan. 30, 1998.
