A FARTHER SHORE  Ireland's Long Road to Peace  By Gerry Adams  Illustrated. 412 pages. Random House. $29.95.
For all his adult life Gerry Adams has fought to reunite the Republic of Ireland with the six counties of Northern Ireland, which remained part of Britain when the rest of the island won its independence 80-odd years ago.
The Irish Republican Army's violent struggle to achieve that goal has wound down, but not without lingering effects on modern marketing. In the republic most people first hear about a new book by Mr. Adams through reports that broadcasting regulators have banned advertisements for it.
The reasoning is that Mr. Adams is so well known as president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, that ads for his books are equivalent to political statements. That policy is also the legacy of a censorship law that until 1994 required actors' voices to be dubbed over Sinn Fein politicians, so that a generation of Irish people grew up without knowing what they sounded like.
The prolific Mr. Adams is still something of an outsider, even now that he has become internationally known and the deep tones of his Belfast accent are unmistakably familiar. The latest of his dozen books, ''A Farther Shore: Ireland's Long Road to Peace,'' is his version of how Sinn Fein came in from the cold, and of the peace process that halted the 30-year sectarian conflict that claimed nearly 4,000, mostly civilian, lives.
The book begins in the late 1970's, when Mr. Adams, now 55, was released from prison and began moving through the ranks of Sinn Fein. Like his previous memoir, ''Before the Dawn,'' it does not acknowledge the commonly held belief that he led the I.R.A. in Belfast in the 1970's. Mr. Adams denies ever being a member of the I.R.A. and repeatedly emphasizes the distance between the paramilitaries and the politicians.
His critics dwell on whether that denial undercuts the reliability of his account, but the distinction is largely irrelevant. Top Sinn Fein politicians like Martin McGuinness have publicly admitted being former I.R.A. leaders, and the connection between the organizations -- including Mr. Adams's role -- is well documented elsewhere.
''A Farther Shore'' is not intended as a confessional or apology, and the denial is an expected formality -- albeit one widely regarded as a fundamental untruth -- that allows Mr. Adams to get on with his political chronicle. When he does, he tends to sound intelligent, reasonable and surprisingly convincing. No wonder Irish authorities still want his voice on the airwaves as little as possible.
The book follows the more thrilling moments of Mr. Adams's career, from the assassination attempt he survived in 1984 to the rapturous rock-star-style welcome he received in New York 10 years later, after being granted a visa by President Bill Clinton over the strenuous objections of the British government.
Its intensity peaks during the late 80's, when Belfast was the center of a bloody maelstrom, and it seemed that not a day could go by without another horrific outrage being committed by any one of the groups capable of savagery: Protestant paramilitary organizations, the police and the British Army, or the I.R.A.
During that period no politicians would reply to letters from Sinn Fein, let alone be seen making contact with it. With the assistance of a Roman Catholic priest, Mr. Adams began secret talks with the mainstream nationalist leader, John Hume of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, and eventually with representatives of the British government.
On few occasions does he admit to being frustrated with the slow pace of those years out in the cold, and the tenacity of all those involved is often astounding. People who wonder what it felt like to be such a pariah get the simple answer that Mr. Adams never knew it any other way.
His thoroughness in describing these and later discussions bogs his story down with unnecessary detail, like subtle shifts in party or government policy, making significant stretches of the book less accessible. It feels like extreme understatement when he writes, ''This was a long game, played slow.''
In his telling, playing that game meant trying and failing many times, until the conditions were right for an I.R.A. cease-fire and the 1998 Belfast peace accord, which set up a local government to share power between Catholics and Protestants, and created some links between Ulster and the Irish Republic. The legislature has functioned only sporadically -- in large part because of the I.R.A.'s failure to disarm fully -- but bloodshed has remained a small fraction of what it was.
Thankfully Mr. Adams has a surprising tendency to goof around, and humorous anecdotes spice up the book's drawn-out passages. These occasional glimpses of his human side and his thoughtful defense of republican politics will do little to persuade those who see him as permanently tainted by violence.
That view, that his resolve and sense of duty only rationalize acts of terror, is anticipated by the Seamus Heaney verse play that Mr. Adams quotes in his introduction to the book. Elsewhere in the work, ''The Cure at Troy,'' Mr. Heaney writes:
No poem or play or song
Can fully right a wrong
Inflicted and endured.
Mr. Adams expresses regret and sadness over times when the I.R.A., which killed more than half of the victims of the ''Troubles,'' claimed civilian lives, but also repeatedly says that he had no influence over its bloody acts. This two-step should make readers feel distinctly uneasy.
But Mr. Heaney and Mr. Adams share a desire to believe that the guns will stay silent, and that their country has reached the moment when, in the poet's words:
once in a lifetime
The longed-for tidal wave
Of justice can rise up
And hope and history rhyme.
Given the transformation of Northern Ireland in the space of a generation, it is not hard to understand their optimism.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
