I asked my daughter, Mira, this morning if she wanted to go to Mars. She cocked her head in a frown, raised her hands in a tiny shrug and went off in search of her mother. She's only 20 months old and doesn't really know Mars.
Truth is, I don't want her to go, even though that imagined departure might be 30 years off.
I would miss her, and given my advanced age by then, if I am even still alive, I would fear that she was gone for good. I might never see her again. Already that prospect seems unbearable.
But in her short life she has already traveled halfway around the world from the land of her birth, Kazakhstan. She's shown no lack of a heartwarming but nerve-racking willingness to explore or go wandering off at any opportunity.
Anyway, as a member of a line that has left home for whatever new coast was available in every generation, I would be churlish to expect her to be the first one to stay home.
That feeling, of never seeing her again, is hardly foreign to the American experience. My great-grandfather said goodbye to his 14-year-old son at the dock in Norway and never saw him again.
I'm having these morbid thoughts thanks to President Bush. Last week, he commanded NASA to reorient itself toward sending humans to the Moon and eventually to Mars, and it occurred to me that Mira would be about the right age to go by the time anybody went. Of course, a lot of things have to go right between now and then.
Somebody will have to pony up a lot of money -- and keep ponying it up -- 5, 10, 30 years from now. NASA and its bosses in the White House will have to be a lot wiser in managing cosmic affairs than they have been in the last 30 years.
But someday, if all goes well, we are told, the rockets will push off. Some people will never return.
That is all to the good, some visionaries have suggested. In effect, a colony on the Moon or Mars could serve as an ark in the event of a catastrophe like an epidemic, a thermonuclear war, an asteroid or global warming. And in the long run, physicists are fond of telling us, whatever is not forbidden is compulsory.
Cosmic disaster is inevitable.
As an old cynic, I'm determined not to get excited about all this. We've been here before. In fact I've spent my whole life waiting for the Great Leap Outward, only to be disappointed. Now under the best of circumstances I'm destined to be part of the left-behind generation. President Bush and the NASA administrator, Sean O'Keefe, have been too clever to tell us when the rockets will finally push off to Mars, or at what ultimate cost. I don't expect to be around.
It could have been different, and maybe I'm still bitter about that. I could have been a Martian, notwithstanding the fact that I am often accused of having my head far enough in the clouds to be a Martian.
President Bush's speech tacitly acknowledged that the last 30 years of the space program -- the effort to build a fancy space shuttle to nowhere and the lumbering International Space Station now floating through the sky like a creaky spider -- were a costly and morale-deadening detour down a dead- end road. The shuttles -- those that remain six or seven years from now -- are headed for the Smithsonian.
The space station could become a zero-gravity hotel, if we manage to keep it from falling out of orbit in the years after the shuttles cease to visit and boost it. In the end, the thing we will have learned most from building the space station is that we shouldn't have built it.
In effect, Mr. Bush took a giant step into the past, into the past of what the future could have been.
If NASA can snap to on its new and stringent budget, it could be a future of reaching, of robots doing interesting and purposeful things, maybe even of enthusiasm in the crucible of America, the classroom, for engineering and science.
If They mean it.
There are those who say this proposal is a political sham, intended to show that the president has ''vision'' as well as goodies to hand out in the politically important states of Texas, Florida and California.
In which case, the new mandate, as Mr. O'Keefe called it, will surely bog down sometime in a sea of red ink and Congressional recalcitrance. In the meantime, worthy science projects could be cut.
The new era turned sour for astronomers last week when NASA announced that there would be no more shuttle missions to the Hubble Space Telescope, guaranteeing an early death for one of the crown jewels of science.
Despite a certain apprehension in the days leading up to President Bush's announcement, many scientists seemed excited in spite of themselves. They were getting a license to be kids again.
Going to the Moon and Mars, they say, is exciting, and NASA needs something exciting as its flagship mission.
Robots, they agree, could do a better job of exploring Mars and looking for life, and would be less likely to contaminate the place with bacteria. And many scientists are skeptical of the means proposed: the Mother of All Government Projects, rather than leaving the job to private adventurers free to take their own risks.
Dr. Martin Rees, a Cambridge University cosmologist and Britain's astronomer royal, recently wrote that as a scientist he was against human spaceflight. ''But as a human being I'm enthusiastic about space exploration as a long-range adventure,'' he added, saying that he hoped that humans would walk on Mars soon.
So I hope They do mean it this time. I'm in my sixth decade, running out of time to get fooled again. I've been burned and I'm not excited, not excited.
But if I were Mira's age, I would be excited. If she wants to go, I will wish her Godspeed. But I really hope she comes back.
ESSAY
