With every visit to New York by Colin Davis and the London Symphony Orchestra, it becomes clearer that their collaboration is going to be ranked up there with a handful of historic pairings of conductor and orchestra in recent decades, like Herbert von Karajan and the Berlin Philharmonic, and Christoph von Dohnanyi and the Cleveland Orchestra. Sir Colin and the London players came to Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday afternoon, the first of three programs through tomorrow night, enthralling a hardy audience that had braved the day's snowy winds with a riveting concert performance of Britten's opera ''Peter Grimes.''
The only drawback, a significant one, was the vocally shaky performance of the Australian tenor Glenn Winslade in the demanding title role. Still, the rest of the cast was strong, and Sir Colin elicited viscerally powerful playing from this great orchestra. The articulate and dramatically involving singing of the London Symphony Chorus was a reminder that many of Sir Colin's finest achievements with the orchestra have depended upon these energetic choristers.
From the opening moments of the prologue, in which Grimes, a reclusive fisherman in a small east coast English town in the 1830's, is the reluctant witness at a coroner's inquest into the death of his apprentice, Sir Colin showed a complete musical and dramatic command of the score, which he had conducted in a landmark 1978 performance and recording with Jon Vickers in the title role. Britten had an uncanny ability to convey character through inspired musical strokes. As Swallow, the lawyer (here sung by James Rutherford, a sturdy bass), questions Grimes, the music is a web of officious and slightly bungling counterpoint. With Grimes's first response, ''I swear by Almighty God,'' the music envelops his answers with a consoling choir of low-pitched strings, which the orchestra played with a wistful richness that almost sanctified his answers.
Never has this opera seemed more of an utter and avoidable tragedy. Every community, the story suggests, has a tendency to isolate a culprit, an ''other.'' Grimes, who has such buried anger and a violent streak, is an easy target, and truly dangerous. But in fleeting moments he reveals the temperament of a dreamer, the side that the trusting schoolteacher Ellen Orford sees. But the gossipy townspeople have no comprehension of such things. So the cycle just continues, and Grimes is further ostracized.
This summer Mr. Winslade left a strong impression as Wagner's Parsifal at the Seattle Opera. Perhaps he is having vocal troubles. Perhaps he just had a bad day. But when he tried to sing Grimes's lyrical utterances, his voice turned thin; and when he summoned power for the heroic outbursts, his voice nearly gave out on the top notes.
Janice Watson brought her lovely lyric soprano to the role of Ellen. The baritone Anthony Michaels-Moore was a robust and complex Balstrode, the retired skipper and Grimes's only other friend.
But the day belonged to Sir Colin. I have never heard such sheer amassed power at Avery Fisher Hall as in the climatic moment of Act III when the entire town vengefully invokes the name of Grimes in steely and piercing harmonies.
Tomorrow's program offers Beethoven's Eighth Symphony and Stravinsky's ''Firebird.'' I can't wait.
MUSIC REVIEW  Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  A review yesterday about a concert peformance of Britten's opera ''Peter Grimes'' by the London Symphony Orchestra credited the tenor in the title role, Glenn Winslade, incorrectly with another performance last summer. It was Christopher Ventris who sang the title role in ''Parsifal'' at the Seattle Opera.
