Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts won the Iowa caucuses here Monday, brushing aside the insurgent anti-war candidacy of Howard Dean by presenting himself as the strongest Democrat his party had to send up against President Bush next year.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina came in second, catapulting him into the first tier of presidential contenders. In the process, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry pushed Dr. Dean -- who just a week ago was confidently preparing for a victory celebration here -- into third place.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri finished fourth, a devastating showing that led him to end his second bid for the presidency. Mr. Gephardt's aides said that on Tuesday morning he was flying not to New Hampshire, where he had been scheduled to hold a Countdown to Victory Kickoff Rally in Manchester, but home to St. Louis.
It was a much happier night for Mr. Kerry, who only weeks ago was battling the perception among many of his own supporters that his campaign might not even make it to New Hampshire.
''We came from behind and we came for the fight,'' Mr. Kerry said, after his fellow Massachusetts senator, Edward M. Kennedy, had, inevitably, proclaimed him the Comeback Kid of 2004.
''And now,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''I have a special message for the special interests that have a home in the Bush White House: We're coming, you're going, and don't let the door hit you on the way out.''
With 98 percent of the precincts reporting, Mr. Kerry had nearly 38 percent of the delegate support awarded in the caucuses; Mr. Edwards, 32 percent; Dr. Dean, 18 percent; Mr. Gephardt, 10 percent; and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio, 1 percent.
More than 120,000 people participated, approaching the record of roughly 125,000 reported for the 1988 caucuses.
Dr. Dean conceded even as Iowans were voting, and when less than half the vote had been reported.
''I'm delighted to finish in the top three,'' Dr. Dean said in an interview with Larry King on CNN. ''On to New Hampshire.''
At a rally later Monday evening, Dr. Dean -- his sleeves rolled up, bellowing to the crowd and smiling as if had in fact won the race -- celebrated his showing.
''If you had told us one year ago that we were going to come in third in Iowa, we would have given everything to that,'' he said.
Still, by any measure, the result was a serious setback for Dr. Dean, who had campaigned intensely across this state for more than a year. It was a clear disappointment to a candidate whose aides were talking openly about rolling up back-to-back victories in New Hampshire and Iowa, and wrapping up the nomination before Valentine's Day.
A survey of voters entering the caucus sites Monday suggested that what had been Dr. Dean's central appeal -- his opposition to the war in Iraq -- did him little good on Monday night. Just 14 percent said the war in Iraq had shaped their final decision, even though 75 percent said they opposed the war.
Dr. Dean's showing also raised questions about what had been one of the most intriguing elements of the Dean candidacy: that he had recruited thousands of first-time voters who could transform the nature of American presidential politics. Although half the voters on Monday were attending their first Iowa caucuses, 36 percent voted for Mr. Kerry, compared with 22 percent for Dr. Dean and 24 percent for Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Kerry's victory would seem to validate the thoroughly unconventional campaign tack he took: to come to Iowa to reinvigorate a candidacy that had been languishing in New Hampshire, and use an unexpected victory to power him back to life in his neighboring state.
His showing here gave him a huge lift as he headed back to New Hampshire to confront the candidacy of Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut.
The day also delivered a big and unexpected victory for Mr. Edwards, who seemed delighted if a bit surprised by the outcome Monday. He said he believed that voters had responded to what he described as his relentlessly cheerful message, drawing an unstated but obvious contrast with Dr. Dean.
''The people of Iowa tonight confirmed that they believe in a positive, uplifting vision to change America,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''We have started a movement to change this country that will sweep across America.''
The vote here served to do what Iowa caucuses traditionally do: reduce the size of a large field. In this case, three candidates -- Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards and Dr. Dean -- flew out of Des Moines for New Hampshire, in what looms as an extremely competitive and pivotal fight.
Waiting for them there were General Clark and Mr. Lieberman, both of whom decided to skip Iowa, where they expected to lose. General Clark had planned for a two-way contest with Dr. Dean, and seemed surprised by the way Iowa had reshaped the fight in New Hampshire.
''I don't know what to call it now,'' he said.
The race now includes four or five potentially viable candidate, including two -- Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean -- who live in neighboring states. What is more, both Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean have decided to opt out of the federal campaign financing system, meaning they will not fall under the spending limits that are imposed on candidates who stayed in the system.
Iowans who voted in the caucuses were far more likely to cite health care and the economy than the war in Iraq as their most pressing concerns in this election, even after a year in which the war significantly shaped the Democratic presidential contest, according to the surveys of voters entering caucus sites.
Dr. Dean won barely half the support of voters who called the war their top priority. And Mr. Kerry did better than Dr. Dean even among opponents of the war, even though in Congress Mr. Kerry voted for the resolution authorizing the war.
The survey found that the caucuses, the most competitive Democratic contest this state has had in at least 16 years, produced a spike of new interest, with about half of caucusgoers saying they were attending their first. At the same time, the survey confirmed what voters here and in New Hampshire have repeatedly said from the start: that defeating President Bush is a top priority for Democratic voters this year.
More than a quarter described electability -- the issue that was at the heart of Mr. Kerry's campaign in Iowa and is at the heart of General Clark's appeal in New Hampshire -- as a crucial consideration in their vote. Among those voters, Mr. Kerry drew 37 percent, compared with 21 percent for Dr. Dean. Mr. Edwards drew the support of 30 percent of those voters.
The survey also suggested that the central theme of Mr. Gephardt's appeal -- pledging to fight against overly liberal trade agreements -- did not fare well. Barely five percent of voters named that as their top issue; and he won the support of less than a quarter of union households.
In a speech Monday night, Mr. Gephardt seemed resigned to his loss.
''Life will go on because this campaign was never about me, it was about all of us,'' he said as his wife, Jane, gazed sadly on her husband.
Among elderly voters, a critical contingent in Iowa and another constituency sought by Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kerry won the support of about one-third, compared with about one-quarter for Mr. Gephardt. The elderly made up one-third of the electorate.
The survey also reflected the extent to which the election shifted in the final week: almost half of Mr. Kerry's supporters and half of Mr. Edwards's said they decided to support their candidate in the last week. By contrast, just a third of Dr. Dean's supporters made their decision in the final days of the campaign, suggesting the extent to which Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry won the undecided vote.
The survey of 1,659 participants as they arrived Monday night for the caucuses in 50 precincts throughout the state was conducted by Edison/Mitofsky for the National Election Pool of the networks and The Associated Press. The margin of sampling error is plus or minus 4 percentage points.
As the caucuses opened, some of the sites were packed, with some voters saying they had not quite made up their minds about what to do, reflecting what many Democrats have said was the extraordinary volatility of this contest.
In Waukee, a Des Moines suburb, Terry Meyer, a retired computer systems analyst, said as he walked into his caucus site that he was leaning toward Mr. Kerry, that he thought Mr. Kerry had the best chance of defeating President Bush.
''Really, the man whose ideas I really like and who I was torn between is Kucinich,'' he said. ''But now that he's not really so much of a factor, I think I might go over to Kerry.''
''I just think that Kerry has more experience and the better chance,'' he said.
In Indianola, Larry Buttrey, 62, a retired machinist, said he was leaning toward Mr. Edwards, citing the very thing that Mr. Edwards had emphasized to differentiate himself: that he was trying to avoid attacking his opponents.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Kerry canceled appearances at several rallies around Des Moines so he could rest a voice that was almost gone after a week of campaigning, though he fit in one appearance at Ames High School.
''We in Iowa are marking the beginning of the end of the Bush presidency,'' he said to a loud ovation. ''That's what this is about.''
Leaving Ames, where he addressed 500 people jammed into a high school cafeteria, he told an aide, ''I feel like a new man.''
How the Poll Was Conducted
The caucus day poll was based on questionnaires completed by voters on Monday evening as they entered Democratic caucus locations throughout Iowa.
The poll was conducted by Edison Media Research of Somerville, N.J. and Mitofsky International of New York City for the National Election Pool which consists of ABC News, The Associated Press, CBS News, CNN, Fox News, and NBC News.
The results are based on 1,660 voters in 50 randomly selected caucus sites, interviewed as they were entering each site.
In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results from such polls should differ by no more than plus or minus 4 percentage points from what would have been obtained by seeking to interview all voters who participated in the Iowa Democratic caucuses.
Results based on smaller subgroups have a larger potential sampling error.
In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of voter opinion on caucus day, like some voters changing their minds after they enter the caucus, may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
