Logistically, things were not going well yesterday for Natalie and Atis Lode, whose attempt to get from Manhattan to Kennedy International Airport started with a ride in the wrong direction on the E train.
The E train was supposed to take them to the new AirTrain light rail service in Jamaica, Queens -- and eventually it did, once they reversed course -- so they could catch the AirTrain to J.F.K.
Once they finally arrived at Jamaica Station, they wandered about Sutphin Boulevard and Archer Avenue looking for the AirTrain.
After standing in line at the Long Island Rail Road counter at the Jamaica Station, they received directions from an employee. They walked about a half-block to the sleek glass home of the AirTrain's Station D stop, but learned that the ticket machines were not taking credit cards, as they should, and since they had no small bills to pay the $5 fare, it was back to the L.I.R.R. for Mr. Lode, in search of change.
Despite the minor inconveniences, the Lodes, who are from Melbourne, Australia, said they still liked the AirTrain. ''We just had a few problems finding it,'' Mrs. Lode said.
Holiday travel days like yesterday are the days that AirTrain faces a real test: many newcomers are having their first encounter with the system, and with its idiosyncrasies. Despite some confusion, however, most welcomed the new way to get to the airport. The idea is wonderful, riders said. The convenience is great. But first we have to figure it out.
''I think they just don't have all the signage up yet, and they really need that,'' said Sheilah Navat, who was on her way with her daughter, Aja, 12, to San Francisco.
Ms. Navat did have nice things to say, too.
''The price is fair, I suppose, considering the alternatives,'' she said. ''And I love the big turnstiles.''
Some passengers expressed concerns about the weather and traffic and said they chose the train with the hope of avoiding the difficulties that are involved in getting to J.F.K., which is known as one of the nation's most inaccessible major airports.
Port Authority officials estimated that 34,000 passengers would use AirTrain per day in its first year, and that the numbers would grow. So far, after about a month of operation, the train has about 15,000 to 20,000 riders a day, said Tiffany Townsend, a spokeswoman for the Port Authority.
''Over all, things are going very well,'' she said. ''With ridership increasing, we're moving toward meeting our goal. It's still early on.''
Ms. Townsend said there were no plans to increase the number of signs along the system or to change their placement. But once a few passenger anecdotes were related to her, she said: ''Obviously, this is a customer service. If we feel the need to augment the number of signs or the placement of signs, we will.''
Pamela Peralta, a Columbia graduate student who was returning for classes from visiting her family in Lima, Peru, found the view remarkable. ''The train was very pretty,'' she said. ''I don't know, maybe it's because it is winter, but it all looked very pretty outside, too.''
But, alas, some luxuries are hard to give up, and for Anna Lee, a Barnard student who had recently landed, that meant she was taking a taxi.
''I just recently heard about the train,'' she said, lugging her bags to the first available cab outside Terminal 4. There was no line. ''But I just came from South Korea, I'm really exhausted, and I just couldn't deal with it.''
