Long before Martha Stewart steps into a courtroom today to watch the selection of a jury for her federal trial, she and her legal team will have carefully tested the government's case -- and her own reputation -- before a sampling of the kind of people who will be deciding her fate.
At one point last fall, jury experts and public relations advisers convened focus groups in Manhattan on Ms. Stewart's behalf to assess reactions to the accusations against her while her lawyer looked on. The focus groups were part of a million-dollar campaign that also includes polling, a Web site devoted to her side of the story and two carefully planned television interviews that allowed Ms. Stewart to proclaim her innocence to large audiences.
While other prominent defendants have mounted similar efforts in recent years, Ms. Stewart's campaign has become what some say is a celebrity defense that draws on her own reputation (as an instructor in and guide to a certain manicured lifestyle), as well as on her connections to other media luminaries, to start making her case well before opening arguments begin.
Prospective jurors will almost certainly have an opinion about Ms. Stewart, who is charged with conspiracy, obstruction of justice and securities fraud, all stemming from a stock trade in 2001.
Bursting on the scene more than 20 years ago, she has become something of a polarizing public figure. Many Americans revere her as an arbiter of taste; others admire the business acumen that built a billion-dollar company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. But many women resent her for setting unrealistic standards for housekeeping, crafts and dining -- especially if they, unlike Ms. Stewart, need more than three hours of sleep a night.
''Where are you going to get the jury pool from, Mars?'' asked Judy Leon, senior vice president of Bowne DecisionQuest, a litigation advisory firm, who added that Ms. Stewart's campaign had set a new standard for prominent defendants.
Still, being Martha Stewart has certain advantages, including a fortune estimated at half a billion dollars that can be drawn upon in an effort to change her image.
Joe Lockhart, a former press secretary to President Bill Clinton, who now runs the Glover Park Group, a Washington image-consulting firm, estimated the cost of her effort at $200,000 to $400,000 a month. He compared that with the $1.5 million that Arthur Andersen, the accounting firm swept up in the Enron scandal, spent over four months to try to improve its image.
While Andersen's effort seemed to achieve little, Mr. Lockhart said he thought Ms. Stewart's team was doing better. ''My impression is that they've done a good job of getting her side out,'' he said.
Ms. Stewart, 62, has long been able to call on high-price advisers to help her when in need, but has not always taken their advice. Like many chief executives, she tends to be self-reliant and to exercise her own judgment in most things. An interview published in The New Yorker last February, which she decided on her own to do, appeared to be sympathetic to her case but also to expose a Martha Stewart utterly perplexed by what she saw as hatred toward her style and achievements.
These days, she seems to have tempered her remarks in an effort to win over the people who will decide her future.
''I have a really wonderful legal team,'' she told Larry King in an interview broadcast on Dec. 22, one of the two carefully planned television appearances cleared by her advisers. ''And my legal team has inspired me to behave in the appropriate fashion.''
The charges against Ms. Stewart stem from the sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems, the biotechnology company founded by her friend Samuel D. Waksal, shortly before the company announced disappointing news that sent the share price tumbling.
She is accused of having misled investigators and investors after word of her stock trade became public. She has not been indicted on charges of insider trading, although the Securities and Exchange Commission has filed a civil lawsuit against her for that.
Prosecutors have said that they would have brought the same case against anyone: famous, infamous or unknown. But that argument is ''absolutely ridiculous,'' said Joel M. Cohen, a former federal prosecutor now at the law firm of Greenberg Traurig. Prosecutors, he said, think the case is in the public interest because of its ''broad general deterrent value.''
Ms. Stewart did not help her own cause in the early days of the investigation. Questioned about it on the CBS ''Early Show,'' she hacked mercilessly at a cabbage and declared tersely that she would be exonerated of any ''ridiculousness.''
Then she added, ''I want to focus on my salad,'' providing comedians with considerable fodder for jokes.
To shift public perception has required significant work and significant assets, although her representatives declined to discuss details. In addition to Susan Magrino, her longtime spokeswoman, Ms. Stewart is also represented by Citigate Sard Verbinnen, a New York public relations firm accustomed to the spotlight of corporate and individual crises. Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia was represented through most of the investigation by the Brunswick Group, a crisis-management specialist, which was replaced last year by Kekst &amp; Company.
For legal advice, after initially relying solely on lawyers from Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen &amp; Katz, the law firm that also represented her company at the time, Ms. Stewart hired Robert Morvillo, a partner in Morvillo, Abramowitz, Grand, Iason &amp; Silberberg with a long history of defending people accused of white-collar crimes. She has also retained John R. Cuti, a partner in Emery Celli Cuti Brinckerhoff &amp; Abady.
Many lawyers advise defendants to say little or nothing before their trials begin. And one person involved in Ms. Stewart's image effort said that Mr. Morvillo did not approve the interview with The New Yorker that Ms. Stewart gave, in which she broke a seven-month silence to spell out how much money she had lost and to discuss, almost plaintively, how people seemed to dislike her.
''In China, they say 'the thinner the chopsticks, the higher the social status,' '' she was quoted as saying over a lunch of Chinese steamed chicken and other delicacies. ''Of course, I got the thinnest I could find.'' Then she added, ''That's why people hate me.''
But Mr. Morvillo was well aware of the televised interviews she gave to Barbara Walters of ABC News, broadcast early in November, and in December to Mr. King. Ms. Stewart declaring her innocence in both interviews, although specific questions about the details of her case were off limits to the interviewers.
On the program with Barbara Walters, Ms. Stewart seemed alternately subdued and defiant, discussing her humble roots in Nutley, N.J., and admitting, in a way, that she was not perfect. (''I cannot fly a jet,'' she said. ''I cannot hang-glide.'')
In the Larry King interview, shortly before Christmas, she talked briefly about religion and brought along her mother, Martha Kostyra, and several Polish holiday babka they had baked.
Immediately after Ms. Stewart's indictment in June, her team created a Web site, www.marthatalks.com, which presents her side of the case.
''We are simply trying to give Martha a more level playing field,'' said George Sard, her chief spokesman.
The Web site -- with millions of hits and some 90,000 messages of support in the last seven months -- is likely to be copied by other defendants in the future, Ms. Leon of Bowne DecisionQuest said. ''What she's done establishes it as a basic and fundamental tactic, forever and ever,'' he said. Indeed, Michael Jackson started a Web site defending himself against accusations of child sexual abuse soon after they were made.
Not everyone agrees that Ms. Stewart's campaign has worked. The television shows ''didn't really help her or hurt her,'' said Peter Montoya, who writes and lectures on what he described as personal brands. He said she was ''her usual reserved self, and she didn't really tell us anything new.''
The lingering question is whether or not the campaign has reached potential jurors, who are drawn from Manhattan, the Bronx and the city's northern suburbs. Prospective jurors have filled out an extensive questionnaire (the questions themselves remain secret) and will be interviewed starting today by lawyers for both sides and out of the view of cameras and reporters.
To help find a sympathetic jury, Ms. Stewart hired Julie Blackman, a social psychologist who specializes in advising lawyers. She was also involved in the defense of Frank P. Quattrone, the investment banker whose first trial on charges of trying to obstruct a securities fraud investigation ended in a hung jury. Mr. Quattrone's retrial is scheduled for March.
Ms. Blackman organized the focus groups and polling for Ms. Stewart, a person briefed on the campaign said. Focus groups typically cost more than $10,000 apiece, said Roger Lee, a public opinion consultant in Washington. Phone polls, in which consultants might ask whether respondents think celebrities are treated harshly or leniently by the justice system, are also expensive, said Donald Vinson, a longtime jury consultant and founder of Vinson &amp; Associates. He estimated that Ms. Stewart's defense advisers might have spent $500,000 or more just on jury selection.
Robert B. Hirschhorn, a jury consultant who advised Robert Durst on his successful murder trial defense, said Ms. Stewart's ideal jurors would respect businesspeople and admire strong and successful women. The prosecutors, he added, would be looking for people who have lost money in the stock market or have had a bad experience with a business, as well as those who dislike or distrust the wealthy or successful.
''The bottom line: the prosecution is looking for a more blue-collar jury, the defense a more white-collar jury,'' he said. ''The prosecution wants people who take the subway to the courthouse, the defense wants people who take a car service there.'' (One lawyer who has practiced in her courtroom said that the judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, takes the subway to work.)
A spokesman for Peter Bacanovic, Ms. Stewart's former stockbroker and co-defendant in the case, declined to comment on the preparations for the trial, except to say that Mr. Bacanovic and his lawyer, Richard M. Strassberg, a former federal prosecutor, were fully prepared and ready to prove their case in court.
Ms. Stewart's investment in her image may or may not pay off in terms of the verdict. But several experts said she and other defendants were entitled to do all they could in that regard.
''The prosecution has so much power that anything that balances that out should be made available to anyone who is charged,'' Mr. Lockhart, the Washington consultant, said. ''When it comes to the court of public opinion, you are always guilty until proven innocent.''
