It is a long road to the 2006 World Cup in Germany, and goalkeeper Jonny Walker knows he probably will not be making the voyage with the United States national team, should it qualify.
''I think I have a professional attitude when it comes to the national team,'' Walker said in a telephone interview from California after he played 90 minutes in a 1-1 draw with Denmark on Sunday. ''I realize that this country has produced some of the best goalkeepers in the world. I'm willing to do anything the coaching staff asks me to do, playing in friendlies with other Major League Soccer-based players, whatever. The big guys are overseas and take priority.''
The traffic in front of Walker includes Brad Friedel, 32 (Blackburn); Kasey Keller, 34 (Tottenham); and Tim Howard, 24 (Manchester United), whom Walker replaced in goal for the MetroStars last season.
On Sunday, Walker was the first choice of United States Coach Bruce Arena because Arena did not have his European-based players available, fielding an all-M.L.S. team against Denmark. (Kevin Hartman was the backup.)
''Walker, in his first game for us, played well in the back,'' Arena said after the game. The match was Walker's first international appearance for the United States; likewise for John Wolyniec, his MetroStars teammate was a late sub.
''Bruce said there's a large national team pool, but he's also being realistic and knows that some of our guys are getting older and he doesn't want to get tied into players,'' Walker, 29, said. ''Of course I was excited to get a chance to play and get a bit of experience on this level. The other team didn't make a case to win the game. We were the team actually for the result. We went out there to win the game.''
Walker, who had played in Chile since 1997 before joining the MetroStars, is the only goalkeeper on the team's roster who has played in M.L.S. The team drafted Zach Wells of U.C.L.A. last week and is interested in Steve Reese, an American from Oregon who played in Romania last season. (''Steve already has MetroStars wallpaper on the computer,'' Reese's mother, Donna, said in a telephone interview Sunday.)
In other MetroStars news, most of the club's players begin training today in the bubble outside Giants Stadium. Early next month, the club will leave for Bradenton, Fla., and then travel to Spain to play in the La Manga tournament.
The MetroStars are in pursuit of an attacking midfielder from Croatia, Mihael Mikic, 24, who plays for Dinamo Zagreb. The club thought it had a deal on a free transfer but discovered that Mikic's previous club, Inker Zapresic, wanted a transfer fee of about $1 million.
AJAX ORLANDO  Dutch Team Farming U.S. Talent
The Dutch club Ajax Amsterdam gave the world the genius of Johan Cruyff. Although it is unlikely to ever find a player as good, or enigmatic, as Cruyff, Ajax officials believe they can and will find the next John O'Brien, an American who has been with the club since 1996.
O'Brien has returned to the field after a long absence because of an Achilles' tendon injury. He trained with the big club in Portugal before the Dutch season resumes tomorrow with a game at Roda. And Ajax, which is renowned for its youth development system, believes it can mine the United States for more talent. It has entered into an agreement with the Royale Football Academy in Orlando, Fla., which has changed its name to Ajax Orlando. (Ajax has a similar agreement with a club in South Africa.)
''It is a cooperative agreement; we get to use their name and trademark and they provide us with personnel so we can recreate an authentic Ajax system in the U.S.,'' Mark Dillon, the club's founder, said in a recent telephone interview. ''What they get in return is a chance to penetrate the U.S. market and, hopefully, discover a couple of players, the next generation of John O'Briens.''
Because of European Union regulations, Ajax Orlando can ''act as the stable for players coming through,'' Dillon said. He hopes to eventually build a modest stadium and gain entry for the club to the A-League, which is one step below M.L.S. An Ajax Orlando club is part of the Super Y League, a national youth league of more than 600 teams.
''Internationally, there are good players coming from places like Iran and Egypt, and we're even starting to see it from the U.S.,'' Dillon said. ''In some ways the U.S. is the new Africa: a lot of relatively inexpensive players. But our players can make the transition to Europe easier because of their character and the similar cultures.''
Corner Kicks
2010 -- Ivan Gazidis, deputy commissioner of M.L.S., says the United States can win the World Cup in 2010. ''Everything we are doing is geared toward that goal,'' Gazidis told the BBC during a recent trip to England. ''I love it when people consistently underestimate us. It allows us to continue to surprise people.''
IN THE FAMILY -- In the fourth round of last week's M.L.S. draft, Chicago selected Phil Hucles from William and Mary. He is the younger brother of Angela Hucles, who played for Boston in the W.U.S.A. and has played for the United States women's national team.
COMING TO A THEATER NEAR YOU -- The former goalkeeper Shep Messing will appear in a documentary about the Cosmos being produced in England. ''The producers called and asked if I would do an interview and told me to pick any strip club in New Jersey,'' said Messing, now a MetroStars broadcaster and managing director of Global Sports Group. ''I guess they've heard about me!''
SOCCER REPORT
