On Jan. 8, Vanya Keenan turned 28. That day, while having surgery to replace a synthetic tube in her arm so that she could receive dialysis, she had a pulmonary embolism, when a floating blood clot in her veins blocked an artery to her lungs.
''On the table, I had shortness of breath; I couldn't breathe,'' she said as she sat in her bedroom in East New York, Brooklyn, a week later. She cradled her right arm, showing the deep blue bruises above her elbow where the tube -- called a graft -- was placed. And she mentioned the surgery she would have a few days later on the same arm to get the graft to work.
But before she could have surgery, Ms. Keenan was taken to the hospital because she was having difficulty breathing. Santos Mulero, the father of her son, said Ms. Keenan had been hospitalized since Jan. 12 with a lung infection.
''I wanted to be a nurse, but I don't know if I have the stomach for it now,'' Ms. Keenan said, laughing, in an interview before her hospitalization.
In her 28 years, Ms. Keenan has seen more than her share of hospital rooms. In the spring of 2000, she was working as a home attendant and caring for her son, Edwin Mulero, now 9, when her doctor told her she had kidney disease.
At first, she said: ''I didn't take it seriously. Instead of going to my doctor appointments I would go to work and miss them. I just couldn't believe it.''
But she began getting kidney stones more often -- winding up each time in the emergency room -- and the oral steroids she was prescribed showed little sign of slowing the disease.
''One day my doctor yelled at me,'' Ms. Keenan said. ''He said it's not a joke. That's when I started going on the computer and finding out more and more about it. That's when I started getting serious with it.''
Now she can explain in detail about the tubes, catheters, solutions and medicines that are keeping her alive while she awaits a kidney transplant.
Pointing to her lower right arm, Ms. Keenan said: ''They put this graft in first. It never worked. It was disappointing that it was a waste of time.'' She pulled down the neck of her T-shirt to reveal the plastic ends of a catheter protruding from her chest, beneath a dressing and medical tape. ''That's how I started getting dialysis.''
In December 2000 she began going to Island Rehabilitative Services, a dialysis center in Borough Park, to receive hemodialysis, in which her blood goes out one tube in her chest, is filtered and is then replaced through another tube. As part of her treatment she met with a social worker there who took a look at Ms. Keenan's many pressing needs.
''Basically I needed someone to help with my son,'' Ms. Keenan recalled. ''I couldn't really do anything.'' She said he ''couldn't really understand why I wasn't feeling good.''
Ms. Keenan was referred to the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. Abisola Hassan, a case coordinator there, arranged for a homemaker, Shirley Daniels, to come to the apartment five days a week for five hours to assist with Edwin.
Ms. Hassan said: ''When Vanya is not feeling good, the homemaker takes over. She comes at 7 a.m. and takes Edwin to school. Then she comes back to tidy up. She picks him up when school is over and takes him home. She prepares dinner, helps with the house and laundry and homework.''
This has been tremendously helpful, Ms. Keenan said. Although she is again receiving treatment at the dialysis center, for a time she was giving herself peritoneal dialysis at home, which required her to be connected to a machine four times a day and limited the flexibility of her schedule.
It also has helped put her mind at ease that her son's needs are being addressed. ''Before I got the service, I was depressed. I wasn't communicating with my family much,'' Ms. Keenan said, adding that her family is now a great support to her.
Because Ms. Keenan has not been able to work since she went on dialysis, Medicaid has covered her medical expenses and she began receiving $500 a month in Supplemental Security Income in 2001. That, and the support she receives from her son's father, is all that the family has to live on.
Ms. Keenan was thankful when Ms. Hassan suggested that she could get new mattresses, box springs and linens for Ms. Keenan and her son to replace their old and broken ones. Ms. Hassan secured $793 in Neediest Cases money to help make Ms. Keenan's home more comfortable.
Harder to replace are kidneys. ''It is a five- to seven-year wait,'' Ms. Keenan said. ''I've been on the list for two. We found out last month that my sister is a match.'' While Ms. Keenan is hopeful that that will work out, she is giving her sister, who is 20, some time to think about it.
For now there are more bad days than good days for Ms. Keenan.
But, as she explained: ''It doesn't make sense to be cranky. Then who's going to want to be around you? Positivity is the best thing.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,002,638.15  Recorded Thursday: 41,418.97
Total: $7,044,057.12  Last year to date: $7,308.409.39
