For a few years I delivered Meals on Wheels twice a month to homebound adults. They were ill, blind or unable to shop and cook for themselves. I brought my toddlers with me because I wanted them to get a sense of living in a community, and because I knew that the elderly people we visited loved seeing them.
I'm a public health nurse. These people weren't really my patients, but I think nurses anywhere will agree that the observational skills we learn in training can never be turned off. We're always looking closely at that mole, listening to that cough or noticing that tic.
The first patient was crotchety. She always had a lit cigarette in her hand, and her health suffered accordingly. She had emphysema and was chronically short of breath. She coughed explosively, her skin was wrinkled, and her hair and nails were yellow and brittle. The windows in her crowded home were covered with greasy film, and she had piles of old newspapers and magazines stacked everywhere in every room.
Complaining constantly about the hospital food we delivered, she frightened my children. On top of everything else she had a snappish German shepherd dog. I always tried to get in and out as fast as I could.
But one hot day in August she stopped me to tell me about the rain. Although we were in the middle of the longest dry spell of the decade, she claimed to be unable to sleep because of the constant rain. She said that it had puddled in her yard, brought her gutters down, tapped on the roof during the night and made her feel sad all the time. She held me spellbound with her description, even as I realized that something must be very wrong.
Because she had no family, I placed a phone call to the local health department. Someone there sent a nurse out to assess the situation. Within the day, it was determined that a virus had left her dehydrated. Deprived of adequate fluids, her medications had become concentrated and toxic in her slight body. After a few days in the hospital with IV's running she came home, right as rain, ready once again to complain about the food.
The second story is more sinister.
Fully aware that all too often our clients were unable, physically or financially, to maintain their homes, I approached a gloomy house, conspicuous in its disrepair, to deliver a lunch.
This house, though, seemed unnecessarily dark. Each window was shaded. When I rang the bell, a suspicious-looking young man, obviously not the intended recipient, came to the door. He motioned for me to place the food on the floor where uneaten meals from previous days were already stacked.
I tried to peek inside but the dim light was such a contrast to the sunshine outside that I couldn't see anything.
I had no doubt that there was a problem; the more immediate concern was what to do about it. Unable to determine that the meal client was safe, I decided to phone the police.
As officers do with complaints like this, they came out with the local public health nurse, and then a psychiatric nurse was called in to help.
It was soon determined that the young man, who was the client's son, was listening to voices that only he could hear, telling him not to feed his ailing, frightened mother. Starving, she could see the food rotting in the hallway but was unable to reach it in her wheelchair.
Thanks to our intervention, by dinnertime both mother and son had been admitted to a hospital.
What I learned from these cases was that what sometimes looks like dementia or Alzheimer's can have an identifiable and treatable cause, and that we must not confuse eccentric behavior with the truly bizarre.
Today more and more of the elderly are isolated, with families flung across the country. Mental health exists on a continuum. We cannot always know what is normal, but we must be prepared to ask for help.
If we do, these people can find crucial support through a crisis. If we don't, they will be the strangers we read about over coffee.
CASES
