Devils center Igor Larionov stuck around for a full practice Monday and paused to sign autographs after he left the ice.
Larionov told reporters later, without a trace of sarcasm: ''Fantastic. Great day today. Great practice. Really looking forward to tomorrow's game.''
What a difference 72 hours seemed to make. Larionov left Friday's practice early after a disagreement with Devils Coach Pat Burns.
Burns said Monday that Larionov would be back in the lineup for Tuesday's game at Pittsburgh. As far as Burns is concerned, the dispute, if it was that, is over.
Asked Monday about Larionov's departure from practice, Burns said, ''I told you I'm not talking about that anymore.''
Burns said he had told Larionov, at 43 the oldest player in the National Hockey League, to leave the ice if he was bored. So Larionov did.
Larionov said Monday that Burns had not kicked him out, but the incident percolated into a controversy that both player and coach have had to chase away.
''Just a bad day in the office, that's all,'' Larionov said.
The Devils (22-11-10-1) have had a lot of bad days lately. Corey Schwab, the backup goaltender, missed practice Monday after apparently reinjuring a groin muscle.
Schwab has been hampered by the injury for most of the season, and his limited availability has prevented the Devils from giving Martin Brodeur more rest.
''I know it's a groin, and that's all I know,'' Burns said.
Defenseman Scott Stevens said Saturday that he was out indefinitely with what might be postconcussion syndrome. He missed practice Monday.
Right wing Jamie Langenbrunner, probably the Devils' best player over the first quarter of the season, has yet to resume practice after arthroscopic knee surgery.
Then there is Larionov, who signed as a free agent with the Devils in September. He is in the 27th and final season of a glorious career, 11 of them in the Soviet Union, but he has been a disappointment for the Devils.
''I made the right decision,'' Larionov said of joining the Devils. ''There are no regrets. I'm looking to finish on a high note.''
The Devils are careful not to appear combustible, and Burns drew more questions when he scratched Larionov from Saturday's victory over Washington.
''I never kicked Igor off the ice,'' Burns said Saturday when asked about Friday's practice.
It was the second time in four games that Larionov had been a healthy scratch. Larionov has missed seven other games because of injury, but none since Jan. 3.
In 34 games with the Devils, Larionov has taken only 14 shots and has not scored a goal. His playing time has also dwindled drastically in the last three weeks.
''There are a lot of surprises in life,'' Larionov said. ''Sometimes, a coach makes a decision. You can't argue.''
Larionov is a fourth-liner who has played fewer than 10 minutes in four of his last eight games. He did not play fewer than 11 minutes in any of his first 26 games.
More than a third of Larionov's 168 career N.H.L. goals have been scored on the power play, but he played only 57 seconds on the power play in his last two games.
He said Monday that he would like to receive more ice time, but not at the expense of risking injury when the Stanley Cup playoffs begin in April.
''I don't want to burn myself out for the playoffs,'' Larionov said. ''My best time period is playoff time.''
Nevertheless, Larionov did not know Burns had scratched him from Saturday's game until he arrived at Continental Arena and did not see a sweater hanging in his locker.
Asked if he and Burns did not share the same philosophy, Larionov replied: ''Every coach is different. I've spent 27 years playing hockey. Every coach is different.''
He said he had never been kicked out of a practice in those 27 years. ''My approach to the game is always fun,'' Larionov said.
HOCKEY
