Despite the suspicion enveloping him, Greg Rusedski wanted to play in this Australian Open, but he did not play for long. After making the long trip here and taking the short walk to the windswept show court No. 2 on Tuesday morning, Rusedski, the British veteran, did not win a set in his first-round match against Albert Costa, the former French Open champion from Spain.
Rusedski's next date with public scrutiny will be less athletic but perhaps more traumatic when he attends a tribunal on Feb. 9 in Montreal; he and his lawyers will attempt to clear him of doping charges after his positive test in July for the steroid nandrolone. ''You know, obviously I wish it would have been all kept quiet,'' Rusedski said. ''As everybody knows, I had no choice but to go public with it.''
No choice because word had already leaked to the British news media that Rusedski had tested positive. While others might have provided the minimum of information and commentary, Rusedski, a serve-and-volley specialist, chose to confront the issue more aggressively. He confirmed the positive test earlier this month and released a lengthy statement explaining why he believed he was innocent.
One of his arguments is that last May, the ATP exonerated seven players who had tested positive for nandrolone after an inquiry determined that ATP trainers had been distributing electrolyte tablets to players. The only one of the seven to be identified publicly was Bohdan Ulihrach of the Czech Republic. Although follow-up tests on batches of the same brand of tablet produced no positive results, the ATP ruled that it could not prove the supplements it had previously given out were not contaminated.
Rusedski's problem is that he tested positive on July 23, two months after ATP officials say their tour stopped distributing supplements. The ATP's problem is that the fingerprint of the substance that Rusedski ingested is the same as the other seven previous positive tests. If Rusedski tested positive after they ceased distributing the pills, perhaps the problem was not in the Tour's supplements at all, a possibility that the World Anti-Doping Agency is considering as it reexamines the science and judgments that led to the ATP's initial ruling.
Costa said he could sympathize with Rusedski. ''Everybody in the locker room is afraid to take even a vitamin pill,'' Costa said. ''This is not normal when you have to play matches in 35 degrees in best-of-five sets,'' he said, referring to the Celsius scale reading that is about 95 degrees Fahrenheit.
Although Costa said he accepted that Rusedski would compete here until due process was completed in his case, he admitted that it was awkward. ''It's very difficult when a person who is positive is still playing,'' he said. ''It's complicated. You wonder what's really going on.''
Rusedski was preoccupied with clearing his name, but Venus Williams was focused on her tennis. She had not played an official match since the Wimbledon final in July, when she played through the pain of a severely strained stomach muscle and lost to her younger sister Serena.
But she cruised through her first-round match on Tuesday against Ashley Harkleroad, 6-2, 6-1. ''It's a little bit sentimental,'' said Williams of her return to tennis. ''But at the time I was very focused in on my performance. Afterwards, it was just a breath fresh air.''
Watching in the stands was Williams's mother, Oracene Price, who is coaching her here and is also taking care of Jair Bobbit, the 5-year-old son of Price's deceased daughter, Yetunde Price, who was shot and killed in Compton, Calif., in September. Bobbit, who spent part of the match asleep on Oracene's lap, was featured in an Australian newspaper photo montage of a Williams practice session earlier in the week. ''He thinks he's a star,'' Williams said.
Williams's only moment of concern on the court came in the fifth game of the first set, when she grimaced after landing awkwardly while executing a swing volley. ''I twisted my right ankle; I'll just monitor it and see how it goes, but I'm not anticipating that it will be so bad,'' she said.
Other prominent players had bigger problems Tuesday. With the first round still incomplete, 11 of the 32 seeded men have lost, including No. 5 Guillermo Coria of Argentina, who was defeated, 7-6 (7), 6-2, 6-4, by Cyril Saulnier of France.
Roger Federer of Switzerland, seeded second, had no trouble with the American Alex Bogomolov Jr., 6-3, 6-4, 6-0. On Monday night, the defending champion, Andre Agassi, defeated the Australian journeyman Todd Larkham, 6-1, 6-3, 6-4. Todd Martin had to work harder to reach the second round, saving a match point in the fourth set against Anthony Dupuis of France.
TENNIS
