Oompah went haywire in the music of Taraf de Haidouks, the Romanian Gypsy band that played a sold-out show at Zankel Hall on Friday night. The group, from the town of Clejani near Bucharest, hurtled through tunes at speeds that would make bluegrass bands blink and then, when it felt like it, even accelerated from there.
Every so often the pace would slow down so that a band member could sing a song that had the Romani speakers in the audience chuckling: tales of cheating husbands, unsatisfied wives and a longing for the elixir of youth. The band features three generations of musicians, none willing to take it easy. The elder band members, the singers Dumitru Baicu and Ilie Iorga, danced when they weren't singing.
The oompah in the music came from Ion Tanase on cimbalom, a hammered dulcimer with notes as weighty as a piano's bass register, and from Viorel Vlad on bass fiddle. Above them, up to three accordionists (Ionel Manole, Marin Manole and another Marin Manole), two violinists (Paul Guiclea and Constantin Lautaru), a clarinetist (Filip Ankov Simeonov) and a flutist (Gheorghe Falcaru) shared the tunes, with Mr. Falcaru sometimes tootling a faster obbligato on his pennywhistlelike flute. Like an Irish band playing a set of reels or jigs, they strung together melody after melody, each more daredevil than the last.
The tunes weren't simple. They darted and zigzagged with built-in trills and precisely stuttered repeating notes. There were quieter bits of virtuosity, too, as when Mr. Lautaru plinked fast pizzicato notes on the fingerboard of his fiddle.
It was party music: dance tunes from across Eastern Europe and the Balkans with hints of points beyond, and songs that turned laments into comedy. From the history of oppression and expulsion that the Gypsies, or Roma, have faced, they salvaged the music of all the places they traversed. In its set Taraf de Haidouks played dance melodies rooted in Romania like sirbas and horas, dipped into odd-meter tunes that could have been Bulgarian or Macedonian and hinted at Greek and Turkish music. When Mr. Iorga sang a high, quivering lead vocal, his voice held airy inflections from India, where the Roma originated centuries ago.
The music hurtled through history and across national borders as fast as fingers could fly. Audience members clapped but couldn't keep up. During an encore Taraf de Haiduks decided to leave melody behind for a moment, and the hall was filled with the twitters and squawks and braying of a barnyard: a little jest before the next breakneck excursion.
WORLD MUSIC REVIEW
