GARRICK UTLEY's career as a reporter for television spanned the birth and arguably death of network news. He was there at its inception in the fall of 1963 as a young office clerk with the Brussels bureau of NBC News and left the screen a year ago as a commentator for CNN. He watched the half-hour nightly news broadcasts, begun just a few weeks after he started, become the behemoths of news coverage and then tumble in a sad decline with the advent of 24-hour cable news networks, satellite links and videophones.
One loses and gains as time progresses. Reporting, he says, has been replaced with ''interminable talking heads'' and ''an unceasing pressure on cable news channels to focus on whatever story creates enough of a sensation to hold on to viewers for as long as possible.''
''Since television can now report live from anywhere in the world,'' he continued, ''television reporters sometimes become color commentators who narrate news events rather than carrying out in-depth news reporting.''
With the disappearance of most international coverage on television over the past decade, except for huge natural disasters and major events like the Iraq war, reporters like Mr. Utley became an anachronism. ''I was swimming against the current,'' he recalled. ''I swam until my arms got heavy and I felt I was going under.''
So where does an old war horse of the news industry go when he feels his talents and his passions are no longer part of the mainstream?
Mr. Utley, 64, has gone back to where he came from, or in his words, ''full circle.'' He will head the Neil D. Levin Graduate Institute of International Relations and Commerce of the State University of New York. The graduate school, part of SUNY's decision to expand the state university system's presence in the city, is named for the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey who was killed at the World Trade Center in the 9/11 attack.
Mr. Utley, who spent most of his career as a foreign correspondent, grew up in Hyde Park in Chicago, where his father, a radio commentator on foreign affairs, filled the house with visitors from abroad and friends from the University of Chicago. World events were part of his daily fare as a child, and at the age of 7 his father took him to the NBC Radio studio to initiate him into the magical world of broadcasting.
BUT it was not his father Mr. Utley wanted to see but the much more renowned woman who did the commercials on his father's morning show -- Aunt Jemima. He waited expectantly for the woman with the bandanna wrapped around her head, the one he knew from his pancake box, to walk into the studio. Instead the woman who appeared was ''white, middle-aged and, well, remarkably skinny.''
''I struggled for a word, but illusion lay beyond my 7-year-old grasp,'' he said.
But the lesson was one he carried within him for the rest of his career. ''Not everything filtered through the microphones, and later the cameras, of broadcasting is what it appears to be,'' he said.
Mr. Utley, who retains his affable Midwestern graciousness and charm, refuses, however, to succumb to bitterness or despair. He cautioned about lionizing the past, and after all he was there, since nostalgia ''can play sly tricks.''
''Memory tends to recall the best rather than the worst of an era,'' he said, sipping coffee from a delicate bone china cup as the dreary winter rain pelted the windows of his living room.
He embraces the Internet and other alternative sources of information, saying that news consumers today are ''savvier.''
''There are more numerous outlets, although a lot are less than edifying,'' he said, ''but it is there. We can get it. We have become our own editors. People are better informed. When I wanted to get news about the war in Iraq, I went to various sources on the Internet. I watched the CNN and BBC video footage and read the reports. I don't long for the old days.''
He is banking that there remains a hunger for world news strong enough to sustain, albeit in new mediums, what he has devoted most of his life to reporting. If he is wrong, he admits, we will fold in on ourselves and lose the vital ability to understand other cultures, to understand how to navigate our way around the globe.
And so, rather than report on world affairs, he hopes to train those who want to head overseas, whether in commerce or in nonprofit work, in the new Levin graduate program.
''Language and culture will be an important component of this program,'' he said, noting the years he devoted to mastering Russian, German and French. When asked his passions, his wife, Gertje, an art historian who had joined the conversation, said with a broad smile, ''me.''
Mr. Utley concurred and noted that he was host of the Metropolitan Opera broadcasts on public television. ''I love opera,'' he said. ''I was always willing to do stories on opera, especially for the morning news shows.''
Mr. Utley, with a staff of four, works out of borrowed space from the state university near Times Square. He will earn a salary of $170,000 a year, plus a $36,000 housing allowance, a modest amount compared with what he took home in the days the networks ruled the airwaves. But he seems, more than anything, delighted to be here, anxious to get his hands dirty and eternally optimistic, despite Aunt Jemima, despite it all.
PUBLIC LIVES
