You don't have to know that Astoreth is a hermaphrodite and the lover of Stanley, a one-eyed card sharp also known as Satan-El, and that both are members of the Gamblers, who occupy a party suite at the Brockton Holiday Inn just outside Boston on Route 24 the moment before the Big Bang.
You don't have to know but it helps. Sort of.
It's only the beginning of the cosmology embracing all knowledge that spills over the walls and floor of the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, where Matthew Ritchie, a mixed-media artist and Manhattan building superintendent, is having his first major show.
Lining the walls of the 8,000-square-foot Brown Foundation Gallery are enigmatic murals that look like ancient maps, intricate paintings of plant and anthropomorphic forms and fanciful sketches of 49 characters like Astoreth and Stanley. Filling the floor is a sculpture called ''The Fine Constant,'' a suspended riverlike aluminum webwork spiked with poles sprouting small humanoid heads designed by grade schoolers, and beneath it, ''The God Impersonator,'' a rubber floor mosaic like a walkway into the piece.
There's also a computerized craps table where visitors throw dice for the fate of the universe and see the results in shifting digital animations to the sounds of distant thunder and electromagnetic bleeps.
''I call it 'The Story,' '' Mr. Ritchie said. He doesn't like to explain his work. ''Put simply, it's all sorts of things thrown into the soup, and you hope it'll turn into something.''
''This is the statement,'' he said gesturing around. ''Anything I'm saying is just sounding off.'' So what is it exactly? ''I could begin if I had a couple hours and a couple shots of whiskey,'' said Mr. Ritchie, 39, a Hugh Grant look-alike from England who celebrated the show's opening on Dec. 13 by skydiving from 14,000 feet. ''A lot of things that are bad for you, you can do in Texas,'' he said.
The exhibition runs through March 14, after which a modified version will move to the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art in North Adams. It has been drawing enthusiastic if at times perplexed crowds to the stainless steel building of the 56-year-old Contemporary Arts Museum.
''It all makes sense,'' said Virginia Mohlere, a medical copy editor attending the show. ''It's a combination of alchemy and mythology that can only be done in art.'' She said people shouldn't get too hung up on the content. ''Even if it doesn't stand up to linear knowledge,'' she said, ''it makes great art.''
Critics mostly have agreed. Writing in The New York Times in 2000, Holland Cotter called Mr. Ritchie's earlier creations ''engaging, even peppy to look at, densely coded and encyclopedic in content'' and said, ''The results smack equally of medieval scholasticism and molecular science, with an air of epic-poetic grandeur keeping the whole thing afloat.''
In a review in The Houston Chronicle, Patricia C. Johnson said Mr. Ritchie's show transformed the museum ''into a fun house of graffiti.'' In the new work, she wrote, ''Ritchie is very persuasive in illustrating the idea of a universe in which everything happens at once in a seamless continuum of space and time.''
The exhibition is called ''Proposition Player,'' for the independent contractor in the gaming industry who is paid by the house to start games. In Mr. Ritchie's words, ''He's the stranger who comes up to you in the casino and says, 'Fancy a friendly game of cards?' ''
Here, that's Mr. Ritchie. In his name, arriving visitors are given a card from his deck representing any of his 49 characters, including Be-elzebub, also known as Bubba, who is eviscerated by his fellow Gambler Lucifer, known as Lucky, who is in turn decapitated in an evil deed exemplifying the deterioration of everything.
It gets worse, or better, according to Lynne Herbert, senior curator at the museum, who masterminded the show and chronicles the epic: ''Purson (the Timekeeper and the seventh gambler) shows up and carries away Lucifer's head. This action represents the integration of energy, light, material and time (E=mc2 ), or as Ritchie states, the basic conditions necessary for art making.''
Goaded by Mr. Ritchie, visitors throw dice (cast from the ankle bones of prehistoric elk), progressing though the card deck, and in the process affecting the fate of the universe as projected in constantly shifting computer animations.
As the exhibit says, ''You may already be a winner.''
Because, as Mr. Ritchie sees it, 95 percent of the universe remains unseen and unknown, he includes plenty of negative space in his work. He invited 9-, 10- and 11-year-olds from the Wharton Elementary School in Houston to model the clay heads that top his sculpture and retained the forms while erasing 95 per cent of their features. On the other hand, as he said, ''in the last three years more information has been exchanged than in all the history of the human race,'' so his work resonates with complexity, in the manner of Matthew Barney, a fellow myth-making artist who also acknowledges a desire ''to include everything.''
''Everyone has gotten afraid of complexity,'' Mr. Ritchie said. He is not one of them. ''More is more,'' he said. Then again, he said, ''maybe it's entirely possible that I've got the wrong idea.''
An indifferent student at St. Paul's in London where the alumni include John Milton, another avid cosmologist, Mr. Ritchie won a scholarship to study art at Boston University. He traveled cross country by bus and landed a job as a building super at 107 Mercer Street in SoHo.
''The great thing about being a super, you get to read a lot,'' Mr. Ritchie said. He read discarded science textbooks left behind by New York University students and wrote hallucinatory tales that read like Alfred Döblin on LSD.
Besides managing the eight-apartment building on Mercer Street, Mr. Ritchie opened a studio in SoHo in the mid-1990's, sharing space for a time with Damien Hirst. Mr. Ritchie and other artists later bought a building at 16 Desbrosses Street, where he now has his studio. He had several shows, one at Basilico Fine Arts on Wooster Street, where he met Garland Hunter, an actress whom he later married. They are expecting their first child in April.
In 2001 he created a permanent installation called ''Games of Chance and Skill'' at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and he has a commission to do a large mixed-media piece for a new federal courthouse in Eugene, Ore.
He began creating ''Proposition Player'' three years ago and began putting it together in a contractor's barn barn in New Jersey a year and a half ago. He said he was surprised when it came together. ''I usually expect a lot of things to fail,'' he said.
