A great many people were caught off guard by the Iowa caucus results, including, of course, supporters of Howard Dean and Richard Gephardt. But high up on the list of bad guessers were all the political theorists who believed that the Democrats who are angry at George Bush wanted the presidential candidate who best channeled their outrage. Yesterday, at least, being angry at Mr. Bush meant wanting to find a candidate who could beat him.
John Kerry, who came in first last night, and John Edwards, who scored a surprising second, appeared to be the men voters thought looked most electable. That throws cold water, at least temporarily, on the long-held theory that primary voters favor candidates who are too far to the left or right to win in the fall. In this era of attack-dog politics, it's nice to have a moment of pragmatism.
The fact that the two senators did so well in Iowa is, however, no proof that either would be the best Democratic nominee. Neither Mr. Kerry nor Mr. Edwards has yet gone through the kind of withering scrutiny that Dr. Dean endured in Iowa. Senator Kerry has at least demonstrated that he knows how to take some knocks and stage a comeback. The early months of his candidacy were a disaster of disorganization and a message void. But he regrouped and convinced Iowa voters that he had the military record and foreign affairs background necessary to take on President Bush. Senator Edwards, who once seemed doomed to spend the entire election season smiling sunnily and being ignored, is now going to find himself near the front of the pack, a place that Dr. Dean and Representative Gephardt found extremely uncomfortable.
Mr. Gephardt's candidacy seemed over after his dismal showing. But Dr. Dean will have plenty of opportunity to rebound in New Hampshire. He can show that, like Mr. Kerry, he knows how to pull himself out of a bad patch and come back stronger.
It is always possible, of course, to invest too much meaning into something as narrow and less-than-democratic as the Iowa caucus. One of the best things about Monday night's outcome is that the race for the nomination is likely to go on beyond New Hampshire, giving voters in more populous and diverse states a chance to have a say.
