In a study hall filled with the hubbub of Talmudic debate, the men wearing scarlet sashes and large crosses made their way between tables, sometimes sitting to chat with the young scholars, sometimes marveling at the intensity of study.
A delegation of Roman Catholic cardinals from the United States and abroad visited Yeshiva University in upper Manhattan yesterday, taking a first-hand look at a bastion of American Jewish orthodoxy while on a two-day visit to strengthen Jewish-Catholic ties.
That effort, officials on both sides said, has assumed some urgency as religious leaders see the likelihood of a papal transition growing nearer. No pope has done more than John Paul II to try to bring Christians and Jews closer, and Jewish leaders want to make sure that the work of reconciliation continues.
''I am sure that the pope means what he says, but will there be a trickle-down effect?'' said Rabbi Israel Singer, chairman of the World Jewish Congress, which helped convene the meeting. ''This meeting is an attempt to make sure it will trickle down throughout the world.''
Leading rabbis from the United States and abroad came together with the cardinals for speeches at the Museum of Jewish Heritage near Battery Park, and today, the rabbis and cardinals will visit ground zero.
Several of the cardinals who attended -- Jean-Marie Lustiger of Paris, Christoph Schönborn of Vienna and Theodore E. McCarrick of Washington -- have been prominent in promoting interfaith relations.
At least one participant, Rabbi Adin Steinsaltz, a prominent Talmudic scholar from Israel, suggested that such meetings do not result in concrete changes.
''They are not negotiating anything in particular,'' he said. ''A meeting like this doesn't signify in itself a breakthrough.''
However, the opportunity for cardinals and rabbis to speak face to face is valuable, he said. ''It's part of a process in which we can talk to each other in a friendly way,'' Rabbi Steinsaltz said.
The Rev. Patrick Desbois, a French priest who works to build relations with the Jews and helped organize the meeting, said that it was unusual because it was held outside the Vatican, involved a large group of cardinals and included some who had previously had little involvement in dialogue with Jews because they come from continents, like India and Africa, where there are few Jews.
The purpose was simply to build relationships and familiarity, not to resolve policy matters, Father Desbois said. ''We are completely outside of diplomacy.''
The point was driven home during the morning trip to Yeshiva University. It was an extraordinary scene: cardinals mingling with young Yeshiva men arguing over laws of the Talmud (women study separately).
Menachem Hecht, 22, and David Wise, 21, discussed writings on the relationship between corporal and capital punishment as Cardinal Ivan Dias of Bombay looked on in wonder. ''The students teach themselves,'' he said. ''You sharpen minds like you sharpen knives.''
Cardinal Schönborn of Vienna said Orthodox Judaism could teach Catholics how ''commitment to faith is not an impediment but an encouragement to society.''
The Catholic delegation, which included Cardinal Francis George of Chicago, was assembled by Cardinal Lustiger, who converted from Judaism as a youngster and speaks Yiddish. Exposing his fellow cardinals to the Yeshiva world, he said, was a way of showing them how to be men of faith in the modern world.
The meeting was notable also because Orthodox Jews traditionally shun dialogue with adherents of other religions. Many Orthodox leaders cite the precedent set by the late Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik, an eminent Orthodox scholar who taught for decades at Yeshiva University. He taught that it was improper for Jews to engage in dialogue on theological issues with people of other faiths.
Rabbi Norman Lamm, chancellor of Yeshiva University, said that some Orthodox Jews may denounce his decision to play host to the Catholic leaders.
''Some would condemn me, and some would praise me, so I might as well do the right thing,'' he said. ''There are small minds everyplace.''
He asserted that the meeting had adhered to Rabbi Soloveitchik's prohibition because it did not involve a discussion of theology. ''We kept to his guidelines,'' Rabbi Lamm said.
At a lunch later in the day, Cardinal Lustiger came over to greet Rabbi Steinsaltz, a puckish figure who good-naturedly asked him what Catholic religious authority gave him dispensation from obeying Jewish laws, given that the cardinal remains a Jew in the eyes of Judaism. Cardinal Lustiger answered, none, really, according to the rabbi, though it was not clear how serious the discussion was.
Rabbi Henry I. Sobel, the chief rabbi of Brazil, said he would propose that Catholic leaders serve as intermediaries between Jews and Muslims to bring the Muslims into the dialogue. ''We need to convert the dialogue into a trialogue,'' he said.
Though the two-day event was not arranged by the Vatican offices in charge of interfaith dialogue, the symposium coincided with a weekend of interfaith events at the Vatican. On Friday, the pope met with two chief rabbis of Israel for the first time in the Vatican, and the next day attended a concert honoring religious reconciliation at the Holy See with Jewish, Muslim and Protestant figures.
