The Bank of Canada is widely expected to lower its main interest rate on Tuesday, seeking to ease the pain of the strong Canadian dollar on exporters and link its economy to the recovery in the United States.
The Canadian currency has soared from a record low of 62 cents in January 2002 to almost 79 cents last week, an increase of 27 percent. On Monday, it traded at approximately 77 cents. While much of the appreciation reflects the weak United States dollar, the Canadian currency has also been enhanced by relatively lofty domestic interest rates and a strong advance in the prices of metals and other commodities that make up a sizable portion of Canada's exports.
Analysts cite the buoyant currency as the chief reason for the recent slip in Canada's economic performance. After several years of growth stronger than that of the United States, the Canadian economy contracted in the second quarter as the American economy grew. In the third quarter, Canada's output rose by an annualized 1.1 percent adjusted for inflation, while in the United States the economy zipped along at an 8.2 percent clip.
The strong currency ''is starting to cut into us,'' said Gerald B. Fedchun, president of the Automotive Parts Manufacturers Association in Toronto, whose members export two-thirds of their production, almost all of it to the United States.
Until recently, the Bank of Canada was optimistic that the erosion in export profits caused by the strengthening currency would be more than offset by growing demand from the United States, and that the revival there would pull Canada's economy along with it.
But David Longworth, a deputy governor at the Bank of Canada, cautioned in a speech two weeks ago that growth in the final quarter of 2003 ''may be somewhat lower than we expected.'' He added, ''We had been looking for economic growth during the last quarter of 2003 to be well above 4 percent, on an annualized basis.''
Adding weight to the calls for a rate cut, Statistics Canada reported last week that the country's trade surplus narrowed to 4.3 billion Canadian dollars in November from 5.1 billion Canadian dollars the previous month. Exports to the United States, which account for more than four-fifths of the total, shrank by 4.4 percent.
According to a poll by Reuters, 9 of Canada's 13 primary currency dealers expect the central bank to cut its overnight rate to 2.5 percent from 2.75 percent on Tuesday. Several expect a further easing at the next policy review in March. The bank last eased rates in September, and before that, in July.
Thomas d'Aquino, president of the Canadian Council of Chief Executives, a lobbying group, said in a speech in Toronto last Thursday that ''the degree of confidence international investors now have in our currency and fiscal management means that the Bank of Canada has room to reduce the gap between Canadian and American interest rates.'' The Federal Reserve's federal funds rate is 1 percent.
But Daniel Racette, an economics professor at the École des Hautes Études Commerciales, part of the University of Montreal, took the view that the central bank should wait longer before easing monetary policy. The American economy ''seems to be roaring,'' Mr. Racette said. ''If it goes on roaring, it might compensate for the effect that the dollar seems to have had.''
Mr. Racette cited recent strong jobs growth in Canada, with almost a quarter of a million jobs created in the final four months of 2003. The unemployment rate has dipped to 7.4 percent from 8 percent.
Some analysts have also argued that a strong currency would help Canadian businesses become more competitive internationally by holding down the cost of imported machinery and technology.
But Mr. Fedchun of the automotive parts association noted that such benefits would not be felt for some time, while the rise in the Canadian dollar was having an immediate impact, especially on small manufacturers that have not hedged their currency exposure.
''We want interest rates to go down,'' Mr. Fedchun said. ''We feel the Canadian dollar is stronger than it should be.''
Executives in other sectors echo that sentiment. Timminco, a maker of specialty alloys based in Toronto, said last week that it was closing a plant in Ontario and laying off 50 workers because of the rise in the Canadian dollar and intensifying competition from Chinese suppliers.
Almost all of Timminco's products are exported and denominated in American dollars, said Halina B. McGregor, Timminco's chief financial officer. Illustrating the impact of the buoyant Canadian dollar on the bottom line, Ms. McGregor said that instead of getting 155 Canadian dollars for every $100 of sales, the company now received less than 130 Canadian dollars.
''It's not just the extent of it, it's the speed,'' she said.
