In a commentary with ''Spellbound,'' Jeff Blitz's documentary about eight participants in the 1999 National Spelling Bee, the producer Sean Welch says that Mr. Blitz has a stutter that is made worse by microphones. Mr. Blitz takes part anyway (stutter free), and we learn that a father of one of the contestants, also a stutterer, prayed not only for his son's victory but also that the boy wouldn't falter during ''kookaburra'' or some such. He doesn't, in a film with ''enough drama, humor and unfiltered nail-biting suspense to put all the thrill-mongering screenwriters in Hollywood to shame,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. 2003. Columbia TriStar. $26.96. 97 minutes. G.
'Open Range'
To hear Kevin Costner tell it in a documentary about the making of his western, even major movie stars can run into problems trying to raise money for projects that aren't too appealing to the studios. Spewing some strong obscenities, he laments that foreign money he had expected didn't materialize. ''You deal with real punks,'' he says, ''people who want to jump into our game.''
He doesn't discuss exactly what restricted the cash flow, but enough money was raised to film in Alberta, British Columbia, and in the documentary and Mr. Costner's commentary we see a director obsessed with detail.
The movie tells the basic story of cattlemen (Robert Duvall and Mr. Costner) who rile a nasty local rancher (Michael Gambon) by passing through with their herd. A big gun battle, and a realistic one, takes place in town, with shots making sharp, lifelike reports and wives rushing into harm's way to tend wounded husbands. Afterward there is a love story to get through, which, not to denigrate the romantic angle, seems tacked on.
Mr. Costner explains everything at earnest length, with much extolling of western integrity and values. On screen his ''relentless root-canal humorlessness turns what might have been an enjoyable B-picture throwback into a ponderous drag,'' Mr. Scott wrote in The Times. 2003. Buena Vista $29.99. 135 minutes. R.
'Curb Your Enthusiasm'
In Episode 6 of Larry David's HBO series, a neighbor calls Larry's place ''the house that Jerry Seinfeld built.'' The neighbor is pretty obnoxious, but then so is Larry (a creator of ''Seinfeld'') in 10 episodes from the first season of ''Curb Your Enthusiasm.'' In an interview with Bob Costas, he describes his improvisatory methods and why some scenes need seven or eight takes. And there is his 1999 comedy special, which introduced the concept. And Larry. ''I used to have people who liked me,'' he says. 2003. HBO. $39.98. 390 minutes.
New DVD's
