There was little celebration in the Patriots' locker room after their victory over the Colts on Sunday. If not for the random pictures being taken with the American Football Conference championship trophy, it would have been difficult to tell that this wasn't just another Sunday night during the regular season.
The Patriots have had plenty of practice with victory this season, but unlike their charmed trip to the Super Bowl two years ago, there is nothing unexpected about how this one unfolded. They spent the last off-season bolstering the defense and on consecutive playoff weekends successfully dismantled the league's co-most valuable players -- quarterbacks Steve McNair and Peyton Manning.
Now Coach Bill Belichick has two weeks to draw up the game plan for Carolina, a scary proposition for Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme.
It is a matchup of two defensive powerhouses, so the efficiency of the offenses will be critical. The strength of the Panthers' offense is the running game with DeShaun Foster and Stephen Davis, but that plays right into the hands of the Patriots, who finished the regular season with the fourth-ranked rushing defense and who have allowed an average of 3.8 yards a rush in the postseason.
With Ted Washington clogging up the middle, they are especially strong against inside runners like Davis. Delhomme is unlikely to have greater success than Manning in deciphering the Patriots' defense, but the efficiency of the Patriots' offense could be the crucial factor in the Super Bowl. Incredibly for a team on a 14-game winning streak, that might be a cause for concern for the Patriots.
The Patriots looked as if they would slice their way through the Colts' defense after scoring a touchdown on their opening drive. But that was the only one they scored. And though quarterback Tom Brady has been nearly flawless this season -- his fourth-quarter interception Sunday was his first at home this season -- the Patriots were 1 of 7 inside the 20-yard line. That left it to their once and perhaps future hero, Adam Vinatieri, to kick five field goals.
During the regular season, the Patriots were next to last in the A.F.C. in red zone efficiency, scoring just 22 touchdowns in 50 possessions inside the 20 (Carolina was worse, scoring just 18 touchdowns in 43 red zone possessions). But more startling on Sunday was the inability of the Patriots to get a first down when they needed it most on two straight possessions late in the fourth quarter.
The Patriots twice went three downs and out, the last time giving Manning the ball with two minutes remaining and his team trailing by 7 points. For all of their defensive dominance, the Patriots were dangerously close to disaster. Their defense stopped Manning deep in his own territory on fourth down, giving the Patriots ideal position for the field goal that iced the victory.
Before the game, Brady told safety Rodney Harrison, ''You have nothing to worry about; we are going to score,'' They did score, just not the way they wanted to.
''We didn't punt for three quarters, and then all of a sudden in the fourth quarter, the execution wasn't as good as we would have liked,'' Brady said. ''And when you don't take advantage of all those touchdowns, the other team feels they've got a shot. So we are going to spend a lot of work on our red zone. It's not something that's really been a strong suit for us this year.''
Brady figures to be the star of the Super Bowl buildup between two nearly anonymous teams, and he will be the focus of the Panthers' dominating front four. They, like the Patriots, are one of the few teams able to generate pressure on the quarterback without much blitzing.
Running back Antowain Smith had 100 yards against the Colts, but the running game will be much more difficult against the Panthers. So, red zone failures and all, the Patriots will rely on Brady again, and hope that he can guide the Patriots as effectively as he did on their first three drives against the Colts: 14 of 22 for 152 yards and one touchdown and putting the Patriots in position for two field goals that gave them a 13-0 lead.
Touchdowns may be just as difficult to come by in Houston as they were on Sunday, but the Patriots won their first Super Bowl on the strength of their defense and Brady's dynamic play at the end that put them in position for the winning field goal.
''Tom Brady is the greatest winner in football right now,'' cornerback Ty Law said. ''Maybe his numbers are not eye-popping, all these yards, all these touchdowns. But he knows how to win ballgames. What are stats when you are sitting at home?''
Manning has plenty of time to answer that.
PRO FOOTBALL
