As the Knicks danced off the court yesterday after their fourth consecutive victory, their longest streak of the season, the players hugged one another and the crowd offered an appreciative ovation. But Isiah Thomas, standing in the tunnel, was not yet content.
The Knicks have undoubtedly been good since Stephon Marbury acclimated himself to his new team, but Thomas, the team's new president of basketball operations, has higher aspirations. Thomas, who has been quick to revamp the roster since he took over the franchise on Dec. 22, said yesterday that he was not done.
''My goal is to be the best and for our team to be the best,'' Thomas said. ''And until we're the best, there's no time to rest.''
Thomas has stripped six players from the roster, changed the coach and assembled a starting five that Kevin O'Neill, the Raptors' coach, said yesterday could be among the three best in the Eastern Conference.
But Thomas, who coached a young and athletic team with the Indiana Pacers, eyes the revised Knicks, and they do not quite fit his vision.
While Thomas is continuing to talk about making the Knicks younger and more athletic, some of the players are hoping that he reconsiders.
''I want this to be my last stop,'' said Keith Van Horn, who has been spectacular since Thomas took over but who struggled yesterday against Toronto, hitting only 1 of 9 shots. ''I'd like to make it work here. That is my goal.''
Van Horn is widely rumored to be available, as are Frank Williams, Othella Harrington and Kurt Thomas. ''I don't concern myself with it,'' Van Horn said. ''I just focus on what we have.''
Marbury, who was obtained in an eight-player trade with the Phoenix Suns, has been everything the Knicks could have hoped for. His 28 points and 14 assists yesterday provided the latest evidence.
''He's a very special player, a very gifted player,'' Thomas said. ''And I think, ideally, we would still like to get more athletic and go out and acquire the best talent and get the best players for him to play with. I would like for us to become a much more athletic team, a quicker team.''
Among others, Thomas is said to be interested in Darius Miles of Cleveland, Jamal Crawford of Chicago and Rasheed Wallace of Portland, though the Blazers now say they are not going to trade Wallace.
The Knicks, who are not quick or athletic, are left to wonder whether their recently improved play will be enough to keep them together. Harrington, who sat out 11 of the 13 games before Thomas's arrival, has had his minutes increase recently. He was the first player off the bench yesterday and responded with 10 points and 7 rebounds. ''If you play well, then there is a possibility you're getting traded,'' he said. ''It's the nature of the business.''
Perhaps no one has ridden the roller coaster more than Williams, a second-year point guard who went from third string to starter to backup, but he has not appeared in the last two games.
''I've got to be patient,'' he said. ''I'm pretty sure my time will come again. When it does come, I'm pretty sure I'll be ready for it.''
Marbury is perhaps the only player who is certain to remain with the Knicks, with Thomas saying that this is as much Marbury's team as his own. ''Whatever Isiah says,'' Marbury said, ''you don't even have to ask me.''
PRO BASKETBALL
