Profits from university endowments rebounded in the 2003 fiscal year, but not by enough to erase the losses of earlier years, according to the latest annual survey by the National Association of College and University Business Officers.
Endowments, so critical to a university's financial health, typically yielded a 2.9 percent return last year, a considerable improvement over the previous two fiscal years. In 2001, university investments actually lost money at a median rate of 3.7 percent. Then in 2002, they lost an additional 6.4 percent, prompting universities to raise tuition and aggressively solicit donations in hopes of making up for declining returns.
Still, last year's returns did not necessarily mean that endowments got any bigger, according to the survey, although there were gains at some of the wealthiest universities.
At 2.2 percent, inflation almost outpaced the profits universities earned from their investments. Beyond that, universities typically spent 5.4 percent of their endowments to run their campuses, offsetting any of the gains they might have experienced.
As a result, the average endowment fell to $321.5 million last year, down more than 5 percent from the 2002 fiscal year and more than 23 percent since 2000, statistics from the business officers show. The median endowment also dropped during that period, to $70 million last year from $80 million the year before and $109 million in 2000.
''The good news is, we've turned the corner,'' said David J. Lyons, senior fellow at the business officers association. ''But the state budgets are in terrible condition, so at the publics, at least, this is definitely going to put pressure on tuition, and fund-raising will be pretty essential for everyone. I think the alumni will be getting a lot of letters.''
Not that all endowments are suffering. The three biggest, at Harvard, Yale and Princeton, all got bigger. The same was true at some of the other wealthiest private institutions, like Stanford, the University of Pennsylvania and New York University, as well as for some large public institutions, including the Universities of California and Virginia.
At the other end of the scale, several institutions experienced declines in their endowments, including the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Dartmouth College and Emory University.
''When nearly 20 percent of our revenue comes from endowment and trusts, it certainly makes a difference and has a belt-tightening effect,'' said James W. Wagner, president of Emory.
Emory's endowment, for example, shrank by more than $500 million, or 11.7 percent, in a single year, the survey found. Nonetheless, Mr. Wagner said, income from research grants grew enough so that he expects no layoffs, salary freezes or large tuition increases.
''It's affecting us but not distracting us,'' he said.
Most universities count on their endowments to cover 5 percent to 20 percent of their annual costs, said Mr. Lyons of the business officers association.
That may not make endowments an institution's primary source of revenue, but they are hardly insignificant, especially since state support of higher education has decreased in the current fiscal year by 2.2 percent, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.
''The endowment is very important to us, but it's not a substitute for loss of state funds,'' said William J. Shkurti, senior vice president for business and finance at Ohio State University.
According to the survey, Ohio State's endowment rose 12.7 percent last year, although Mr. Shkurti described the increase as the function of an accounting change, not exceptional returns. ''Two years ago, as part of state budget cuts, we lost $20 million with the stroke of a pen,'' Mr. Shkurti said, noting that it was ''the equivalent of a $400 million endowment'' in terms of revenue.
Most institutions would have liked an 8 percent or 9 percent return, at least last year, experts on college finance said. The goal each year is to generate enough of a return to cover inflation, spend about 5 percent of total assets and cover fees without depleting the endowment.
But the fact that their returns fell short of that does not mean universities will end up throttling their endowment spending, officials said.
''Once universities get used to a certain amount of money coming from the endowment, it's really hard to squeeze that back,'' said Richard A. Raffetto, managing director of endowments and foundations at the Bank of New York. ''It's very painful on campus.''
