Hezbollah guerrillas in Lebanon fired an antitank missile on Monday that hit an Israeli military bulldozer clearing roadside explosives in the border region. One Israeli soldier was killed and another seriously wounded, Israel said.
The attack stirred tensions along the uneasy frontier and raised the possibility of an Israeli military response. It also increased friction between Israel and Syria, which maintains a large military presence in Lebanon and supports Hezbollah.
Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, called in December for reopening peace talks with Israel, but Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, was cool to the idea even before the Monday episode.
''If President Assad is intent on making peace, the least he could do is restrain Hezbollah from attacking Israel,'' said Raanan Gissin, a spokesman for Mr. Sharon. ''The first thing Syria has to do is act against terror.''
The attack occurred, an Israeli military official said, as an armored bulldozer was preparing to carry out a controlled explosion of roadside bombs detected about two weeks ago. They had not been removed earlier because of persistent rains.
The bulldozer was on the Israeli side of the border, near the village of Zarit, the official said.
Hezbollah said the bulldozer was in Lebanese territory and had been destroyed by the missile, The Associated Press reported from Beirut, the Lebanese capital.
Because of the uneven terrain, an Israeli fence runs a bit south of the border in this area, a military official said. The bulldozer was on the northern side of the fence, but was still well within Israel, the official added.
United Nations monitors in southern Lebanon were called in to verify the exact location, the official said.
Israel said it had uncovered roadside explosives planted by Hezbollah three times since November.
Earlier in the day, Israeli warplanes flew over Lebanese airspace, which they often do on reconnaissance missions. As is often the case, the planes drew Hezbollah antiaircraft fire, The A.P. said.
Before the shooting, Mr. Sharon told a parliamentary committee that it was clear to him that a peace deal with Syria would require Israel to withdraw from all of the Golan Heights, which is not far from the site of the Monday shooting.
One Israeli legislator said Syria was in a weak position, and suggested that Israel might be able to win concessions if talks were held soon.
''Have no illusions,'' Mr. Gissin quoted Mr. Sharon as saying in the discussion. ''The price for full peace with Syria is Israel relinquishing all of the Golan Heights.''
Mr. Gissin added, ''The prime minister said this as a statement of fact, not as his position in any negotiations.''
Israel captured the Golan in the 1967 war, and Syria has demanded the return of all the territory as part of any peace deal.
Both Mr. Sharon's political supporters and opponents in Israel interpreted his comments as reluctance to pursue new negotiations.
Ran Cohen, a legislator with the liberal Meretz Party, said Mr. Sharon had in effect declared that ''I don't intend to pay the price of peace with Syria.''
Ehud Yatom, a member of Mr. Sharon's rightist Likud Party, agreed that negotiations seemed unlikely, but supported the prime minister. ''I understood very well what the prime minister meant,'' Mr. Yatom said. ''I understood that the prime minister is not overjoyed about giving up the Golan Heights.''
Last week, Israel's president, Moshe Katsav, invited Mr. Assad to visit Jerusalem, but Syria rejected the offer as a public relations stunt.
Syria says it wants talks to resume from the point where they broke off in early 2000, under the previous prime minister, Ehud Barak. The two sides appeared close to an agreement at that time.
But Israel says it wants the negotiations to begin without conditions, and believes that Syria is in a much more vulnerable position now.
Some Israeli officials believe that Syria is making peace overtures now because it is facing increased pressure from the United States.
The Clinton administration actively courted Syria in an effort to broker Middle East peace agreements during the 1990's. The Bush administration has taken a much tougher line.
In another development, Mr. Gissin said, Israel was reviewing possible adjustments to the separation barrier it is building in the West Bank, which has drawn much criticism abroad.
''We came to the conclusion that we have obtained the optimum level of security in some areas, but there is something to be desired in the living conditions for Palestinians,'' Mr. Gissin said.
Israel has made several minor alterations to the barrier. But the Palestinians reject the idea that any part of the barrier should be built in the West Bank, which is land they want as part of a future state.
Israel says the barrier is solely a security measure.
