HIGHLIGHTS
FILM AWARDS: BRITISH NOMINEES -- Yes to ''Cold Mountain,'' but no to Nicole Kidman. That was the story yesterday in London, where the British Academy of Film and Television Arts announced the nominations for its equivalents of the Oscars. ''Cold Mountain'' captured 13 nominations for the prizes, to be announced on Feb. 15, two weeks before Hollywood's annual accolade. Just behind ''Cold Mountain'' was ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' with a dozen nominations. Anthony Minghella, the director of ''Cold Mountain'' and Peter Jackson, the director of ''The Return of the King,'' were nominated in the best director category, along with Tim Burton for ''Big Fish,'' Sofia Coppola for ''Lost in Translation'' and Peter Weir for ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World.'' The same five movies were also nominated for best film. Best actress nominations went to Anne Reid for ''The Mother,'' Naomi Watts for ''21 Grams,'' Uma Thurman for ''Kill Bill Vol. 1'' and Scarlett Johannson for both ''Lost in Translation'' and ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.'' Nominees for best actor were Benicio del Toro for ''21 Grams,'' Bill Murray for ''Lost in Translation,'' Johnny Depp for ''Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl,'' Jude Law for ''Cold Mountain'' and Sean Penn for both ''21 Grams'' and 'Mystic River.''
POE AND POLITICS -- Just before 3 a.m. yesterday, a black-hooded man entered the icy cemetery in Baltimore where, for 56 years, someone has paid annual tribute at the grave of Edgar Allan Poe on the anniversary of Poe's birth. In keeping with tradition, the visitor left three roses and a bottle of French Cognac, but this year there was something else: a note, The Associated Press reported. Possibly referring to French opposition to the war in Iraq, it said: ''The sacred memory of Poe and his final resting place is no place for French Cognac. With great reluctance but for respect for family tradition the Cognac is place. The memory of Poe shall live evermore!''
FILM: ACCOLADE FOR 'THE KING' -- ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' has won the Producers Guild of America's highest honor, the Darryl F. Zanuck Award for Theatrical Motion Picture. Ten of the previous 14 winners have gone on to win the Academy Award for best picture.
THEATER: TONY AWARDS AND TV -- This year's Tony Awards will be broadcast live for three hours on June 6 by CBS from Radio City Music Hall. The announcement yesterday accompanied news of a six-year extension, through 2010, of the 27-year relationship between the CBS Television Network and the awards, presented by the League of American Theaters and the American Theater Wing, which founded the Tonys in 1947. The new agreement covers the 60th-anniversary special in 2006.
MERYL STREEP'S NEW HAT -- Max Bialystock and Leo Bloom may have to look to their laurels. Meryl Streep, Oscar-winning actress, is becoming a producer. Ms. Streep, right, is joining forces with the Culture Project to produce ''bridge &amp; tunnel,'' the new one-woman show by the actor, poet and playwright Sarah Jones (''Surface Transit''). Telling of assimilation in changing America through 14 characters, ''bridge &amp; tunnel'' begins previews on Feb. 4 at 45 Bleecker Street Theater and opens officially on Feb. 19.
FOOTNOTES
Chaka Khan, Paquito D'Rivera, Freddie Jackson, Will Downing, the Luther Vandross All-Star Band and the band from the David Letterman show are only a few of the music industry luminaries who are to perform at 8 p.m. Thursday at Symphony Space in a benefit for the jazz impresarios Mike and Pat Mikell, for 22 years the owners of the Upper West Side nightspot Mikell's. Three years after the club closed in 1991, Mr. Mikell was found to be suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, better known as Lou Gehrig's disease. Soon afterward, the couple quietly relocated to Woodstock, N.Y., where they have grappled with mounting medical expenses.
