With more than 100 supporters filling the steps of City Hall and chanting ''Charles in charge,'' Charles Barron, the Democratic city councilman from Brooklyn and a former Black Panther, announced his plan to run for mayor in 2005.
Later, he received a major endorsement, that of the Rev. Al Sharpton, during a Martin Luther King's Birthday celebration at the Canaan Baptist Church of Christ, on West 116th Street in Harlem.
Since being elected to the Council in 2001, Mr. Barron has been outspoken in his advocacy of black causes and his criticism of other council members.
A self-described black revolutionary who represents the East New York and Brownsville neighborhoods of Brooklyn, he has called for slave reparations and for replacing City Hall portraits of white historical figures with those of black figures.
He has also called Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg racist for saying minority parents did not understand how poorly their children were being educated in public schools.
Yesterday, he described his platform as ''a people's platform'' that included proposals for a renter's rebate to counter the homeowner's property tax rebate recently proposed by Mr. Bloomberg, free tuition at the City University of New York, taxes aimed at New Yorkers who make more than $250,000 a year, and other taxes like a stock transfer tax and a tax for Internet purchases.
Mr. Barron said he chose Martin Luther King's Birthday to make his announcement because just as Dr. King had developed ''a radical vision'' that called for ''a more equitable distribution of wealth in this country,'' he was now ''calling for a new structure in city government that is racially and gender balanced.'' Changes are needed, he added, because ''too few white men have too much power right now.''
Mr. Barron was much more specific at Mr. Sharpton's event, where he ticked off the names of many New York political leaders and derisively noted that they were all white men.
He also took on Mayor Bloomberg, who had just left after telling the crowd about his plan to put police officers in the schools to help keep students safe. Mr. Barron said: ''We don't need no police in our schools. We don't need our schools to be turned into prisons.''
Mr. Sharpton said he and Mr. Barron had taken part in protests together and spent time in jail together after one of those protests. Addressing Mr. Barron, he said: ''Charles, you served. You've been there every hearing, you stood there every march, you spent nights in jail, you took the lies and the criticism, you took the editorials that distorted you, you served us and were loyal to us, and if nobody's there for you, I'm going to be there for you. Because you've been there for us.''
George Arzt, a veteran political consultant, said that although the endorsement would help galvanize black support for Mr. Barron, ''he still is a marginal candidate.''
Many had expected Mr. Sharpton to support Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president who lost the Democratic primary in 2001 and who is considering a run in 2005. But Mr. Arzt noted that Mr. Sharpton's support for Mr. Ferrer in 2001 ''was a double-edged sword because Ferrer lost some white support because of his alliance with Sharpton.''
Mr. Barron scoffed at political pundits who have said he has no chance of becoming mayor.
''This is a serious campaign, and I am in it to win it,'' Mr. Barron said, even though, he said, he ''has not a penny right now'' in campaign funds.
