Monica Ali's ''Brick Lane'' (Scribner) will vie for National Book Critics Circle honors this year against fiction by Edward P. Jones (''The Known World,'' Amistad/HarperCollins), Caryl Phillips (''A Distant Shore,'' Alfred A. Knopf), Richard Powers (''The Time of Our Singing,'' Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux) and Tobias Wolff (''Old School,'' Knopf).
Besides announcing its nominees in several categories yesterday, the circle said it would give its Ivan Sandrof Lifetime Achievement Award to Studs Terkel, the Pulitzer Prize-winning author, oral historian and radio personality. The group's Nona Balakian Citation for Excellence in Reviewing will go to Scott McLemee, a senior writer at The Chronicle of Higher Education. The winners are to be announced at the National Book Critics Circle's 30th annual award ceremony on March 4 at the New School in Manhattan.
General nonfiction nominees are ''The Bounty: The True Story of the Mutiny on the Bounty'' by Carolyn Alexander (Viking), ''Gulag'' by Anne Applebaum (Doubleday), ''Sons of Mississippi'' by Paul Hendrickson (Knopf), ''Random Family: Love, Drugs, Trouble and Coming of Age in the Bronx'' by Adrian Nicole LeBlanc (Scribner) and ''Rising Up and Rising Down'' by William T. Vollmann (McSweeney's).
The nominees for biography and autobiography are ''A Tragic Honesty: The Life and Work of Richard Yates'' by Blake Bailey (Picador), ''The Life You Save May Be Your Own: An American Pilgrimage'' by Paul Elie (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux), ''Jonathan Edwards'' by George Marsden (Yale University Press), ''Lucia Joyce: To Dance in the Wake'' by Carol Loeb Schloss (Farrar Straus &amp; Giroux) and ''Khrushchev: The Man and His Era'' by William Taubman (W. W. Norton).
The poetry nominees are ''Blue Hour'' by Carolyn Forché (HarperCollins), ''What Narcissism Means to Me'' by Tony Hoagland (Graywolf), ''She Says'' by Venus Khoury-Ghata (Graywolf), ''Columbarium'' by Susan Stewart (University of Chicago Press) and ''Granted'' by Mary Szybist (Alice James Books). The nominees in criticism are ''Gritos'' by Dagoberto Gilb (Grove), ''Songbook'' by Nick Hornby (McSweeney's), Michelangelo &amp; the Pope's Ceiling'' by Ross King (Walker), ''River of Shadows: Eadweard Muybridge and the Technological Wild West'' by Rebecca Solnit (Viking) and ''Regarding the Pain of Others'' by Susan Sontag (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux).
