The gavel is not falling just on executives in the United States.
On Wednesday, as jury selection in the trial of Martha Stewart begins in New York, a German court will open proceedings against Josef Ackermann, the chief executive of Deutsche Bank, and three other former directors of a telecommunications conglomerate, on charges that they approved the payment of improper bonuses to its executives.
Germans are likely to watch Mr. Ackermann's legal battle every bit as avidly as Americans track Ms. Stewart's securities fraud trial. In some ways, the stakes for German industry are higher.
Mr. Ackermann is, by dint of his position, the most powerful banker in Germany. Unlike several American executives who face trial in the coming weeks, he remains on the job and in charge.
Deutsche Bank, which has backed him to the hilt, is fitting out an office near the court in Düsseldorf, so Mr. Ackermann can work between the twice-weekly hearings. On Thursday, after court adjourns, he will fly to Davos, Switzerland, to attend the annual World Economic Forum.
Behind this show of confidence lie grave risks for Mr. Ackermann and Deutsche Bank. A guilty verdict would almost certainly force him to step down, not to mention expose him to fines and a jail sentence of as much as 10 years. It would also leave Germany's flagship bank leaderless at the very moment that the banking industry is entering a period of likely consolidation.
The trial, which grew out of the takeover of the conglomerate, Mannesmann, by Vodafone of Britain in 2000, has become something of a referendum on whether executive pay in Germany has spun out of control. The political backdrop could add to the uncertainty of the proceedings.
''Germans have to decide, 'What kind of a system do we want in our country?''' said Marcus Lutter, a professor of law and an expert in corporate governance at the University of Bonn. ''It's unfortunate that we have to decide this social question in a criminal court.''
At issue is whether Mr. Ackermann and other directors of Mannesmann violated the trust of shareholders by awarding 57 million euros ($70 million) in severance and bonuses to Klaus Esser, Mannesmann's chief executive, and other senior managers. Mr. Esser and the former personnel manager of Mannesmann are also on trial.
Such payments would not raise eyebrows in the United States. But in Germany, where as recently as the mid-1990's, few chief executives made more than $500,000 a year, they have become a scandal.
The timing of the payments also raised questions, because they came soon after Mannesmann accepted a $183 billion bid by Vodafone. Prosecutors initially tried to claim that Mr. Esser and his team received the payments in return for dropping their resistance to Vodafone.
But prosecutors later shelved the idea of a conspiracy for a more straightforward argument that the payments violated the trust of shareholders because they enriched the recipients and did not help Mannesmann.
For all the talk about the 57 million euros, legal experts said the amount of the compensation will not be at the heart of the case. Rather, the panel of judges, led by Judge Brigitte Koppenhöfer, is expected to question the motives and competence of the board members.
''This is a question of business judgment,'' said Theodor Baums, an expert in corporate governance at Goethe University in Frankfurt. ''The judges will ask, 'Was the board competent? Was this a self-interested decision? Can they show reasonable grounds for making this decision?'''
Professor Baums, who acted as a legal adviser to Vodafone, said the provisions in German corporate law about executive compensation were vague, stipulating only that it be ''adequate'' to the tasks performed. He predicted it would be difficult to find the board members guilty.
Mr. Ackermann's lawyer, Eberhard Kempf, said he would argue that his client approved the payout to Mr. Esser and other managers because they had sharply increased the value of Mannesmann.
''Esser achieved an extraordinary success for the company, and therefore, Esser deserved an extraordinary reward,'' Mr. Kempf said in an interview. ''Actually, I think it's a fairly simple case.''
Mr. Kempf has been in the middle of many prominent cases. In 1995, he defended Nicholas W. Leeson, the rogue trader who helped bring down the British merchant bank Barings, when he tried to avoid extradition to Singapore. He also represented the von Metzler banking family, whose 11-year-old son was kidnapped and murdered here in 2002.
For Deutsche Bank, the legal bills are worth the money. Losing Mr. Ackermann, a 55-year-old Swiss-born investment banker, could leave the bank adrift at an awkward time, analysts said.
After the deepest downturn since World War II, German banks are positioning themselves for a wave of consolidation. Speculation about mergers, as well as takeovers by foreign giants like Citigroup or the Royal Bank of Scotland, surface daily in Frankfurt's banking circles.
Executives at Deutsche Bank dispute the suggestion that Mr. Ackermann's legal troubles would leave the bank flat-footed. ''He has a very capable management team, with 11 executive board members,'' a spokesman, Detlev Rahmsdorf, said. ''We're a very big institution, so we don't depend on one person.''
But Deutsche Bank has had to devote resources to another legal battle, involving Mr. Ackermann's predecessor, Rolf E. Breuer. The fallen German media tycoon, Leo Kirch, sued Mr. Breuer last week in a New York State court, contending that Mr. Kirch had conspired with John C. Malone, the American cable television magnate, to destroy Mr. Kirch's media empire.
The goal, Mr. Kirch's lawyers say, was to carve up the Kirch Group's cable assets, giving Mr. Malone's Liberty Media control of the German cable market, and Deutsche Bank investment banking fees.
Mr. Rahmsdorf dismissed the charges as ''totally absurd.''
''Dr. Breuer and Mr. Malone have never met and never talked to each other,'' he said. ''There is no relationship whatsoever.''
While the legal squabble with Mr. Kirch is a distraction, Mr. Ackermann's trial goes to the heart of German corporate culture -- and to the kind of globally competitive bank he is trying to build.
At a Deutsche Bank presentation last February, Mr. Ackermann put his case in a national context -- arguing that it was less about ethics than about a destructive bias against corporate executives in Germany. He said it could jeopardize the country's place in the global economy.
''The best Germans don't want to work here,'' Mr. Ackermann said. ''They want to work in London or New York.''
But some reject the argument that the Mannesmann case is that much of a litmus test. Jürgen Kurz, a spokesman for one of Germany's largest shareholder-rights associations, said many of the issues raised had already been thoroughly debated.
The case, Mr. Kurz said, also lacks an obvious victim. ''The shareholders earned a lot of money out of Mannesmann,'' he said.
Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the opening of court proceedings in Germany against Josef Ackermann, chief executive of Deutsche Bank, referred incorrectly to a lawsuit brought by Leo Kirch, the fallen German media baron, against Mr. Ackermann's predecessor, Rolf E. Breuer. It contends that Mr. Breuer, not Mr. Kirch, conspired to destroy Mr. Kirch's media empire.
