Following are excerpts from speeches by the candidates to their supporters last night after the Iowa caucuses, as transcribed by The New York Times (Kerry, Edwards and Gephardt) and Federal Document Clearing House (Dean):
John Kerry
George Bush, to put it quite simply, has run the most arrogant, inept, reckless and ideological foreign policy in the modern history of our country. And we are going to turn it around by joining the community of nations. We will go back to the United Nations, and we will turn over a new chapter in America's relationship with the world.
Now Karl Rove and George Bush have already announced that they intend to run this election on national security. And you can understand why. You can understand why. They can't exactly run on jobs. They can't exactly run on health care for all Americans. They can't exactly run on having left no child behind. They can't run on the environment and advancing the cause of humankind. So they will run on national security.
And I look forward to reminding them that I know something about aircraft carriers for real, ladies and gentlemen. If George Bush wants to make national security the central issue of this campaign, I have three words for him we know he understands: Bring it on.
John Edwards
I came here a year ago with a belief that we can change this country, with a belief that the politics of what was possible, the politics of hope could overcome the politics of cynicism. I have been all over the state of Iowa, I have been on main streets, in cafes, in people's homes. The people of Iowa tonight confirmed that they believe in a positive, uplifting vision to change America. And not only that, tonight we started a movement to change this country that will sweep across America. Tonight we began it.
Howard Dean
We have just begun to fight. We have just begun to fight.
And we're going to fight and fight and fight until this country becomes a place where we'll put more money into small children and their families than we will into prisons.
Where, instead of giving $16 billion worth of tax breaks to oil companies and gas companies, we'll put it into renewable energy and ethanol and biodiesel.
Where, instead of giving $200 billion to the H.M.O.'s and insurance companies and the pharmaceutical companies, we'll give seniors a real prescription benefit.
Richard A. Gephardt
Tonight I congratulate the other candidates for their strong campaigns here in Iowa. One of them will wind up carrying the banner of the great Democratic Party in this election, and they will have earned it. And I will support that candidate in any way that I can.
My campaign to fight for working people may be ending tonight, but our fight will never end. We will reclaim the White House in 2004 because we have to. The eyes of the world are watching us and they're watching us in ways that sometimes in the past they never have. And in the end, we will prevail.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
