With the vicious, vocal fan base in full roar over the talk-radio airwaves Monday morning, Eagles Coach Andy Reid inserted himself squarely into the debate over culprits for his team's third straight loss in a conference championship game.
After addressing his players, who cleaned out their lockers to face a long and bitter off-season, Reid addressed the questions about what went wrong in the Eagles' 14-3 loss to the Panthers Sunday night. He refused to blame the rib injury that rendered quarterback Donovan McNabb ineffective. He refused to criticize his wide receivers, who were roundly roasted in the fans' talk-radio debates. He would not discuss how injuries had pocked the Eagles' run defense.
Reid insisted that most of the fingers be pointed at him.
''Offensively, I could have put guys in better positions,'' he said. ''We had some calls that I would love to have back. I think generally, when getting opportunities to make plays, we need to do a better job at that.''
Reid did not want to jump ahead to the team's upcoming personnel issues, beyond saying he would meet with all three of the team's major free agents to be, running back Duce Staley, and cornerbacks Bobby Taylor and Troy Vincent, by the end of the day. All three expressed skepticism that they would return to the Eagles.
Reid also said McNabb's injury -- a cartilage separation in his ribs -- might have been serious enough to keep McNabb out of the Super Bowl, had the Eagles won the game.
Of course, they did not win, which is what made Reid's job so painful on Monday.
Reid did laud his players for their toughness in bouncing back from an 0-2 start to the season, winning 12 of their last 14 games to win the National Football Conference East. Reid said that toughness would help the Eagles bounce back from this latest defeat.
It will be a difficult one to rebound from. The Eagles were the first N.F.L. team to play host to a conference championship game in consecutive seasons and lose both. They became the first team since the Dallas Cowboys in 1980, 1981 and 1982 to lose three straight conference championship games.
''The thing that you can take care of is, you can have a great off-season,'' Reid said. ''All the other stuff and everything that's written or said, you can't worry about that. Get back to what you can control and that's having a heck of an off-season, coming into training camp ready to go and get ready to play football. That starts today.
''We back up from football a little bit, then we get right back at it and get ourselves right.''
Reid said everything would be evaluated by him; the team president, Joe Banner; and the player personnel director, Tom Heckert, including personnel and coaching failings. In the last two conference championship losses, the Eagles scored only one touchdown.
''I would say that is not a very good state,'' Reid said. ''We did not play well offensively. But, I've got to take a hard look at myself on that and then I'll go from there.''
The players were somber, as expected, as they cleared out their lockers for an off-season that came too soon for them. When asked how long this disappointment would last, receiver James Thrash said, ''Probably forever.''
PRO FOOTBALL
