For weeks, reporters practicing the tricky art of political prognostication here declared the Iowa Democratic caucuses to be a two-man race, with former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont riding to front-runner status on a jet stream of antiwar sentiment and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri close behind.
That piece of conventional wisdom and countless others, espoused on television and radio, in newspapers and magazines, were incinerated Monday night, as political punditry went into a frenzied recalculation of voter sentiment that was certain to reset the tone of the coverage for the race as it heads to New Hampshire.
When Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts emerged as a clear winner around 8:30 in Iowa, some members of the mainstream media were asking themselves whether they had missed the story, or whether it had simply changed at hyperspeed.
Despite polls showing late surges by Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, many pundits still believed as late as Sunday that Dr. Dean had the best chance to win.
Asked on Fox News on Sunday what his gut was telling him about the likely outcome, even David Yepsen, a political columnist and longtime caucus watcher for The Des Moines Register, said: ''I think Howard Dean's still in pretty good shape. I mean, even though these polls are showing Kerry and Edwards surging, Edwards just doesn't have the organization that the other candidates do.''
But at 11 Monday night, Wolf Blitzer declared on CNN, ''The pundits had basically written off John Kerry and John Edwards, yet they did so remarkably well here.''
Jon Banner, the executive producer of ''World News Tonight'' on ABC, said in a telephone interview: ''The race was turned on its head. I don't know that we missed the story, but the story changed.''
Television viewers on Monday night watched a real-time, hard shift in political wisdom as the early results seemed to take anchors and commentators by surprise on all of the major networks.
For the first time since the campaign began there was real data, in the form of entrance polls and actual caucus results, and that data debunked several of the theories that had been bouncing around the news media for months. Suddenly, with the capture of Saddam Hussein, perhaps the war was no longer the overwhelming issue of the campaign, several commentators said. And perhaps new issues -- the economy, health care -- were more important.
William Kristol marveled on the Fox News Channel on Monday night: ''War is not a disqualifier among huge majorities. That's terrible for Dean.''
The writing had been on the wall for a few days that Dr. Dean would perhaps not march so easily to victory. But many reporters were loathe to put too much stock in any polls showing a shift in the race because of the deliberative caucus system here, in which voters may arrive ready to support one candidate only to shift to somebody else if their candidates do not meet minimum thresholds of support.
''When MSNBC/Reuters/Zogby had the poll which showed Kerry ahead, people held their breath and said, What does that mean?'' said Tim Russert, the moderator of ''Meet the Press'' on NBC, referring to results released last week showing Mr. Kerry leaping to the head of the pack. ''That won't hold up.''
Many seasoned commentators said they believed that even if the polls were correct in determining voter sentiment here, it would make little difference because caucuses had traditionally been won by those with the strongest organizations, regardless of things like momentum.
Some commentators said the most important factor that seemed to have been lost on political reporters and commentators was the level of uncertainty among the electorate and the softness of some voters' commitments to the candidates they claimed to support.
Bob Schieffer, moderator of ''Face the Nation'' on CBS, said, ''It was clear to me that this thing was very fluid and it was very, very volatile.''
That, he said, made it a bit hard to peg.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE POLLS
