Just before Connecticut beat Rutgers, 72-47, in women's basketball Monday, the former United States Senator Birch Bayh of Indiana reminisced about Title IX legislation that he had championed in the 1970's and how it had advanced the cause of women's athletics.
Bayh was among the crowd of 16,294 who saw Diana Taurasi lead the Huskies with 27 points, 4 rebounds, 3 assists and 3 steals to improve their record to 13-2 over all and 4-1 in the Big East.
Bayh, honored by the university before the game, said Connecticut was ''the first university that took on the conventional wisdom that people wouldn't pay to see'' sports like women's basketball. Referring to the sold-out Hartford Civic Center, Bayh said, ''You won't be able to find an open chair.''
But not all the fans stayed in their seats. Some stood briefly early in the second half because of Taurasi. On a broken play, with time running out on the shot clock, Taurasi somehow found the ball in her hands at the top of the key.
With no other options, she casually lofted a jump shot that fell through the net for one of her seven 3-pointers. It looked so nonchalant yet confident that she could not keep the smile from her face.
The fans saw this and cheered as she backpedaled up the court. Taurasi responded by applauding back and raising her palms upward to encourage the audience. ''I was just having a good time,'' she said.
She and her teammates have not had that much fun lately. With two defeats in their previous five games and an unimpressive victory over Boston College on Saturday, the Huskies -- winners of the last two national championships -- have seen their ranking plunge from first in the country to No. 5 in Monday's Associated Press poll.
Huskies Coach Geno Auriemma was not happy with Taurasi's 12 points against B.C. or her 11 points in a defeat at Notre Dame in the previous game. He said she was not taking enough shots, so he told her what few coaches tell a senior superstar: Get selfish.
''He said, 'You're not having any fun out there,' '' Taurasi said. ''If I have a weakness, it's sometimes I'm not selfish enough.''
Auriemma, using his nickname for Taurasi, said it was a ''rare occasion where you tap into something 'D' happens to agree with.''
On Monday, she found the balance and made others around her better with a display of versatility that showed why she was the player of the year last season. In the first half, Taurasi set up a layup by Willnett Crockett with a no-look pass to the right wing on the fast break. In the second half, she fell to the floor underneath the basket and won a tussle for a rebound against Michelle Campbell, who fouled Taurasi.
Later, when the bandaged and limping Shalicia Hurns of Rutgers tried for a layup, Taurasi snatched the ball from her hands, ran the floor and sank another 3-pointer.
''In a game like this, when you really want to make a statement, I was a little more aggressive,'' Taurasi said.
Rutgers, which fell to 9-7 and 2-3, had only eight players healthy enough to play, and Chelsea Newton, with her shoulder wrapped, left in the second half with a leg injury. With a makeup game against Temple on Wednesday, Coach C. Vivian Stringer said she would be grateful if it snowed and the game was postponed again.
Cappie Pondexter led Rutgers with 13 points. Taurasi was 10 for 15 from the field and took no free throws, reflecting the defensive effort that Stringer alluded to when she said, ''we're not stupid.''
''I would have loved to have covered Taurasi better,'' she said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
