Scientists excavating a tomb in the Nile Valley have stumbled upon the remains of a mummified lion, strengthening the long-held belief that ancient Egyptians worshiped it as a sacred beast.
The lion, a male, was found carefully nestled against a wall in the tomb of Maïa, a prominent Egyptian thought to have been a wet nurse to King Tutankhamen in the 14th century B.C. But archaeologists suspect the remains may have been placed there centuries later, when the tomb was frequently used to bury other Egyptians and revered animals, like cats.
The findings were reported in the latest issue of the journal Nature.
''We knew from inscriptions that lions existed in Egypt, but not a single one had ever been found,'' said Dr. Alain Zivie, a French archaeologist who led the team that made the discovery. ''I think Maïa would have been much surprised to know there was a lion buried in her tomb.''
For 20 years, Dr. Zivie's team has been excavating Saqqara, a burial ground near the ancient city of Memphis in northern Egypt. They discovered Maïa's elaborate tomb there in 1996 and slowly began working their way through its multiple chambers.
Five years later, in a section of the tomb dedicated to Bastet, the cat-headed goddess, they spotted the lion's undisturbed skeleton perched on a rock. Placed in a room cluttered with the bones of other animals, it might have been mistaken for the remains of a mummified cat, Dr. Zivie said, save for its sheer size.
''Mummified cats are very common, but this was immediately unusual because it was so big,'' Dr. Zivie said.
Though the skeleton was missing the characteristic linen bandages of a mummy, its position and discoloration indicated some form of preservation, which would have been complicated for an animal so big. Dr. Zivie said an analysis of its teeth suggested that it had lived in captivity and had died naturally.
Depictions of the lion as a divine beast, often with human characteristics, like the Sphinx are tightly woven into Egyptian art and mythology.
Ancient texts and inscriptions describe sacred burial proceedings, yet until now the only known animal cemeteries in Egypt held baboons, dogs, cats and even fish.
''This is pretty significant because it will add to the overall picture of what we know about religion and cult in Egypt,'' said Dr. Emily Teeter, an Egyptologist at the University of Chicago who was not involved with the excavation.
Why this lion ended up where it did is still unclear. One theory is that it was considered an incarnation of Mahes, a god with the head of a lion. But the skeleton's proximity to the sanctuary of Bastet, Dr. Teeter said, suggests that it was actually thought to represent Sekhmet, the mother of Mahes and an alter ego of Bastet.
Dr. Zivie plans to run more tests on the skeleton that may reveal the lion's age and details about its life. Its bone measurements, he said, are among the largest ever documented for a male lion.
