He burst into the ballroom, fists thrust in the air, and slapped a string of high-fives with the dozens of labor union members standing onstage. He grabbed hold of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa and yanked his hand up, too. He whipped off his suit coat and rolled his sleeves up as far as they would go.
This is how Howard Dean marked the first loss of his charmed political life.
''We will not give up,'' he bellowed to the fiery crowd, grabbing one of the American flags being waved and thrashing it around.
Shouting himself hoarse, Dr. Dean readopted some of the growling, angry outsider tone that had propelled his earlier insurgency as he spun through the list of states where he planned to fight the next rounds: from New Hampshire to South Carolina to Massachusetts and North Carolina, the latter two the homes of the men who beat him here.
With a fierce grin and a red face, he vowed, ''We will not quit now or ever!''
The performance masked what must have been disappointment for Dr. Dean, who until a couple of weeks ago seemed almost invincible and on his way to a clear-cut victory here, but ended up with 18 percent of the vote, only enough for the bronze.
Though he had risen from, as he liked to say, a mere asterisk in the race a year ago, Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, had sat comfortably in the front-runner's seat through the fall.
The defeat on Monday came after months of near-constant attacks by several of his Democratic rivals. With innovative use of the Internet not just to collect donations but also to link like-minded supporters in a call to action in their communities, Dr. Dean began to attract several leading Democrats -- the Washington kind he had often condemned -- to his insurgent banner.
But the endorsements from Mr. Harkin, Iowa's most popular Democrat; former Vice President Al Gore; two of the nation's largest unions; and 35 members of Congress seemed to complicate Dr. Dean's message more than help spread it. His own gaffs -- insulting fellow party members as Republicans, acknowledging he had a foreign-policy hole to plug in his résumé, promising to appeal to Southerners who identify with the Confederate flag -- were grist for his opponents.
One sign of how the campaign had changed was on the stage, where members of the endorsing unions, in color-coded T-shirts, were joined by prominent local elected officials. Earlier in the campaign, those spots were usually filled by the anonymous yet ''ordinary people'' Dr. Dean says he represents.
Many Democrats say that perhaps the most profound shift in his fortune followed the capture of Saddam Hussein last month, when Dr. Dean declared the United States no safer. Opposition to the Iraq war had propelled his campaign, but his statement drew criticism and led many Democrats to question whether he could take on the president on the critical issue of terrorism.
In fact, polls of people arriving at the caucuses on Monday night found that of Dr. Dean's supporters, most decided to back him more than a month ago, before Mr. Hussein's capture.
Using his slogan ''you have the power,'' Dr. Dean said over the weekend that he expected the field organization that he built here, along with his more than 100 days traversing Iowa and the 3,500 volunteers who came from out of state this month, to bring the caucus home.
''One person can't do anything, but half a million people can,'' he told a throng of more than a thousand young supporters at Iowa State University in Ames just before the caucuses began, referring to the number of names on his Web site's e-mail list. ''Tonight, about three hours from now we're going to find out whether this all works or not. You're going to prove it to yourself and prove it to all of us.''
The question hovering over his campaign since summer has been whether the passionate crowds he drew for rallies, fervent supporters showering undecided voters with handwritten pleas for support, and vibrant online community would translate into votes.
But a funny thing happened on the way to the caucuses. New people turned out, as Dr. Dean had hoped, according to an entrance poll that showed half the caucusgoers had not taken part in one before. But, the poll found, most chose Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts instead.
''All the phone-calling we did, we'd have people who'd say, 'I'm a Dean supporter, I'm a Dean supporter.' '' said Kelly Chambers, Dr. Dean's captain in Precinct No. 83. ''But when it came to caucus night, we only had 11 people show up for Dean. It just seems like all my hard work's been for nothing.''
The evening unfolded in bizarre fashion as hundreds of supporters milled about the half-filled ballroom here, devoid of the normal election night big-screen televisions on which to watch the results. Instead, the supporters passed results from their own precincts along with beers from the cash bar until suddenly, just after 8 p.m., word rippled through that Dr. Dean had all but conceded on ''Larry King Live'' on CNN.
Throughout the week, as his star seemed to be slipping, Dr. Dean promised to stick around through primaries and caucuses in all 50 states, predicting that his campaign coffers would easily carry him to the July convention.
Monday night, after a brief, explosive speech that could hardly be categorized as a concession, Dr. Dean worked the rope line like a rock star for about 10 minutes, then bolted the ballroom and the state, bound for a chartered jet and a predawn rally in Portsmouth, N.H.
As televisions on the press bus showed Mr. Kerry make his victory speech, Dean aides snarked about him stealing their lines, their message, their voters, and their thunder.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
