PricewaterhouseCoopers, the accounting and consulting company, announced yesterday that it had completed its long-anticipated deal to move to a new home at Madison Avenue and 42nd Street in one of the largest leasing deals in three years.
Pricewaterhouse signed a lease for 800,000 square feet, or two-thirds of the newly completed tower at 300 Madison Avenue, where it plans to move 3,500 employees in the next year. The 35-story building will most likely be named PricewaterhouseCoopers Center.
The deal followed a game of real-estate musical chairs. Brookfield Financial Properties originally built the tower for CIBC World Markets. But CIBC, the Canadian investment bank, reconsidered moving its whole New York operation there after the Sept. 11 terrorist attack and began looking for a subtenant. Finding one was not easy. There was lots of competition for tenants, because vacancy rates were up and rents down.
Pricewaterhouse itself had long been in the market for a Midtown spot to consolidate its operations. After chasing a number of prospects elsewhere, the company landed on 300 Madison, but it did not want to make a move until it had a tenant for its current space at 1177 Avenue of the Americas, between 45th and 46th Streets.
Up jumped Kramer, Levin, Naftalis &amp; Frankel, a law firm with offices at 919 and 909 Third Avenue. Kramer, Levin agreed to lease 283,000 square feet at 1177 Avenue of the Americas in a move that represents both a consolidation and an expansion.
The deals, which were struck simultaneously, were something of a full-employment act for real estate companies. Lou Varsames of the CLW Real Estate Services Group was lead adviser to Pricewaterhouse, while CB Richard Ellis was a co-broker. Newmark &amp; Company represented Kramer, Levin and Pricewaterhouse at 1177 Avenue of the Americas and was a financial adviser to Pricewaterhouse on 300 Madison. And Brookfield represented CIBC, which will occupy the rest of the space at 300 Madison.
''The market is showing some real activity,'' said Scott Klau, executive vice president for Newmark. ''People perceive that we've reached bottom. Whether perception turns into reality, we'll see.''
