''It's by the big balloon, not more than 500 yards from the Ritz-Carlton, but there's really nothing to see,'' Richard Campbell said with a discernible lack of enthusiasm.
At lunch in the new Ritz-Carlton Hotel on Potsdamer Platz one day last week, I had to cajole Mr. Campbell, a former United States Army intelligence officer from the cold war period who now gives historical tours of Berlin, into giving up even that sketchy detail.
No one in Berlin really wants to discuss the dark past these days, and who in the world can blame them? Here's a traveler who has come to town for the first time as Berlin struggles to put itself back on the map as a major destination for business travelers and tourists, and the first thing he wants to do is find the site of the bunker where Hitler killed himself in 1945 as Russian troops bore down?
At this stage of history, Berliners are understandably reluctant to continue confronting the past. I was aware of the potential for cultural faux pas I presented in insisting on finding that one awful place.
Raffeale Sorrentino, the chief concierge at the Hotel Adlon near the Brandenburg Gate, actually pinpointed the bunker site exactly on a map for me when I stopped in for a tour of the hotel later that day. I trudged over in a gloomy drizzle and found the unmarked site just past a muddy lot on which a giant facsimile of a multicolored hot-air balloon towers over a small recreation field for children.
The government officials and developers who want to reposition Berlin as the cultural and economic hub for middle Europe understandably cringe at these things. Berlin, they say with justification, is an exciting world capital vibrating with creative energy and economic potential just 13 years after the fall of the wall and the difficult, breathtakingly expensive reunification of Germany that ensued.
Yet I think that those who grew up in the postwar and cold war eras come here, as first timers, with a deep compulsion to experience a past that Berlin has gratefully relegated to the history books.
One drizzly evening, for example, I walked along Friedrichstrasse to the famous Checkpoint Charlie site where American and East German forces once stared down one another at the Berlin Wall, initially feeling very John le Carré in my drab olive trench coat, vintage Macy's 1985. But by the time I reached the sandbags on an island in the middle of the street at the recreated checkpoint guardhouse, I was feeling more like an ill-dressed rube wandering past the high-fashion boutiques and flashy restaurants that now dominate the once-forlorn East German neighborhood.
This underscored the new reality for me. While the city struggles with 18 percent unemployment, tourism officials are seeking recognition among potential visitors that Berlin, at staggering economic expense since unification, has emerged from the past to claim its place among the great global capitals. The opening of the luxury 302-room Ritz-Carlton Hotel last week with a black-tie reception was seen as merely the most recent evidence of that.
Berlin now has 70,000 hotel rooms, twice the number of a decade ago, said Hanns P. Nerger, the president of Berlin Tourism Marketing, the city's tourism agency. Another 10,000 rooms are ''in the pipeline,'' he said. Many of those new rooms, like the Ritz-Carlton's, are concentrated in the top echelon of hotels, he added. From the local hoteliers' perspective, ''the biggest problem is the tough competition'' for customers among the luxury hotels like the Adlon, the Ritz-Carlton and the Four Seasons.
One consequence is you can find a great hotel here at a very good price. In 2002, for example, the average room rate for four-star and five-star hotels in Berlin was about $140, well below that in London (about $350) and in other cities including Paris, Milan, Rome, Barcelona, Amsterdam and Madrid, according to a survey cited by the tourist board.
The past, meanwhile, continues fading into the mist. In October, Tempelhof Airport, a haunting example of colossal Nazi architecture in the middle of the city and a relic of the cold war Berlin airlift, will close forever, said Burkhard Kieker, the director for information and marketing for Berlin International Airports.
A vast expansion of the outlying Schönefeld Airport is about to begin. When the new Schönefeld -- rechristened as Berlin Brandenburg International Airport -- opens in about six years, Tegel Airport, which is now Berlin's main international airport, will also be shut. Now a center for short-haul holiday flights among the low-cost carriers, Schönefeld is being rebuilt as a major hub - with high-speed train links as alternatives to flying for trips of three hours and less.
The airport project will bring in 20,000 jobs, Mr. Kieker said. Just the news that such an effort is under way, he added, would probably attract renewed interest among world airlines in re-establishing Berlin as a major destination for overseas business and leisure travelers.
Astonishingly, the capital of Germany does not offer nonstop fights to and from the United States, not even on Lufthansa.
''No one can believe it,'' Mr. Kieker said. ''Lufthansa canceled its daily nonstop Berlin-Washington-Berlin service the day after Sept. 11.'' American carriers, which then had been reconsidering opening nonstop routes that were abandoned in the early 1990's, ''postponed their plans,'' he said.
''We are quite confident, however, that there will be American carriers flying nonstop routes'' to and from Berlin by next year, Mr. Kieker said.
On the Road appears each Tuesday. E-mail: jsharkey@nytimes.com.
ON THE ROAD
