All it takes is a crossover and the crowd is in love. Stephon Marbury is just as smitten.
Madison Square Garden, starved so long for a Knicks point guard who could switch directions on a dime -- never mind millions -- seems caught in rapturous wonder whenever Marbury fakes out defenders with the dribble, pulls up for a shot or finds an open teammate.
''It's like you want to do something every time,'' Marbury said, reciting what gets him going. ''Things like, 'Ooh, aah,' and then you hear it, that's what you feed off of. You want to make more oohs.''
Those oohs have replaced the boos of the pre-Isiah Thomas, pre-Marbury and pre-Lenny Wilkens era. Wilkens, coaching against the team that fired him last April, watched yesterday as Marbury scored 24 of his game-high 28 points in the second half and finished with 14 assists, thrilling the matinee audience of 19,308 with a 90-79 victory over the Toronto Raptors.
Toronto's own star, Vince Carter, missed his second straight game with a strained right quadriceps. He missed 39 games to injury last season.
In his best all-around performance in his eight games since coming to New York eight games ago, Marbury led the Knicks to their fourth straight victory, their third under Wilkens and the fifth since he joined the team.
''It makes us tremendously better because you know he can turn it on offensively when he wants to,'' Allan Houston said. ''But when he's making plays like that, when he gets so explosive, he gets everybody open, gets everybody involved, gets everybody in a rhythm, gives everybody confidence.''
While Keith Van Horn had his worst shooting game (1 of 9) of the season, Houston scored 17 points and Othella Harrington added 10 off the bench.
The Knicks (19-24) have had far more options with Marbury running the high pick-and-roll with Kurt Thomas and Michael Doleac; he comes off their screens and deftly bounces a pass behind his back to either one, waiting at the elbow of the free-throw line.
''I know if I set a good screen for Steph, he's going to come off free or I'm going to end up free,'' said Thomas, who was 8 of 16 for 16 points. Doleac added 7, hitting 3 of 5 from the field.
''That guy might be working his way to an extension,'' Marbury quipped.
Marbury started slowly and the Knicks did not break away. But on the final play of the second quarter, he penetrated and found Houston behind the arc, and Houston knocked down a buzzer-beater for a 40-36 halftime lead.
Then Marbury carried the Knicks on a 9-2 run at the start of the second half, but the Raptors (20-19) began ripping apart the Knicks' defense, launching a 14-3 run that tied the score, 52-52, behind Jalen Rose and the rookie center Chris Bosh.
While Kevin O'Neill, the Raptors' coach and the former Knicks assistant, was in perpetual motion, cursing and encouraging his players, Wilkens stood with his arms crossed or sat on the bench. He did not call a timeout until the Raptors tied the score with 6 minutes 26 seconds to play in the third quarter.
''They have to learn how to stop runs,'' said Wilkens, who has been criticized at times for such a deliberate approach to timeouts. ''It was early enough in the game I felt, 'O.K., we can do this.' ''
Houston said that by not calling a timeout, Wilkens made his players more accountable on defense.
''He is just so cool and so calm on the sidelines,'' Marbury said. ''He makes it seem like everything is always O.K.''
By the final 36.3 seconds of that quarter, it was. Marbury helped the Knicks pull away with a swift pass to Harrington that made the score 64-61, and a spectacular play where, on a fast break, he faked a pass back to Thomas and instead layed in the ball to give the Knicks a 66-61 advantage.
Wilkens gave the team time to readjust because he knew that Marbury could stabilize things. But Wilkens knows more than that, Isiah Thomas said.
''I know some people nowadays question him; the real judges are the people who are in the Hall of Fame and who vote on the Hall of Fame,'' said Thomas, who was inducted last June. ''I think they know just a bit more about basketball than a lot of us.''
Wilkens did not have to tell Marbury to be more aggressive to start the second half. ''I encourage him all the time,'' Wilkens said. ''I think he's doing a great job of setting things up and running the show,'' Wilkens said. ''In the second half he came out and really went after it.''
Marbury led a 9-0 run to begin the fourth quarter, putting the game out of reach at 75-61 by stepping back and pulling up for 18-foot jumpers. He shot 11 for 20.
''I don't think our defense was a problem today, but I think Stephon Marbury was a problem,'' O'Neill said. ''He played a great basketball game, and when he is making jump shots like that, he's very difficult to keep in check.''
REBOUNDS
The Knicks moved into a tie for the eighth playoff spot with Philadelphia. ALLAN HOUSTON, who guaranteed the Knicks would make the playoffs this season, said he could ''definitely sense more electricity in the Garden.''
''You can sense that even though we're not in the playoffs right now,'' he said, ''everybody knows or believes we eventually will be and they're coming to see a playoff team.''
PRO BASKETBALL
