The Bloomberg administration, after a two-year review of the city's property tax laws, has delayed a broad legislative push to overhaul New York City's tax assessment system after concluding such changes would be politically impossible in Albany now.
The city Finance Department is still moving ahead with internal changes in how it supervises its staff of assessors and to modernize the equipment they use.
But the second major piece of Finance Commissioner Martha E. Stark's agenda -- to modernize the laws that dictate how the city divvies up its $12 billion property tax burden--will be put off for an undetermined amount of time.
Ms. Stark said on Friday that the delay was needed to examine more closely how any legislative changes would affect the city's property tax system. ''Before I would put the proposal before my boss or any boss, I want to know what the impact of it is,'' she said.
But others, including a Bloomberg administration official and a real estate lawyer involved in the debate, say that top officials in City Hall put a stop to her agenda, concluding that it was not worth trying to fight what would probably be a losing battle in Albany or take the risk of a backlash that might result from some of the changes that Ms. Stark wanted in the law.
''Some of the proposals were politically impossible,'' said the City Hall official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''It would have been a huge political lift.''
After the indictment in February 2002 of 18 current and former tax assessors on corruption charges--a scheme that cost the city tens of millions of dollars--Ms. Stark told the City Council that the city should move aggressively to address not only internal weaknesses in the oversight of the assessors, but also longstanding problems in the state laws.
''The assessor scandal has been extremely painful for New York City,'' Ms. Stark told the City Council in December 2002. ''It has undermined the public's confidence in a system that was already in need of an overhaul. But at least it has given us the impetus to make that overhaul.''
In releasing a final report of a task force established after the indictments, Ms. Stark on Friday detailed once again the internal changes the Finance Department is undertaking to provide more oversight for the city assessors and to at least try to clarify for the public how the property tax system works.
More random reviews of assessments are being conducted, for example, and additional investigators have been hired. The city also intends to buy new equipment, like handheld computers, for its assessors who must place values on properties each year, and it is banning most interaction between the assessors and property owners to reduce the likelihood that bribes might be offered to change assessments.
''What we want to do is get our Finance house in order,'' she said on Friday. ''There's a lot of things that we can do that much improves this process. And then look at the bigger picture.''
The task force report also calls for limited legislative changes, including letting the city make public information contained in annual statements submitted by owners of office buildings and other income-producing properties, so the public can better understand how the city sets assessment values on commercial properties.
But perhaps the most notable part of the final report is what it did not call for.
Ms. Stark is among those who have long argued that owners of cooperative apartments in Manhattan, on average, benefit by paying property tax bills that do not fairly reflect the market value of the units they own, while co-op owners in the other boroughs pay unusually large bills.
Also, owners of homes in neighborhoods where values are not rising quickly, like Pelham Parkway and Baychester in the Bronx, East Harlem in Manhattan and Coney Island in Brooklyn, typically pay proportionately higher taxes than owners of homes in popular sections of the city, like Park Slope or Cobble Hill in Brooklyn. These disparities are a result of a law that caps the billable amount real estate values can increase each year, resulting over the long term in major distortions in how residential properties are valued across the city.
The system is now so distorted that the owner of a single-family home worth about $400,000 in one city neighborhood can pay more in annual property taxes than a town house elsewhere that is valued at $1.4 million.
Finally, homeowners will continue each year to get tax bills in New York City in which there appears to be no rational connection between what the house is worth on the open market -- based on neighborhood sales -- and what the city assigns to the house as its assessed value, a result of a law that Ms. Stark also has said she thinks is flawed.
The laws produce a system that, at times, is not only inequitable, Ms. Stark has said, but it is also incomprehensible to the average person, therefore making the system more prone to corruption.
Bloomberg administration officials said in interviews last week that these shortcomings in the law are real. The concern was not that the rewriting of the laws would face intense opposition, one city official said. It was just that getting it done in Albany would require the city to put less emphasis on other more pressing priorities, particularly those that are needed to help the city balance its budget this year.
''The last time, an overhaul of the property tax system took years and an override of a gubernatorial veto,'' one aide to Mr. Bloomberg said, referring to the previous rewriting of the city's property tax laws two decades ago. ''There is only so much time in the day and so much political capital.''
Councilman David Weprin, chairman of the Council's Finance Committee, said he thought the Bloomberg administration was wise to be moving cautiously with any plans to restructure the property tax laws.
''The conservative, safe thing is always to study the issue a little more,'' he said. ''It is not an irresponsible position to take.''
Also, even though there is near universal agreement that the current system is unfair, revamping it would result in winners and losers. ''The people who benefit never appreciate it as much as the anger generated by people who get gored by the changes,'' said David Moog, the assessors' union president.
Ms. Stark said on Friday that she was committed to continuing to study the need for more fundamental changes in the law, promising, for example, to prepare a statistical analysis of what the impact would be if property taxes were based on the full market value of a home, instead of the complicated and sometimes seemingly irrational calculation of what the city calls ''assessed value.''
''There was no opposition to the idea that we should study what the impact would be of going to a market value standard,'' Ms. Stark said on Friday, when asked directly whether City Hall had blocked her agenda.
Gene Russianoff, staff lawyer at the New York Public Research Interest Group, which has been pushing the city for years to address the inequities in the property tax system, said he would be disappointed if political considerations slowed the move to eliminate the flaws in the laws.
''If the word from City Hall is that real reform to make the system fairer and more comprehensible is dead, that is bad and very disappointing,'' Mr. Russianoff said. ''That is a depressingly familiar refrain from prior administrations, and it cuts against the image of a nonpolitical mayor who is willing to take on the tough issues.''
