Anti-globalization protesters jostled with opponents of war, and those fighting India's caste system performed street plays alongside groups opposing religious and sex discrimination. At the six-day annual World Social Forum here in India's financial capital, hundreds of groups raised their voices in protest, if not always in unison.
The agenda of the gathering, held for the first time outside Brazil, appeared to have shifted from its central focus on trade and the inequities of global capitalism, splintering into a long list of regional causes.
''I came here and went 'Huh?' '' said Ellen Lenox, an English teacher from Brasília. ''The focus has changed from unfair global trade and the monopoly of big business toward antiwar, antidiscrimination causes.''
As in the last three years, this year's World Social Forum is timed to run concurrently with the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, which is seen by critics and most of those in attendance here as a gathering of rich capitalists.
Amid the heat and dust of a vast derelict factory complex in suburban Goregaon usually reserved for home decor or auto expositions, thousands of people gathered from across India and abroad to make common cause, with the slogan ''Another world is possible.''
Members of the organizing committee in Bombay, also known as Mumbai, said about 80,000 people from more than 100 countries were taking part.
Prominent among the speakers in the first three days of the forum were José Bové, the French farmer who led the demolition of a half-built McDonald's outlet; the Iranian human rights activist and Nobel laureate Shirin Ebadi; and the Indian novelist Arundhati Roy.
Coca-Cola and Pepsi were barred from the refreshment stands in favor of water and freshly squeezed sugar cane juice and lemonade. Microsoft Windows and Internet Explorer were discarded in favor of Linux operating systems and Mozilla browsers.
Continuing with the theme of the previous three global gatherings, all held in Porto Alegre, Brazil, peace activists vehemently criticized President Bush's wars in Afghanistan and Iraq. But some new themes emerged.
Pratap Kumar complained that for Dalits, or untouchables, like him, who were on the lowest rung of India's caste system, diatribes against globalization ring hollow to people denied basic human rights.
''What does anti-liberalization mean when we don't have the basic freedom to drink water at the village well or send our children to the same school as those from the upper castes?'' asked Mr. Kumar, from Vijayawada in the southeastern state of Andhra Pradesh.
On Monday, halfway through the meeting, the sober proceedings were hijacked by the news that a young South African delegate had accused a South African judge of raping her in a hotel room here on Saturday night. Local television networks reported that the judge, who was also attending the forum, had been arrested by the local police after the woman entered a complaint.
