Chicago's reputation as the capital of the nation's candy industry suffered another blow last week when the maker of two candy brands based here, Fannie May and Fanny Farmer, said their factory and retail stores would be closed and the brands sold to an out-of-state company.
The departure of the two brands follows those of E.J. Brach and Frango in recent years. Though well-known manufacturers like Tootsie Roll Industries, the William Wrigley Jr. Company and the Willie Wonka Candy Factory are still here, Chicagoans have begun to wonder which confectioner will be the next to go.
''The closing of Fannie May isn't only about jobs lost,'' said Mayor Richard M. Daley. ''Chicago has lost one of its most identifiable and beloved cultural icons.''
The city's candy industry, which by a trade group's reckoning employed 13,600 workers here in 1995, will be down to about 7,000 when the sprawling, antiquated plant on West Jackson Boulevard is shut down over the next few weeks by the 84-year-old Archibald Candy Corporation, eliminating 625 jobs. The company's 242 Fannie May and Fanny Farmer retail stores will be shuttered by Feb. 15, the day after Valentine's Day.
Archibald Candy had been struggling for some time, and filed for bankruptcy protection in 2002. It reorganized and emerged from bankruptcy last October, but continued to suffer from falling sales, rising costs, stiff competition and an uncertain economy. Terms of the sale of the two brands to Alpine Confections of Alpine, Utah, were not disclosed when the deal was announced on Jan. 14; both companies are privately held. Archibald will continue to operate its 170-store Laura Secord retail chain in Canada.
Believing that Fannie May candies were about to disappear entirely, many Chicagoans reacted by rushing to stock up one last time on Pixies, Trinidads, Mint Meltaways and the company's other treats. Alpine has said little about its plans for the two brands, but both are expected to remain available through retail outlets such as supermarkets, supplied from Alpine's four plants in Utah, Ohio and British Columbia.
Still, Fannie May devotees expressed sadness, saying that no grocery store could offer the aroma, the ambience, the service or the selection they enjoyed for decades in the dozens of Fannie May candy shops around the city.
Anne Marie Nalley, tears gathering in her eyes, said she and her 13 brothers and sisters had enjoyed the candies since childhood. Ms. Nalley, now in her 40's, said buying Fannie May candies at Christmas and Easter was a family tradition.
''I just get all choked up about it,'' she said, standing inside a Fannie May store on Michigan Avenue. ''What am I going to do for gifts? I can't talk about it. I'll get too emotional.''
Sharon Reum, 60, who works as a consultant, said she had been a Fannie May customer as long and she could remember. ''My husband used to buy them for me when we were teenagers,'' she said.
Frank Rzepka, a 61-year-old graphic artist, said that though sweets were no longer part of his diet because of diabetes, he still shopped in the stores for relatives and friends.
Italian and German immigrants got Chicago's candy industry started toward the end of the 19th century, taking advantage of the city's location at the hub of the Midwest railroad network. The city embraced the industry and fought to keep it intact here in recent years despite wages, sugar prices and environmental regulations that combine to put American candy factories at a sharp cost disadvantage.
''No one wants to get a passport to visit their factory,'' said Bill H. Kelley, vice chairman of the Jelly Belly Candy Company and chairman of the National Confectioners Association. ''But when you're fighting sugar, labor and other incidental costs, you can't fight a three-headed monster.''
Sugar prices are the biggest of the three problems, candy makers say, because of the federal government's longtime policy of protecting domestic sugar producers from competition by sharply restricting imports. As a result, American candy makers must pay twice the world price for sugar, they say, giving hard-candy makers, especially, a strong incentive to relocate to Canada or Mexico.
Jack Roney, director for economics and policy analysis at the sugar producers' lobbying group, the American Sugar Alliance, said sugar had been made a scapegoat by companies whose true aim was to take advantage of cheaper foreign labor. He said the average wage for American candy-industry workers was about $14 an hour, while in Mexico, candy factories paid less than $1 an hour. Energy, employee benefits and compliance with environmental rules also cost less overseas, he said.
