The 200-mile distance between Boston and New York is one of the busiest corporate travel stretches in the United States. According to NYC &amp; Company, a tourism marketing organization, 316,000 Bostonians travel to New York for business each year. The Greater Boston Convention and Visitors Bureau estimates that almost a million New Yorkers return the favor. Now, there is a new way to connect the cities.
On Oct. 1, the LimoLiner, a luxury bus service that runs between the Back Bay and Midtown Manhattan three times each weekday and once on Sundays for $69 each way, opened for business. The trip usually takes about four hours.
Since then, most business travelers have resisted the LimoLiner's advances, but Fergus McCann, the Scottish entrepreneur who started the Boston-based service, has a plan to promote it by persuading potential customers to tour the inside of the vehicle.
With the LimoLiner creating a new travel option, now is an opportune time to compare the various modes of travel between the cities. What follows are descriptions of two round trips, starting in Boston on the LimoLiner, returning on Amtrak's Acela Express, going back to Manhattan on the Greyhound bus and making the final leg home to Boston on the US Airways Shuttle.
Room to Stretch Out
The silver-colored LimoLiner pulled in front of the Hilton Boston Back Bay 15 minutes late on a cold Thursday afternoon, and Lara Setrakian, a Harvard senior with 70,000 frequent-flier miles, and three other passengers climbed aboard. Inside were tinted windows and 28 reclining leather chairs that gave off a pleasant musky aroma. ''It doesn't have that bus smell, which is a killer,'' Ms. Setrakian said.
Compared with, say, the Acela, the LimoLiner provided each person an enormous amount of legroom. And not just that: the bus is rarely crowded, meaning travelers can wait until the last minute to buy a ticket.
Hillary Johnson, a student at Harvard's Graduate School of Education who travels between Boston and New York four times a year, decided to take the LimoLiner three hours before its departure. ''You can't do that with an airplane, unless you want to pay an incredible amount of money,'' she said.
Soon, an attendant brought sandwiches and nonalcoholic drinks to passengers, ''much like a flight attendant would on an airline,'' said Kevin S. Kennefick, chief executive of Data Intensity, a database business in Waltham, Mass., and a recent LimoLiner customer.
Also available at each seat: free Ethernet or wireless connections, an amenity that neither the plane nor the train offers. ''Having access to e-mail for the length of the trip, that's a home run,'' said Scott Signore, a principal at Matter Communications in North Andover, Mass.
The bus also offers movies on the big-screen television (earphones: $2) and free magazines.
On this day, the bus reached its destination, the New York Hilton, 45 minutes late. Mr. McCann, the owner, said he was not certain how long the $69 fare would last, but added, ''I would rather have it fail at $69 than be empty at $99.''
Office on a Track
Amtrak's Train 2164 was so crowded that Brian Foye and Chris Harrington, managers for the Capital Grille steakhouse in Westborough, Mass., had to sit in the quiet car, which did not suit them. (Acela passengers, unlike LimoLiner guests, are not permitted to choose their seats before boarding.) It was a Friday afternoon, an hour after the train had left Penn Station in Manhattan 10 minutes late, and the pair had moved to the cafe car for $4.50 beers.
Though the Acela serves alcohol and has a larger menu than the LimoLiner, it charges for the food and drink and sometimes runs out of items, including, on this trip, hot dogs, pizza and roast turkey sandwiches. On the other hand, the opportunities for social interaction are greater and it is easier for passengers to spread out papers and write memorandums.
Alison Merifield, an account director at the Boston office of Lewis PR who often rides the Acela, describes the train less as a mode of transportation than as a mobile satellite office. ''Our clients expect to be able to reach us any time, and traveling on the Acela means they can,'' she said. ''While cellphone coverage can be spotty -- particularly when trying to conduct a conference call with India -- it's still better than on a plane.''
Although the train has a top speed of 150 miles an hour, it is notorious for running late. David Jacobson, a public relations freelancer in the Boston area, complained that after Providence, R.I., it ''creeps along the coast while you watch the old men driving Cadillacs go faster than you.''
Still, on this trip, the train got to Boston in three hours and 13 minutes, just two minutes late. The one-way fare was $99.
Low-Priced Option
The most arduous leg of this road test was a Monday morning Greyhound journey from Riverside Station in Boston to the Port Authority terminal in New York. At $30 for a one-way ticket, the price is right (though triple the $10 fare for the Fung Wah bus that runs between the Chinatowns of New York and Boston), but the ambience is stark.
While the LimoLiner's bathroom was clean and bright, featuring a black vase with yellow flowers and plenty of mirror space, Greyhound's had a flimsy accordion door, a small stack of moist towelettes, no sink and a chemical smell. The ride was cramped and bumpy and no food was available.
All of which may help explain why there was a distinct absence of laptop computers and suits on this three-hour-and-55-minute journey, which began 10 minutes late.
So where were the corporate travelers? Julia Searles, a Greyhound ticket agent in Boston, said business travelers usually caught the 7:20 a.m. bus, which she said was ''always on time.''
Crowded Yet Speedy
It was Tuesday, Dec. 23, and the Department of Homeland Security had declared an orange alert two days earlier. Air travelers braced for a long and stressful experience, with many people heading to the airport more than 90 minutes before takeoff. The check-in line for the 2 p.m. US Airways Shuttle, however, was short, and the security measures seemed routine, if tight.
Tom Kane, a vice president of Harborside, a New York stock trading company, says he chooses the shuttle for its reliability. The flight usually takes about an hour. Mr. Kane disdains the Acela because, he says, it is rarely on time.
Mario Almonte, a brand specialist at Herman Associates, a New York public relations firm, says he considers the train more dependable, and a better place to work or doze. ''When I'm traveling to Boston from New York, I ask myself: 'Do I feel lucky?' and if the answer is 'No,' then I take the Acela,'' Mr. Almonte said.
US Airways does provide cubicles, some with phones, at its gates, though Elliot Schrage, 43, a consultant based in San Francisco, said he was ''stunned that they don't have wireless access.''
The flight itself (which cost $128.50) was packed, and as an unsmiling attendant distributed free soft drinks and bags of pretzels, the LimoLiner's dining and space advantages became apparent. But the plane took off on time and landed early, though the exit process was predictably slow. So which is the best way to make the trek?
That, of course, depends on the traveler's tastes and budget. But Mr. McCann, LimoLiner's owner, puts the issue in perspective. ''Business travel is a grind,'' he said. ''Nobody really enjoys it.''
BUSINESS TRAVEL
