The first to arrive at the Precinct 2 caucus in the Waukee City Hall council chambers were three white-haired women from the housing complex for the elderly in a former cornfield nearby. They lugged a stack of John Kerry posters under their arms.
The women immediately began to rearrange a dozen red chairs into a circle in the back of the room, taping the posters to the chairs. Shortly after 6 p.m., the caucus's temporary chairwoman, Jody Chambers, came into the hall.
A cluster of Kerry people arrived, then several John Edwards supporters, two very committed Howard Dean supporters and three generations of a Des Moines family. Just before the official caucus starting time at 6:30 p.m., several dozen people entered in a steady stream.
Lynne Howard sat in the front row, knitting a shawl, while her daughter, Brynne, stood beside her, fresh off a three-hour drive from St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minn., just so she could take part. ''I always have to keep myself busy at these things,'' Ms. Howard said as the knitting needles clacked.
Mother and daughter were both firmly for Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio. ''I know he's on the edge of things but he pushed the debate and brings up things that need to be said,'' Lynne Howard said.
At 6:30 p.m., Ms. Chambers cleared her throat and, with hands and voice shaking, called the meeting to order. All the seats were filled and a half-dozen stood at the sides. ''I'm just a little nervous,'' Ms. Chambers said. ''It's a big responsibility.''
At the side of the room, William Terrell, an acupuncturist, studied the map of Waukee, which is the fastest-growing city in Iowa, caught in the tide of the Des Moines westward expansion. Farmers mixed with suburbanites at the caucus. Huge apartment complexes rise along both sides of Highway 6, the main commercial strip, with the last few corn farms fighting for space in between them.
At 7:05 p.m., Ms. Chambers conducted the official count. Four years ago, Waukee had only one precinct caucus, and about 70 people assembled to choose between Vice President Al Gore and former Senator Bill Bradley. This year, because of the area's growth, there were four precinct caucuses, though each was a bit smaller. The final Precinct 2 tally was 53 people.
The task of the caucusgoers was to choose just 4 delegates, so in the weird world of caucus math, that meant that a candidate needed 9 supporters to be ''viable,'' to qualify for at least one delegate.
''The Kerry women have already set up in the back,'' Ms. Chambers said, ''So we can keep them there. Any Dean supporters? How about you go up in this corner. Gephardt, can we put you over there? Kucinich people, right there in the front. If there are any Clark supporters, they can go back by the water cooler. The Edwards people, oh, how about over here on the side?''
The two biggest groups were those for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, the chair circles eating up the back half of the chambers. At the front, five supporters for Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, tried desperately to make a deal with the eight for Mr. Kucinich.
''I like Howard Dean's values,'' said Elizabeth Terrell, Mr. Terrell's wife, like her husband an acupuncturist and a Dean supporter. ''Look, with eight of you and five of us, we don't have anything,'' she told the Kucinich base. ''But if we go together, we can have a delegate.''
Tim Broderick, who owns the farm just across the street from City Hall, was deputized by the Kerry team to try to talk the Gephardt supporters into their camp. He managed to break loose three of five of them, then a fourth.
With five minutes left, the Dean people were well short of the count they needed for a delegate. ''Maybe we've got time to approach the Gephardt folks,'' Mr. Terrell said. But then, almost on cue, Dorothy Taylor, the last of the Gephardt supporters, moved over to the Kerry circle to great whoops of delight.
The Dean supporters were getting desperate. Finally, to stop the Kucinich people from bleeding into the Edwards camp, three Dean supporters, including Mr. Terrell, huddled together and sadly decided to support Mr. Kucinich.
The final result: Mr. Kerry had 22 supporters, Mr. Edwards 18 and Mr. Kucinich 9, with the rest undecided. By the vagaries of caucus math, this meant two of the precinct's four delegates went to Mr. Kerry, one each to Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kucinich. Dr. Dean came away empty-handed.
''When I walked in here, I was afraid we wouldn't be viable,'' said Mike Miller, a high school teacher and supporter of Mr. Kusinich, grinning happily. ''But Dennis Kucinich has a delegate!''
Who is that delegate? Brynne Howard, 18, who will drive down from St. Olaf again for the March 15 Democratic county convention.
The disappointed Terrells left quickly. ''Where were all the young people they said would turn out?'' asked Ms. Terrell, eyes red.
''I'm in the dog house,'' Mr. Terrell said. His wife had stayed firm for Dr. Dean.
''He's driving,'' Ms. Terrell said. ''I'm crying.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CHOOSING DELEGATES
