Eric Lindros played like a freight train again Monday afternoon, but the rest of his teammates were more like impassive passengers -- along for the ride -- and the Rangers were routed by the Boston Bruins, 5-2, in a game notable for its nastiness.
With the Rangers trailing by 3-0 in the second period, Lindros knocked Boston's best player and captain, Joe Thornton, from the game and might have set the stage for an even more bitter rematch Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden. A thundering right hand from Lindros landed underneath Thornton's eye, opening a gash, closing the eye and sending him to a hospital.
The Bruins' Web site said that Thornton had sustained a small cheekbone fracture and that he was expected to miss Tuesday's game; he was released from the hospital Monday night.
''I didn't drop my gloves first,'' said Lindros, who appeared to cross-check Thornton after the two took a face-off in the Rangers' zone. ''The bottom line is you never want to see a player like Joe Thornton, or any other player for that matter, be injured.''
Thornton, who has 11 goals and 33 assists this season, slipped forward as he grappled with Lindros at 6 minutes 43 seconds of the second period, leaving himself open for Lindros's blow.
The Bruins retaliated almost immediately. Just over a minute later, Boston's enforcer, Doug Doull, jumped over the boards for a shift and nailed Petr Nedved in neutral ice with a hit that earned him a five-minute major for charging and a game misconduct.
''He didn't even have the puck,'' a furious Glen Sather, the Rangers' coach, said of Nedved.
After taking six stitches to close a gash on his forehead, Nedved told Jim Ramsay, the Rangers' trainer, that he was well enough to play, and he took a regular shift in the third.
Afterward, however, Nedved complained of a headache, and Sather said he was worried Nedved might have sustained a concussion.
About a minute after Doull's hit, Dan McGillis was assessed a match penalty for attempt to injure and a game misconduct for a knee-on-knee hit on Rangers defenseman Darius Kasparaitis.
Kasparaitis had to be helped off the ice, and the team's medical staff said he had a sprained left medial collateral ligament.
The Rangers fumbled a golden opportunity to get back in the game. After the penalties on Doull and McGillis, the Rangers could not score on 49 seconds of a four-on-three power play, three minutes of a five-on-three advantage and 1:11 of a five on four.
The Rangers (18-17-7-4) dropped into ninth place in the Eastern Conference behind the Islanders, who defeated the Ottawa Senators, 5-2, at Nassau Coliseum on Monday.
Lindros was a force for nearly every second of his 15:34 of ice time. He scored one of the Rangers' goals, his 10th of the season and his fifth in the last 10 games.
''He's doing everything,'' Sather said of Lindros, whose stretch of dominating play started about two months ago. ''I wish they would all catch on fire like him.''
Rangers center Bobby Holik said, ''We just don't have enough guys playing like that.''
Sather said, ''It seemed like our team didn't wake up until Eric got in the fight.''
The Rangers had already seemingly thrown in the towel, a puzzling concession considering the Bruins (21-12-10-4) are one of the teams the Rangers are chasing for a playoff berth. ''Anybody who doesn't know the situation in that dressing room can't be very intelligent,'' Sather said, referring to the playoff race. ''How could you not know?''
SLAP SHOTS
DARIUS KASPARAITIS joins the veteran defenseman GREG De VRIES and the Rangers' top defensive prospect, FEDOR TJUTIN, on the sideline with sprained knee ligaments. ''I don't think it's bad,'' Kasparaitis said, adding that he would probably have a magnetic resonance imaging test on his left knee Tuesday. Of the collision with DAN McGILLIS, Kasparaitis said: ''I don't think he was intentionally trying to take my knee out. It's not a big deal.'' Rangers defenseman BORIS MIRONOV sat out his second consecutive game because of an illness. With Kasparaitis out, Mironov figures to play Tuesday against Boston. . . . Rangers goaltender MIKE DUNHAM, outplayed by ANDREW RAYCROFT (34 saves), allowed 5 goals on 22 shots.
HOCKEY
