MARCELLUS  What, has this thing appear'd again to-night?  BARNARDO  I have seen nothing.
-- ''Hamlet,'' Act I, Scene 1
A bland and bulky conference center in this city's fogbound downtown was transformed in recent days into the Elsinore of particle physics. The ghost that continually appeared, disappeared and appeared again during a scientific meeting was not the shade of a murdered king but a puff of primordial matter with an otherworldly name: the quark-gluon plasma.
This drama, like the original, involved not only a clash of great forces but also what some saw as betrayal and a measure of revenge. It drew in a pair of renowned laboratories -- two great houses of physics -- that have avidly pursued what may be among the most important discoveries in science.
Most of all, the meeting was a forum for one of those institutions, Brookhaven National Laboratory, to play Hamlet, earnestly raising doubt after doubt about the meaning of its own data: the laboratory's scientists refused to acknowledge that they had created the plasma, even though it would be hard to find a physicist anywhere who seriously argued that the lab had blundered and failed in its quest.
''From a personal point of view, I'd never bet against it at this point,'' said Dr. Thomas B. Kirk, Brookhaven's associate director for high energy and nuclear physics. But his doubts, like those of the laboratory at large, were soon on full display. ''People have been fooled before,'' he said darkly. For now, he said, the laboratory would have no announcement.
This seemingly perverse state of affairs produced what Dr. Reinhard Stock, a physicist at the University of Frankfurt, described as a ''to be or not to be'' aura here. More important, it illustrated how fraught it can be to declare a simple ''Eureka!'' in an age of collaborations with hundreds of scientists -- and of strict but byzantine protocols for claiming discoveries, any one of which can cause shifts in hundreds of millions of dollars for research.
The basic plot line is fairly simple. Since June 2000, Brookhaven's Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider, in Upton, on Long Island, has been smashing gold nuclei together at nearly the speed of light. The aim was to knock weird but fundamental particles called quarks and gluons out from where they were normally trapped in the protons and neutrons of the gold nuclei and create a soup, the plasma, containing no ordinary matter at all.
Because it probably last existed only a few microseconds after the start of the Big Bang, the great explosion believed to have spawned the universe, the quark-gluon plasma is among the most coveted substances for study in science.
By any measure, Brookhaven scientists have seen a series of striking, if indirect, signs that the plasma has turned up in their collider. Powerful jets of particles have gotten stuck inside a plasma-like substance and disappeared, as predicted. Almond-shaped dollops of the substance have expanded in precisely the weird patterns that theorists expected.
''The evidence for the quark-gluon plasma is overwhelming,'' said Dr. Miklos Gyulassy, a theoretical physicist at Columbia.
But that clear-cut assessment does not take into account what Brookhaven sees as outrageous fortune. In February 2000, a few months before Brookhaven began colliding its gold nuclei, scientists conducting a similar but less powerful experiment in Geneva at Europe's leading particle physics laboratory, known as CERN for its French acronym, were finishing up a decade of arduous research.
Perhaps fittingly considering the role that it was about to assume in the minds of scientists working at Brookhaven, the CERN experiment collided nuclei not of gold but of lead. The CERN scientists, which included Dr. Stock and Dr. Johanna Stachel of the University of Heidelberg, decided that their data contained evidence that they had created ''deconfined'' quarks: a state, probably short of the quark-gluon plasma itself, in which quarks had begun spilling out of the protons and neutrons in the lead nuclei. Since their program was ending, they decided to announce that finding to the world.
''It does indicate that a new state of matter is created,'' Dr. Stachel said at the time.
For Brookhaven, whose $600 million collider had been built on hopes of finding the quark-gluon plasma, something was rotten in the rarefied world of particle physics. Uttering one of the few true curses of pure research, the American scientists blamed politics. Even worse, they said, it was politics based on scant evidence.
''What upset people here was that it wasn't sufficiently persuasive,'' said Dr. Thomas Ludlam, a Brookhaven physicist.
Dr. William Zajc, a Columbia physicist and the spokesman for a group of more than 400 scientists and engineers working on the Brookhaven experiment, said the CERN announcement ''added more confusion than light to the story.''
Those words were like daggers. Dr. Stock said he had realized that the timing would not be appreciated in the United States. ''They were just starting a half-billion-dollar operation and we are saying: 'Bye-bye. We have stolen your child,' '' Dr. Stock said.
The CERN scientists took the criticism stoically. As the months rolled on, Brookhaven got its share of attention, successfully starting up its collider and collecting ever more impressive data. But along the way, something happened that the CERN scientists found delicious: the new data suggested that they had been right at the edge of creating the quark-gluon plasma, just as they had said.
As the case for the plasma at Brookhaven grew stronger and no evidence emerged to disprove CERN's claim, the European scientists began seeing something more than scientific caution in Brookhaven's delay.
To announce a discovery now, Dr. Stachel said, ''the very same people who were very critical have to eat their words.''
Brookhaven could not disagree more, saying that it merely wishes to collect more data and be sure that the plasma does not end up on the scrap heap of discoveries that are later found to be wrong. ''CERN doesn't come in our discussions; that's over,'' Dr. Kirk said.
He added that in his mind, there was only one important thing to consider in announcing any discovery: ''When we roll it out, it's going to be bulletproof.''
That hesitation does find support, even among scientists like Dr. Berndt Mueller, a theoretical physicist at Duke University, who believe that all evidence is consistent with the lab's having produced the plasma. ''It's no mystery to me why they haven't announced it,'' Dr. Mueller said. ''I think the lab has been appropriately cautious.''
Others wonder if modern collaborations, run democratically rather than led by the famously headstrong leaders of earlier decades -- the Nobel Prize winners Leon M. Lederman and Carlo Rubbia are routinely mentioned -- may breed indecision.
''In my younger days, we didn't vote,'' said Dr. Nicholas P. Samios, a physicist and former director of Brookhaven. ''Leon -- vote? Carlo -- vote?'' he added, his face twisted into a wicked smile. But not wishing to sound critical, he said of the cautious statements from Brookhaven, ''I think I would have been a bit stronger.''
Or, as Marcellus said at his guard post before the Danish castle, ''Peace, break thee off; look, where it comes again!''
