AMONG the many great lies that keep the world spinning -- ''The check is in the mail,'' ''This won't hurt a bit,'' ''Sure, I'll respect you in the morning'' -- is the one about New Yorkers' being able to put up with anything.
That loving myth has comforted the people of this city for generations. But there is one thing that many of them absolutely cannot handle. It is called reality.
One reality is that the prices of certain essential services, like subway fares and college tuition charges, enjoyed the Zamboni treatment for many years; they were kept as artificially frozen as the hockey ice at Madison Square Garden. When they inevitably rose some months ago, cries of betrayal rang from Bay Ridge to Baychester.
Something similar is almost surely about to happen with taxi fares. In fact, it has already begun.
City officials leave no doubt that fares will soon go up, possibly by as much as 25 percent. Even though no action has yet been taken by the Taxi and Limousine Commission, the grumbling is in chorus.
Some of it comes from frequent taxi riders who, often enough, belong to the city's more privileged classes. They seem to have trouble grasping why a Bangladeshi immigrant behind the wheel of a yellow cab might possibly seek more than the $11 an hour that officials say the average driver earns.
A reality ignored by many New Yorkers is that fares have not risen in eight years, not since March 1996. ''Friends'' was still a fairly new television series, that's how long ago it was.
One result is that the cost of a typical cab ride is a Zambonied $6.85. (The average trip is said to be 2.8 miles, which also happens to be the approximate distance from home to office for your typical newspaper editor. A coincidence, no doubt.)
Bruce Schaller, a Brooklyn researcher whose specialty is the taxi industry, finds that New York has lower fares than at least 13 other major American cities. A 2.8-mile journey runs to $10.85 in San Francisco, or 58 percent more than in New York. When adjusted for inflation, Mr. Schaller said, the fare here is the lowest it has been since 1965.
In a separate study prepared for Transportation Alternatives, an advocacy group for pedestrians and bicycle riders, Mr. Schaller concludes that a fare increase may improve taxi safety. Analyzing data from the 1990's, he discovered ''a strong relationship'' between cabbies' incomes and their accident rates.
''Drivers who are under greater financial pressure tend to work longer hours,'' making them more tired and more error-prone, he said. ''Financial strains,'' he added, ''may also pressure drivers to exceed the speed limit, run red lights and take other risks.''
From conversations with city officials, it is not clear that they buy Mr. Schaller's safety arguments. All the same, they suggest that a fare increase is on the way, probably soon.
BUT in this politically charged city, how do you make passengers feel they are getting something for their money? That is the question vexing the Bloomberg administration, said a senior official who spoke only if given the standard (if irritating) guarantee of anonymity.
Some ideas under discussion are technophilic, like global positioning devices to help fleets track their cabs. Forgive us a certain skepticism. Technology has hardly been the cab rider's constant friend. You need only recall those pointless television screens behind the driver, not to mention the shrieking Elmo and his buddies urging riders to ''buckle up.''
More important for most New Yorkers, City Hall recognizes, is putting more cabs on the streets, especially during rush periods. At 4:30 p.m. on a workday, you stand a better a chance of stumbling upon a weapon of mass destruction in Iraq than finding an empty taxi in Midtown.
So besides planning to add 900 cabs, the senior official said, the city is thinking about scrapping the basically useless night surcharge of 50 cents and replacing it with a rush-hour surcharge of a dollar. The hope is that, with a lure of extra money, cabbies will keep cruising at 5 p.m. rather than doing their usual vanishing routine.
Now if only something can be done to improve passenger leg room, to install clear partitions so that you can actually read the driver's name and to get cabbies to pay mild attention to riders, instead of gabbing on their cellphones the entire time, true progress can be proclaimed.
Not that any of this is said as a complaint, mind you. Don't you know that New Yorkers can put up with anything?
NYC
