Escalating an increasingly bitter fight, Conrad M. Black asked a Canadian court yesterday to issue an injunction that would prevent the board of Hollinger International from trying to block his sale of control of the company.
The legal maneuver is Lord Black's latest effort to frustrate Hollinger's board, which is planning to discuss the situation by conference call today and remains furious about Lord Black's surprise agreement on Sunday to sell his controlling stake in the company to a set of reclusive entrepreneurial British brothers.
Lawyers for Hollinger -- which publishes The Daily Telegraph, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post -- were continuing to work last night on possible paths of recourse, including ways to thwart the deal, which will be presented during today's call, executives close to the company said. But they cautioned that the situation was fluid and that the company had not ruled out any options and could take some kind of action as early as today.
The sale of the controlling stake could have a significant effect on Hollinger's ability to recover more than $200 million that it has accused Lord Black of misappropriating as well as the company's effort to restructure itself.
In a statement, Lord Black said he was seeking a declaration from the Superior Court of Justice in Ontario that the deal he reached with the Barclay brothers and their company, Press Holdings International, was ''effective, valid and binding.'' He said he took the legal action ''to prevent any interference whatsoever with the completion of this transaction.''
It remained unclear last night what action the board would seek to take. ''Lord Black has so much power through his controlling stake that maybe he can get away with it,'' one executive said.
Still, to some degree, a sale of Lord Black's stake has some appeal to the board, the executives added. The sale would put $178 million in cash into the hands of Lord Black through a privately held company that he controls called Ravelston Management. Lord Black agreed to sell his controlling stake in Hollinger, which is based in Chicago, through a circuitous route by selling Ravelston's 78 percent interest in a publicly traded Canadian company called Hollinger Inc., which has as its main asset a controlling interest in Hollinger International.
Hollinger International desperately wants the proceeds of Lord Black's sale. Late Friday, a special committee of Hollinger International filed suit seeking at least $200 million from Lord Black, whom the company accuses of receiving unauthorized noncompete fees and excessive management fees for himself, his colleagues and two companies he controlled, including Ravelston, which are named as defendants.
Laura Jereski, an analyst at Tweedy, Browne, which owns a large stake in Hollinger, said that although the Barclay brothers' intentions were unclear, the ''offer could be positive for Hollinger because it increases the liquidity of a company that is a defendant in the case, and that is good.''
Still, Lord Black has made it clear that he has no intention of paying the company the $200 million. Although he initially agreed in November to repay at least part of that sum, about $7.2 million, he now maintains that he does not owe the company even that amount, saying that the board had, in fact, approved some payments. He reiterated that contention yesterday.
Lord Black failed to make an initial repayment of $850,000 of that $7.2 million on Dec. 31, and his contention that he does not owe the company anything has angered the special committee, which was created to investigate the payments to Lord Black. That helped explain the committee's lawsuit as well as a surprise move by the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday seeking to prevent any effort to block the company's internal investigation. The S.E.C. won a ruling so that any change in control at the company would give Richard C. Breeden, the former chairman of the S.E.C. and an adviser to the special committee, additional powers as special monitor.
No one knows whether Lord Black has any liquid assets. He has given some indication that he does not. Some analysts say they think he has no liquid assets left while others speculate that he may have put money away.
A spokesman for Lord Black, Jim Badenhausen, responded to those theories by saying: ''That is ridiculous speculation to anyone who knows Conrad Black. He intends to continue pursuing his many other business, literary and political interests.''
What also complicates matters for Hollinger is that the intentions of the Barclays are not clear. While they sent a conciliatory letter to the special committee saying that they hoped to work with it and that they would not impede the process in which the investment bank Lazard has been hired to restructure the company -- which could mean selling some of Hollinger's newspapers -- the brothers have taken other steps that seem to indicate they have no interest in working with the committee. For example, they have been in secret talks for several weeks about the deal, according to several people close to the situation.
One person involved said that lawyers for the committee raised the idea of sending subpoenas to the Barclay brothers in connection with the current lawsuit against Lord Black. Because they are secretive, the idea of being deposed in an American court could help push them to drop the deal.
