President Bush intends to use his State of the Union address on Tuesday to set out a multipart approach to helping Americans deal with rising health care costs, including a possible expansion of tax-free savings accounts for medical expenses, people briefed by the White House said on Monday.
Addressing an issue sure to be hotly debated during the presidential campaign, Mr. Bush will rely largely on existing proposals to address health care costs, they said. Those ideas include granting tax credits to help people purchase health insurance, allowing small businesses to band together to purchase health coverage for their employees and moving to limit the liability doctors face from malpractice suits.
Mr. Bush also intends to highlight health savings accounts, which allow workers to place money into accounts tax free and withdraw the money tax free to use for medical expenses, subject to a number of limits. The Medicare overhaul bill Mr. Bush signed last year contains a provision creating a version of the accounts.
People involved in the talks said administration officials had held discussions with Congressional leaders about calling for an expansion of the program, which is now limited to people who have deductibles of $1,000 or more for individuals and $2,000 or more for families.
It is not clear whether Mr. Bush has decided to propose an expansion of the existing program or simply to highlight it as one way his administration is working to deal with the issue, people who have held discussions with the White House said.
Many Democrats oppose the health savings accounts, calling them a tax break for the wealthy, who least need help with medical expenses. Democrats have also criticized as inadequate Mr. Bush's proposed $89 billion package of tax credits to help people purchase health insurance. The Democratic presidential candidates have put a special emphasis on dealing with the more than 43 million people who have no health insurance.
Republicans who have been briefed on the themes Mr. Bush plans to strike in the State of the Union address said his health care proposals would be offered under the umbrella of a broader philosophy of giving people more control over, and more responsibility for, their own financial planning.
Mr. Bush refers regularly in his speeches to promoting an ''ownership society,'' a phrase his advisers say also applies to administration proposals to create personal investment accounts in Social Security and encourage home ownership, especially among minorities and low-income people.
Mr. Bush continued practicing for the speech on Monday at the White House, where he also marked the Martin Luther King holiday by stopping in at a lunch given by Laura Bush for spouses of black ministers who have been active in promoting religion-based social welfare programs.
''It's almost finished, in case you're interested,'' Mr. Bush told reporters who asked about the State of the Union address as he entered the lunch in the State Dining Room.
Coming a day after the Iowa caucuses and a week before the New Hampshire primary, the speech will serve to frame both the president's election-year agenda and his vision for a second term if he is re-elected.
But the policy proposals Mr. Bush will set out are constrained by the growing budget deficit, which Republicans on Capitol Hill said the president would vow again to cut in half over the next five years.
Mr. Bush has championed tight limits on the growth of most domestic programs but has called for large increases in military spending. He is expected to propose another large increase in spending next year for domestic security.
