On Jan. 2, NASA's Stardust spacecraft flew through a 14,000-mile-an-hour hail of debris from the Wild 2 comet. Under this withering barrage, the ship's objective was not only to survive, but to use a collector made of a bizarre substance to gather an unaltered sample of five-billion-year-old dust and gas ejected by the comet.
This seemingly impossible task has been the 20-year quest of Dr. Peter Tsou, the deputy principal investigator for the Stardust. On a quiet afternoon at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Dr. Tsou showed off a three-centimeter cube of silica aerogel, the substance that he used to catch the comet's tail.
At around 0.003 grams per cubic centimeter of material -- only about three times as dense as air -- aerogel is pure silicon dioxide. Not only is it the least dense solid in existence, it is also such a remarkable insulator that a layer of it surrounds the most vital electronics on the Mars rover Spirit. But the most striking feature, at least to the naked eye, is that up close, the cube looks like a blurry hologram.
''When you look at this,'' says Dr. Tsou, holding the aerogel up, ''you don't know where to focus. That's why some people call it solid smoke.''
Made of 99.6 percent empty space, the little cube is indeed barely there, with a density one-hundredth that of the hand that holds it.
To make this strange material, scientists start with a liquid alcohol like ethanol and mix it with silicon dioxide to form a gel. Then, through a process called supercritical drying, the alcohol is forced out of the gel, typically with high-pressure carbon dioxide. With this drying process, the gel does not collapse or lose its volume. It appears holographic because the silicon dioxide scatters shorter wavelengths of light much like air in the daytime sky.
In the mid-1980's, Dr. Tsou ventured to the Los Alamos National Laboratory in search of a material that would allow him to collect particles moving at three to six miles per second without destroying either the particles or their collector. ''I approached many scientists,'' he said. ''They said, 'Come on, that's ridiculous.' At J.P.L., we have a tech guru. I paid him to do a report, and he said, 'It's not possible.' ''
Dr. Tsou had considered using many thin foil layers or a polymer foam to catch the particles, but in space, radiation and temperature extremes quickly degrade foams. Because foams and foils are opaque, finding the captured interstellar particles would have been a problem.
While at Los Alamos, he said, he noticed a cube of an odd material on a laboratory windowsill. It was a form of aerogel that Los Alamos had tested and rejected for its nuclear fusion experiments.
The material was not new. In 1931, Steven S. Kistler was a pioneer in making the substance at the College of the Pacific in Stockton, Calif., now the University of the Pacific. But, Dr. Tsou said, the material was not used much, except in powdered form as a nontoxic anti-caking agent for food.
In the 1980's, Dr. Tsou and others began to work with the material. ''It has 14 Guinness Book of World Records-type properties,'' Dr. Tsou said. ''It's the lowest density of any solid, and it has the highest thermoinsulation properties. Though it would be very expensive, you could take a two- or three-bedroom house, insulate it with aerogel, and you could heat the house with a candle. But eventually the house would become too hot.''
Additionally, aerogel slows soundwaves to about 10 percent of their speed in air, and because it has such a vast surface area for its volume, its use as a filtration agent could increase the capacity of desalination plants a thousandfold.
Because aerogel is transparent and releases light when struck by certain high-energy radiation, it provides an excellent means of counting atomic particles. It also has incredible compressive strength. ''It can take 2,000 times its body weight without damage,'' Dr. Tsou said. NASA's Web site shows a 2-gram cube of aerogel (less than 0.1 ounce) supporting a 2.5-kilogram brick (about 5.5 pounds).
''It's better than anything you can think of,'' said Glenn Tsuyuki, a manager with the Mars rover project.
Because of its ability to keep electronics on both the 1997 Mars Pathfinder and the current rover, Spirit, at room temperature in the face of minus-100-degree cold, aerogel will probably remain the insulator of choice on Mars missions for some time, Dr. Tsuyuki said.
He added that he had proposed aerogel as the collection medium for a future flight studying dust in the upper Martian atmosphere.
''I would imagine that there are ideas out there that we haven't even thought of,'' he said.
