Gov. Mark Warner, jacket off and microphone on, was pacing the front of the conference room, preaching his gospel of tax reform, again.
Waving at PowerPoint slides detailing Virginia's fiscal problems, he pressed, prodded and practically begged 100 Chamber of Commerce members to do what he said he could not do alone: persuade the Republican lawmakers who dominate the state legislature to support his plan, which includes a $1 billion tax increase over the next two years.
''I hope you are all Republicans,'' Mr. Warner, the state's first Democratic governor in a decade, told the group. ''If this makes sense, your elected officials need to hear from you.''
Since his election in 2001, Mr. Warner has cut a beleaguered figure in Richmond, struggling to close a $6 billion budget shortfall that drained money from nearly every state program and made ambitious programs all but unthinkable.
But he has taken the offensive this year, proposing an overhaul of the tax system that he says will cut taxes for 65 percent of Virginians while raising them for the rich, preserve the state's triple-A bond rating and close a projected $1.2 billion budget shortfall in the next two years.
His proposal comes at what seems an unpropitious time for raising taxes. Last fall, voters in Alabama overwhelmingly rejected a similar tax overhaul, while Californians overwhelmingly elected an anti-tax governor in October. In 2002, voters in Northern Virginia and in the Hampton Roads area rejected sales-tax increases intended to raise revenue for transportation projects.
Undaunted, Mr. Warner has taken his proposal -- easily the most ambitious and risky of his term -- on the road with the same genial verve that marked his campaign for governor, crisscrossing the state each week to meet Rotarians and retirees.
But in a shift from 2001, when he proclaimed himself a friend of rural voters -- sponsoring a Nascar team, commissioning a bluegrass campaign song, supporting gun-owners' rights -- he has emphasized a different part of his résumé this year: that of Mark Warner, the multimillionaire businessman.
''I spent 20 years in business, two in politics,'' he tells audiences, referring to the entrepreneurial endeavors that earned him more than $100 million in the cellphone industry.
''I like speaking to business groups because they get it,'' he said in Virginia Beach before explaining why the state's ''fiscal meltdown'' would hurt industry. ''My strategy is simple; my strategy is you.''
There is evidence his strategy is paying dividends. Though the National Federation of Independent Businesses sharply criticized the plan, the Chamber of Commerce is expected to endorse its broad outlines sometime soon, group officials said. In addition to raising taxes on the wealthy, it would increase sales taxes and some corporate taxes.
''We give him high marks for coming up with a plan that tries to strengthen the Commonwealth's financial condition,'' said Hugh Keogh, president of the Virginia Chamber of Commerce. ''There is concern that without investments in education and infrastructure, Virginia runs the risk of withering on the vine.''
Still, the Republican Party's powerful anti-tax wing, sensing the chance to stop both a tax increase and an up-and-coming Democrat, has pledged to fight the plan. Led by Senator George Allen; Attorney General Jerry W. Kilgore, a prospect for governor in 2005; and Speaker William J. Howell of the House of Delegates, they contend that Mr. Warner's plan will stifle growth and cause a loss of up to 28,000 jobs. Privatizing services and cutting waste are the answer, they say.
''You can't tax your way to prosperity,'' Mr. Howell said in an interview. ''The message is clear: we've got to get a handle on our costs.''
But while Republicans control both houses of the legislature, Mr. Warner has one advantage: a schism between the party's moderate wing, which supports tax increases, and its staunchly anti-tax conservatives.
The rift opened in the 1990's during budget battles between the moderates and Gov. James S. Gilmore III, an anti-tax stalwart. It widened this month when the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Senator John H. Chichester, a Republican, proposed a tax increase twice as large as Mr. Warner's, much to the chagrin of Mr. Howell and Mr. Kilgore. Conservatives believe that Mr. Chichester is trying to help the governor by making Mr. Warner's plan seem modest in comparison, staking out the most aggressive position as a starting point for negotiations.
''In Virginia, there are two parts of the party,'' said Mayor Dana Dickens of Suffolk, a Republican who has praised the Warner plan. ''There are a lot of anti-taxers, but there are also a lot of moderates who understand we need to strengthen infrastructure to attract business. And the Republican Party is the party of business.''
For Mr. Warner, 49, the plan is a big gamble. Tall, toothy and telegenic, he is widely considered a rising star in the Democratic firmament. A rich-man populist with a regular-guy amiability, he is the kind of Southern moderate many Democrats say their party needs to regain support outside the liberal Northeast.
But his political future is constrained by Virginia law, which limits governors to one term. Some speculate that Mr. Warner would like to be on the presidential ticket this fall. More commonly, analysts expect him to challenge one of the state's Republican senators, Mr. Allen in 2006 or John W. Warner in 2008. (Mr. Warner narrowly lost to Senator Warner, no relation, in 1996.)
To do that, analysts say, he will need a more ambitious record than the cautious budget-cutting one he has established in his first two years.
''He wants a legacy,'' said Larry J. Sabato, director of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia. ''And this is his first opportunity to make one, because the economy has been so bad.''
Everywhere he goes, Mr. Warner tells voters that the Republicans oppose his plan at their peril. More budget cuts will weaken the state's universities, leave roads and schools in disrepair and bring overcrowding to prisons and nursing homes. His plan calls for increased spending on schools, higher education, transportation and other programs.
He contends his plan makes the antiquated tax code fairer. It would cut taxes on food and eliminate them on cars and estates worth less than $10 million. The nearly flat income tax would rise for people earning more than $100,000 but fall for most others. He would increase the sales tax by a penny, to 5.5 cents, and raise cigarette taxes to 25 cents a pack, from 2.5 cents. He would close special deductions for the high-income elderly and certain corporations.
Mr. Howell said he was willing to raise some taxes, including those on cigarettes and gasoline, but he is adamantly against raising the general sales tax or income tax. Mr. Warner's dire predictions of service disruptions and infrastructure decay are exaggerated, he argues.
Born in Connecticut and educated at George Washington University and Harvard Law, Mr. Warner does not sound like a Virginian. But he has appropriated the courtly Virginia political style and its centrist politics. He does not talk about abortion rights, though he says he supports them, and incessantly promotes himself as a fiscal conservative.
Now, with some Senate Republicans supporting a larger tax hike than his own, he finds himself right where he wants to be: in the middle.
''The need is so obvious and my fix is so conservative,'' he said in an interview. ''It's not as if I'm trying to create some grand new entitlement program.''
