Exulting in victory, pumping his fists, embracing his wife and saluting his fellow Vietnam veterans, Senator John Kerry, for a moment, sounded almost penitent.
''I've listened to you, and I've learned a lot,'' he told hundreds of overjoyed workers and die-hard supporters on Monday night. ''And you have made me a better candidate, and I thank you for that.''
Again and again, Mr. Kerry alluded to his terrible 2003: the year he emerged as a presumptive front-runner and beat prostate cancer, then squandered a daunting lead in the polls and withstood months of withering criticism, only to shake up his campaign, overhaul his message and his style of reaching voters, and make a last stand, not in his backyard of New Hampshire, but in Iowa.
''Not so long ago, this campaign was written off,'' he said Monday night. ''Thank you, Iowa, for making me the comeback Kerry!''
''If I am elected president,'' he began, but the crowd corrected him with chants of ''When! When! When!''
''When I am elected president!'' he repeated. ''I'm still learning.''
That was it for the rear-view mirror.
On a night that Howard Dean had already congratulated him by phone, then delivered a furious televised rallying cry to his supporters to take their battle to New Hampshire, Mr. Kerry, 60, stood with his wife and disbelieving daughters and a jubilant Senator Edward M. Kennedy and vowed to take his own battle straight to President Bush.
''We came from behind, and we came for the fight, and now I have a special message for the special interests that have a home in the Bush White House,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''We're coming. You're going, and don't let the door hit you on the way out.''
What followed was perhaps the most concise and cutting indictment of Mr. Bush that the famously wordy Mr. Kerry has ever given.
''This president has an open hand for his friends at Halliburton, but he has turned his back on our friends and neighbors,'' he said. ''He has turned his back on America's teachers and America's schools. And I will crisscross this country in this campaign and hold George W. Bush accountable for making a mockery of the words 'no child left behind.'
''Add up the deficit and the indifference of this administration,'' he added. ''Count the cost that working families are paying while the privileged ride high and reap the rewards. Seniors have seen their retirements stolen by Enron and Worldcom. We've seen financial scandals and jobs sent overseas. And at companies like Tyco, we've seen a work places where this president licenses a creed of greed.''
''Two million people have seen their health insurance blown away, and three million people have lost their jobs,'' he said. ''And when we add it all up, as I have in Iowa and New Hampshire and as we will all the way to November, it is clear that the one person in the United States of America who deserves to be laid off is George W. Bush.''
For months last year, Mr. Kerry struggled to explain his vote in favor of the authorization of the use of force in Iraq, while Dr. Dean overtook him in national polls in July and raised record sums by tapping into a new vein of support among young people and over the Internet.
In September, Mr. Kerry tried to jump-start his campaign with a four-state announcement tour, but even that was clouded by staff acrimony related to a debate about how to contend with Dr. Dean's rise. Weeks later a senior adviser quit to work for Gen. Wesley K. Clark, whose entrance into the race helped deny Mr. Kerry the publicity his campaign craved.
Mr. Kerry began attacking Dr. Dean more forcefully on foreign policy, taxes and Medicare, but failed to convert a series of controversial statements by him into a revival in the polls. By November, a distant second in New Hampshire, Mr. Kerry fired his campaign manager, Jim Jordan, saying he wanted to ''change the dynamic'' in his campaign.
With his staff bolstered by former aides to Senator Kennedy and a coterie of longtime friends and political hands from Boston, Mr. Kerry came up with a new message -- a ''Real Deal'' for Americans -- and a new, shortened stump speech.
In December, as Dr. Dean's lead still held firm in New Hampshire, Mr. Kerry made it known he would devote most of his time, money and manpower to Iowa, hoping to beat expectations and return to New Hampshire with momentum. He also put his own money on the line, withdrawing from the public-finance system and borrowing $6.4 million against his Boston town house.
In Iowa all but a few days since Christmas, Mr. Kerry steadily improved on the stump, slowly dropping his procedural Senate-speak for plain English. And he began to connect with voters, giving thoughtful answers to their questions.
By last week, Mr. Kerry had struck on a trademark move: offering to take questions until every caucus-goer in the room was won over. In Des Moines on Wednesday he cut his speech to 10 minutes and paced from one questioner to another for nearly two hours, transfixing hundreds of largely undecided voters. By Sunday night, as 1,800 supporters rallied at the Iowa state fairgrounds, his weekend of wearing down undecideds had left him rasping hoarsely.
Monday night, Mr. Kerry was again full-throated in victory. So much so that he demonstrated he still had not learned to keep a major speech short, or to stick to a prepared text: He spoke for 28 minutes and went on long after his three written pages.
But Mr. Kerry, who in the waning days of the race never showed the slightest sign of cockiness, had clearly mastered the art of expectations.
Look ahead to New Hampshire, someone asked him. Would he win?
''I intend to try,'' he said, the picture of humility. ''I don't have to, especially now, but I intend to try.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
