British and American weapons experts have returned to Libya and within weeks could begin dismantling, destroying and removing technology and materials related to Libya's once secret programs to develop nuclear and other illicit weapons, a senior Bush administration official said Monday.
The experts spent several weeks in the fall inspecting Libyan laboratories and military factories but had taken no steps to begin dismantling the weapons programs after Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi announced on Dec. 19 that he would give them up.
Plans are also being laid by Libyan chemical weapons scientists to incinerate tons of mustard gas agent manufactured to fill chemical bombs, the senior administration official said in a telephone interview. Missile programs and biological research efforts are still under scrutiny.
The United States and Britain have not decided how to remove any highly enriched uranium and the centrifuge machines designed to separate it from natural uranium in the manufacture of the first Libyan nuclear bomb. That project was in its early stages when Colonel Qaddafi said he was dropping the arms programs. The senior administration official said the illicit materials would probably be shipped to a secure facility in Britain or the United States.
In Vienna, American and British officials met Monday with Dr. Mohamed ElBaradei, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, and reached an agreement under which the United Nations agency will verify the destruction and removal work, a spokesman for the agency said.
However, the work of destroying or dispatching illicit weapons will not be performed by inspectors from the international body, as it was in Iraq, Western officials familiar with the talks on Monday said. Instead, it will be performed by American and British experts from intelligence agencies, the United States Department of Energy and the national nuclear laboratories.
Dr. ElBaradei met with John R. Bolton, the American undersecretary of state for arms control, and William Ehrman, a senior British disarmament official. After the meeting, they met with reporters, but did not make reference to the American and British team that has already arrived in the Libyan capital, Tripoli, Western officials said. The head of the team, numbering about a dozen experts, was identified by Western officials as Donald A. Mahley, the State Department's special negotiator for chemical and biological arms control issues.
Dr. ElBaradei said his agency's role was ''very clear -- that we need to do the verification.
''A good part of the program needs to be eliminated,'' he said. ''It needs to be moved out, and we clearly need the British and American support with logistics.''
For his part, Mr. Bolton, speaking in Vienna, said it was a ''very productive meeting,'' though Western officials said significant tensions still existed between some American officials and Dr. ElBaradei.
A spokesman for Dr. ElBaradei said the director would send nuclear inspectors to Libya later this week to work with the American and British team. The international agency will tag and seal the machines, technology and dangerous materials so they can be placed in an inventory for destruction or removal.
The senior administration official said Libya was ''in a hurry'' to dismantle the weapons programs and was eager to make a full and detailed declaration about its once secret nuclear program to the board of governors of the atomic agency in March.
Those critical declarations, along with the dismantling and destruction of weapons and technology, will hasten the day when Libya looks to President Bush to lift sanctions and restore diplomatic relations with Tripoli. All are essential steps in the return of American oil companies.
American officials are contemplating opening an office in Tripoli to facilitate the work of the weapons experts, one Western official said, but also to create a channel for direct diplomatic contact between Libyan and American officials.
Also on Monday, the senior administration official said the deadline of the Lockerbie settlement that hangs over the Libyan disarmament process could be extended by mutual consent if Congress has not acted to lift sanctions by May.
Libya agreed to pay $10 million to the families of each of the victims of Pan Am Flight 103, brought down by a Libyan terrorist operation over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988. But the final $6 million in payments depends on a decision by President Bush to persuade Congress to lift sanctions on Libya and to remove Libya from the list of terrorist-supporting states.
The official said that if all the disarmament tasks were not completed by May and if Congress had not acted, but it appeared that both would occur, Libya would probably extend the period of payment.
