And now, a way to be a card-carrying Democrat, a campaign contributor and a party promoter, all at once.
A credit card offered by the Democratic National Committee allows the cardholder to direct a 1 percent rebate on each purchase to the party's national committee. Charge $100 to the credit card, and the party gets $1.
The Democratic National Committee is now soliciting several hundred thousand supporters after testing the card with several thousand registered Democrats late last year.
Providian Financial, which is issuing the card as a platinum Visa, plans a series of mailings throughout 2004.
Someone who wants to carry the card but is feeling a little less generous, can instead elect to collect the 1 percent rebate personally.
There is an alternative award program as well. Cardholders can collect a point for each dollar of their purchases and redeem the points for various awards, from travel to magazine subscriptions. If they first give $150 to the national committee, they will then accrue two rewards points for every dollar charged to the card.
''We're providing Democrats across the country with a new way to support the party,'' said Debra DeShong, a spokeswoman for the committee.
''We hope that every time they use the card they will remember how important this upcoming election is, and they will be motivated to stay involved,'' Ms. DeShong said.
Available in four Democratic designs, including a sketch of a bucking red and blue donkey, the card is also a way to promote the party at restaurants and checkout counters.
Political analysts say the card reflects the importance of individual donors now that campaign finance laws bar the unregulated passing of s0-called soft money from corporations and unions to political candidacies.
''When soft money was outlawed, what the parties lost were the multimillion-dollar contributions,'' said Trevor Potter, a partner at Kaplan &amp; Drysdale in Washington and a former chairman of the Federal Election Commission. ''They are scrambling for ways to make up that lost money.''
Martin Barna, a 24-year-old law student at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, describes himself as a loyal Democrat but one living on a student's budget. ''Having a card like this would make me more likely to contribute,'' he said. ''It's kind of like racking up airline miles. It's a no-brainer, and it's really not costing you anything to use it.''
The Republican National Committee tried out a similar credit card during the last presidential election campaign. Christine Iverson, a spokeswoman for the committee, said that the card was suspended because campaign finance laws were changing. She added that the committee was considering whether to reinstate the card.
In past election cycles, the Republicans have fared better at encouraging individual giving than have the Democrats, said Lawrence M. Noble, a former general counsel for the Federal Election Commission and now the executive director of the Center for Responsive Politics. The center describes itself as a nonpartisan, nonprofit research group that tracks money in politics.
During the 1999-2000 election cycle, for example, the Democrats received $275 million, representing 53 percent of their donations, from small donors, according to the center. The Republicans took in $466 million, or 65 percent of their donations, in small contributions.
''It's a lot harder to raise that money,'' Mr. Noble said. After all, individuals may give no more than $2,000 to a candidate or $25,000 to a national party -- pittances compared with the corporate contributions of old.
Whether a credit card will be an effective fund-raiser generally depends on the loyalty of the membership, said John Grund, a partner at First Annapolis Consulting, a credit card research firm in Annapolis, Md. He considers the Democratic card promising. ''There's no doubt that there are tens of thousands of members of these political organizations who might view the credit card as part of their calling,'' he said.
It is somewhat surprising that a similar card is not already in wide circulation, he said. ''This puts politics front and center, and we all know how heated politics are,'' Mr. Grund said. ''I think there are some financial institutions that might have been sensitive to such a card.''
Providian, which has had a big business serving people with weak credit, has said that it is eager to expand by issuing cards to groups, known as affinity cards because the users share an interest in a place, a school, an organization or something else. MBNA and Bank One, which has received a takeover offer from J.P. Morgan Chase, dominate that business.
Last year, Providian provided the Federal Election Commission with an outline of how the card would comply with an array of laws and reporting rules. Any donations must clearly be from customers and not Providian, and Providian would also help to ensure that cardholders stay below the annual cap on political donations.
