In the gray buyer's-remorse dawn after the celebration of President Bush's announced plans to return to the Moon and even send humans to Mars, the changes and sacrifices necessary to fulfill the dream are coming into focus.
Good night, Hubble Space Telescope and all of its glorious pictures and discoveries; the shuttle program has to focus on finishing the space station. Goodbye, shuttle program, scheduled to be shut down after the International Space Station is completed at the end of this decade. And then good luck, International Space Station, which is to be handed off to the other partners, including Russia, Canada, Japan and the European Union.
By some time around 2017, according to the White House plan, United States financing for the station will go away, just two decades after its first two segments were launched into orbit. Will it join more than 9,000 pieces of sizable human-made space junk circling Earth? Will it fall back to Earth some day with the same nail-biting uncertainty that accompanied the final descent of the Skylab space station in 1979?
In the near term, of course, the station will be a major part of preparing for the return to the Moon and more distant places. In announcing the plan, Mr. Bush said that in the years leading up to the Moon mission ''we will focus our future research aboard the station on the long-term effects of space travel on human biology.''
That is why Dr. John M. Logsdon, director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University, said, ''We can't go to Mars without the station.'' There is no other way to see what space does to humans over the long haul.
The goals of the station could drift, however, after that grand effort. No part of the plan is set in stone, and European nations and Japan are unlikely to let their enormous investment in the station go to waste. ''We could end up buying time back from Europe to use the station for research,'' Dr. Logsdon said.
Brian Chase, vice president of the Space Foundation, a group that promotes space exploration and business, said the nation's new space vision could improve the fortune of the station. ''There may be a rising interest in the space station now that it's been put in the broader context of the exploration effort,'' he said. But noting that the cost of commuting would be as much of a problem as ever, he said, ''You've got to have the ability to get there to do research.''
Science aside, are there other possible uses for the station? Some of the wackier ideas have long been discussed by space scientists, including a high-altitude Hollywood -- setting up cameras on the station could allow on-location filming in orbit. With an audible grin, Dr. Logsdon said the station could be an ideal setting for reality television. ''It certainly could be a good place to do a 'Survivor' show,'' he said. ''And you're really in trouble if you get kicked off.''
And there is already a small measure of space tourism. Space Adventures, a company based on the notion that people will pay to really get away from it all, helped arrange the space station visits for two wealthy tourists, Dennis Tito and Mark Shuttleworth, and has other trips planned. Eric Anderson, the company's chief executive and president, said the new plans put a pressure on would-be travelers to act quickly. ''From the perspective of a potential space tourist, I certainly wouldn't wait to see what happens,'' he said.
For real imagination, however, it is best to go to professional dreamers like Bruce Sterling, a novelist whose works are identified with the gritty cyberpunk genre. Mr. Sterling once wrote a short story with William Gibson, ''Red Star, Winter Orbit,'' about squatters taking over an abandoned Soviet space station. The International Space Station, he said, could be put to many uses. Rushing through a jumble of ideas, he said it could be the ultimate high-level meeting place, an orbiting Davos. ''You could rename it after Soros or Gates,'' he said.
Since it has such powerful communications capabilities, he said, it could be turned into a very offshore bank or data haven, the kind of place that serves the needs of money launderers and pornographers, or as a safe storage site for corporate records.
Really rolling, Mr. Sterling came up with other ideas, even suggesting that low-Earth orbit could be the site a new Neverland Ranch. ''You could put Michael Jackson there,'' he said, ''so we wouldn't have to think about him.''
