As many as 100,000 Iraqis marched peacefully through the center of the city on Monday in a show of support for a revered Shiite cleric opposing the Bush administration's plans for the transfer of sovereignty.
The march was a powerful display of solidarity behind the cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, at a time when leaders of the Shiites, who account for more than 60 percent of the population, are beginning to exercise their enormous political influence over American policy here. Almost as many people attended the protest as there are American soldiers in Iraq.
The demonstration sent an unmistakable message to senior American and Iraqi officials, who were to meet at the United Nations later in the day to discuss with officials there the American plan to transfer power through indirect, caucus-style elections. Demands from Ayatollah Sistani for direct elections of a transitional assembly before the turnover of power on June 30 have forced American officials to turn to the United Nations in an effort to legitimize their proposal.
A representative of Ayatollah Sistani in Baghdad said in an interview that the cleric still insisted on direct elections and wanted the United Nations to monitor the process.
What role the United Nations will play is unclear, especially given the tenuous security situation in Iraq. The United Nations withdrew all its workers from Iraq in October after several bombings at its headquarters here, including one in late August that killed 22 people.
On Monday, Khudair Abbas, the country's health minister, raised to 24 the number of people killed in a powerful suicide car bomb that exploded at the main entrance of the headquarters of the Coalition Provisional Authority on Sunday. About 120 people were wounded, Mr. Abbas said, according to The Associated Press. It was the single deadliest bombing in Baghdad since American forces occupied Iraq in April.
Like the demonstration on Monday, that attack was undoubtedly an attempt to influence the direction of the talks at the United Nations.
The march began at 8 a.m. and did not taper off until mid-afternoon, with Shiites walking a mile through central Baghdad carrying banners and chanting slogans in support of their most revered spiritual leader.
''All the people are with you, Ayatollah Sistani!'' the marchers shouted as they flowed beneath an overpass near Mustansiriya University, where they began to disperse.
Many people held up portraits of the reclusive ayatollah, 75. Others lifted up paintings of Ali, Hussein and Abbas, the three most important Shiite martyrs, all slain in the seventh century in killings that solidified the Sunni-Shiite split. Green flags, symbols of Shiite Islam, rippled above the heads of the crowd.
American helicopters buzzed overhead as an announcer with a bullhorn urged the marchers onward. ''Say 'yes, yes' to elections and 'no, no' to appointing the people in any way other than elections,'' he said.
''Enough with America!'' people yelled from the street.
''We want to be with Ayatollah Sistani,'' said Imad Ali, 40, a salesman walking with the protesters. ''We want to support what he says. He wants elections, so we want elections too.''
Muhammad Masser, a 35-year-old doctor standing next to Mr. Ali, said he had come here partly because he knew that a delegation from the Iraqi Governing Council was arriving at the United Nations.
''The will of the Iraqi people will give this delegation power to achieve what the Iraqi people want,'' he said. ''All people have the right to choose their representatives. So why shouldn't the Iraqis do that too? The world has become so small, and everyone has elections other than us.''
An agreement reached between the Provisional Authority and the Governing Council on Nov. 15 states that a transitional assembly will be chosen through caucus-style elections in Iraq's 18 provinces. The assembly would be put together by May 31 and would then appoint an interim government by June 30. But on Jan. 11, Ayatollah Sistani challenged that plan by renewing a call for direct elections.
''About the role of the United Nations, Ayatollah Sistani wants it to be one of monitoring or observing,'' said Muhammad Alaaowi al-Shameri, a representative at the cleric's office at Kadhimiya Mosque here and a professor of Islamic philosophy at Mustansiriya University. ''If the United Nations plays an active role in the election process, that will support and legitimize the assembly.''
In southern Iraq, an advance team of more than 30 Japanese soldiers crossed into the country from Kuwait to prepare for the entry of a larger relief effort of 1,000 soldiers by March, The Associated Press reported. The soldiers are expected to help purify water supplies, rebuild schools and provide health care. It is the first deployment of Japanese troops to a country embroiled in combat since World War II and has generated much debate in Japan.
American military officials said a soldier died Sunday from wounds suffered in a roadside bombing north of Samarra last week. That brings to 501 the number of American soldiers who have been killed since the war began in March.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: SHIITE PROTEST
