When Lt. Gen. Thomas F. Metz arrives in Iraq in the coming days to take command of day-to-day military operations there, he will be battling insurgents as much as ill will, and his troops will be engaged in everything from firefights to fixing sewers.
That is why General Metz, commander of the Army's III Corps, ordered up training for the mission that went far beyond the usual tabletop war games and field exercises.
He dispatched senior officers to Jordan for lessons on Middle Eastern history and culture. Combat maneuvers in the deserts of California and muggy Louisiana included 200 Arabic-speaking civilians, under contract with the military, whose job it was to complicate the work of soldiers training to operate checkpoints and raid homes.
The headquarters staff of III Corps, which will form the core of the coalition joint task force running the entire Iraq mission, drilled with scenarios castwell into June for weather and religious holidays and local politics.
And he assigned his commanders and senior noncommissioned officers a reading list on Islam because ''we have to understand their culture through a different set of eyes,'' General Metz said in an interview.
''Regardless of your academic background, whether you've come through a public or a private school system in the United States, you're going to get a good dose of American history, West European history and a little world history,'' said General Metz, a soft-spoken three-star officer who has commanded mechanized infantry units and taught engineering at West Point.
''That world history is going to be written through the eyes of a Westerner, and we have to understand that the Islamic culture was a dominant power in the world for hundreds and hundreds of years.''
Study of what he called ''the cultural piece'' led to new procedures that may allow the military to conduct muscular missions while minimizing bruised relations with the Iraqi population.
''Example: What a squad leader must do when he enters someone's home,'' he said. ''If you have to break the door down to get in to do the search, then have an engineer team standing by that, when you leave, will repair the door. After you've thought of it and done it once, it seems real simple.''
For years, III Corps trained to command divisions readied for a specific high-intensity conflict -- the fight to defend South Korea from invasion by the Communist North. Since receiving his orders for Iraq, General Metz has guided III Corps in preparing instead for an operation that presents troops with lower-intensity challenges of stability and security operations.
Lessons observed are only learned once they are incorporated into future action, and General Metz will be drawing on experience gained from America's first front against terror. From October 2002 to January 2003, he served as chief of staff to the Central Command under Gen. Tommy R. Franks, dealing hands-on with the complicated postwar period in Afghanistan.
That experience, he said, taught him the importance of analyzing a range of influence that any government may exert, what he called DIME, for diplomacy, information, military and economy.
''I learned in Afghanistan that you can't build the security tower all the way to its top and then expect everything else to come up,'' he said. ''You can't build any one to its finished production and then start on the next one. They have to come together.''
General Metz will arrive in Iraq as deputy to Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, commander of the coalition's joint task force. Pentagon officials say General Sanchez will then focus his energies less on tactics and daily operations and more on strategic-level, military-political issues in the critical months as control passes to a new Iraqi government, which is planned by July 1.
Those changes are part of the largest movement of American troops since World War II, with almost a quarter million rotating in and out of Iraq, Kuwait and Afghanistan, which presents opportunities for creative missions -- and increased opportunities for insurgents to attack.
The complexity of that rotation can be seen here at Fort Hood, one of the Army's largest and most important bases. One of its divisions, the Fourth Infantry, will return from Iraq this spring; another, the First Cavalry, will go to Iraq, to be responsible for the security of Baghdad.
Members of a National Guard brigade, the 39th, from Arkansas, are here for accelerated training for their role in the deployment of large numbers of citizen-soldiers to join active-duty forces in Iraq.
Maj. Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli, commander of the First Cavalry Division, said he worked with community leaders in nearby Killeen to arrange training very different from that usually given to troops heading overseas.
Soldiers are being teamed with the chief of Killeen's water and sewer district, the supervisor of the electricity grid and the manager of the local landfill ''to get an idea how the whole thing works, and what 'right' looks like,'' General Chiarelli said.
In Iraq, ''The soldier is the guy down in the neighborhood on a day-to-day basis, and if something is not going right, he's the first person who is going to hear about it,'' General Chiarelli added. ''We're going to make life better for the Iraqi people in those areas.''
Brig. Gen. Thomas P. Bostick, an assistant division commander for the First Cavalry, said, ''The overarching theme is, we want to turn over in a progressive manner to the Iraqi people control of their country.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE MILITARY
