''Slick'' is not a word anyone would use to describe the great house of Dior, but slick is exactly what the Dior shows have become under John Galliano. They are the most spectacular of shows and, at the same time, the most predictable. You know before the first model hits the glossy runway that the clothes will be wild, the Dior logo vivid against the backdrop, and even the most hapless photographer will get a good, clean shot.
And that is the point. With the consistency of Pepsi, and a sense of theater worthy of Ziegfeld, Mr. Galliano in a matter of a few years has given Dior an audacious image even a child can apprehend. It is why thousands of teenagers turned up for the opening of the new Dior store in Tokyo. It is why Sarah Jessica Parker and the crew of ''Sex and the City'' will film one of their final episodes, on Thursday, at the Dior flagship on Avenue Montaigne. And it's why Graydon Carter, the editor of Vanity Fair -- who on Sunday gave a dinner for Diane Von Furstenberg at Caviar Kaspia here that drew everyone including Yves Saint Laurent and Valentino -- took his young daughter to the Dior studio over the weekend to meet Mr. Galliano as he was finishing his spring 2004 haute couture collection.
Yet, as much as Mr. Galliano's shows are designed to seduce a mass audience, they inevitably obscure the creative process. And what is the value of looking at clothes that cost several million dollars to make -- the tab for the 31 looks Mr. Galliano presented today, plus $1 million more for the show itself -- when they pass by in a fury of hair and ornament and Nefertiti eyes? Because of the sameness of the shows, a lot of journalists, myself included, have wondered whether Mr. Galliano has run out of ideas or if, in starting his couture collections too late, he has been forced to fall back on familiar ground.
The truth is, neither conclusion is right. To see how a collection evolves from the first germ of an idea -- the tangents, the surprises, the horrible tensions -- Mr. Galliano agreed to a series of conversations over the weeks and days and finally the hours before his show on Monday afternoon.
These conversations began on Dec. 9, and included the members of his design team closest to him, Steven Robinson and Bill Gaytten, who have worked with Mr. Galliano since the 1980's, as well as Sidney Toledano, the chief executive of Dior.
By the first week in December, Mr. Galliano had not only mapped out the line he would take with this collection -- a blend of ancient Egypt and the backbreaking poses of 1950's fashion photographs -- but he had also put into production in Dior's studios 25 muslin prototypes.
The kind of couture clothes that designers like Mr. Galliano, or Karl Lagerfeld at Chanel, make involve the work of hundreds of people. There are the seamstresses and tailors, of course, but all over Paris, in small workrooms, there are also beaders, embroiderers, feather makers, people to dye and hand-paint fabrics. For this collection, Mr. Galliano used eight embroidery houses and had nearly all of the fabrics hand-dyed, many of them based on the mink browns, aquas and powdery lilacs you see in magazines from the 50's -- and which Mr. Galliano's team collected in voluminous research books. One fabric was painted to resemble the scales of a python, while the many layers of a chiffon ball skirt -- as much as 50 or 60 yards -- were dyed shades of livid green blending into brown.
Pat McGrath, the makeup artist, who has worked with Mr. Galliano since 1999, arrived in Paris with 40 cases of supplies. ''Before Christmas, I got the call saying lots of gold, Egypt, the 50's, so I went off to all these places in London,'' Ms. McGrath said on Saturday night as she worked in a room at Dior on Avenue Montaigne with the hairstylist Orlando Pita making dozens of test looks. ''When they say the 50's and Egypt, and it's for couture, you know it's going to be beyond anything.'' In another part of the house, the milliner Stephen Jones contemplated a golden headpiece in the shape of a scorpion. ''I have to really think about keeping up with John,'' said Mr. Jones, who had 25 people working for him on the show. ''Everybody does. We have an idea about what's beautiful and ugly, but John has already moved on, so there's catching up to do.''
What perhaps is not so apparent from the Dior shows is the level of concentration Mr. Galliano has. In December, when the shapes were still being worked out in muslin, he was animated and funny -- superconsiderate, really. But as the collection approached the final days before the show, and the studios were working until 2 or 3 in the morning and only a handful of dresses were ready for final fittings on Saturday night, Mr. Galliano grew quieter, more focused, speaking to Mr. Robinson and Mr. Gaytten in almost a whisper.
''I'm a bit like the clothes,'' Mr. Galliano said at one point. ''There's the surface -- what you see. Who's that crazy guy with the bandanna? But underneath all that there's a structure that's been instilled in me by my parents.''
Mr. Galliano began his research in November in Egypt, taking a trip from Cairo to the ruins of the Nile. But as with every trip, Mr. Galliano rarely returns with a literal idea. Last season he went to India and produced a collection based on all forms of dance -- from tango to 1930's marathon dancing. ''Of course, I didn't want to come back and do India -- that would be too easy,'' he said. ''No more than I wanted to come back from Egypt and do a mummy moment. Though the mummies were quite interesting, with this bandaging idea.'' He did make several dresses of wrapped organdy, with delicate beading, but loosened the bandaging so that his mummies appeared to be glamorously dissolving.
The other idea that Mr. Galliano thought a lot about was the strict line of 1950's fashion, especially the way it related to volume. ''This was just the base of an idea,'' he said in December as he flipped through pictures by Irving Penn and Richard Avedon of Dior and Balenciaga suits and dresses. ''We wanted to produce this concave line, as she shoots forward from the hips, and like those wonderful images of Avedon's in profile,'' he said. ''It's trying to get the longest line on a woman, which is normally from the shoulders diagonally to her feet. When Mr. Dior did his, he was inspired by greyhounds.''
To create what he called his ''sphinx line,'' Mr. Galliano had hip-length corsets made to wear under each outfit -- some of them with an infrastructure that would exaggerate that ''shooting forward'' effect he was talking about -- and all of them in custom colors. He also had the shoulders and sleeves of jackets cut to emphasize the severe line. ''Normally, a sleeve is set more forward,'' he explained. He also found ingenious ways to direct the volume in the clothes, something he thought about after the last show. A pale blue silk jacket, encrusted in stones and pitched tightly at the waist, had a series of suspenders built in the hem, so that it turned under in soft, swept-back folds. Pyramids and obelisks were evoked in collars and three-dimensional, cascading sashes.
Mr. Toledano, the Dior chief executive, stayed up in the studio until the early hours of Monday with the rest of the house. He recalled his reaction to his first Dior haute couture show, in 1998, when Mr. Galliano had models alighting from a train. ''I thought, 'Why? Why all this?' '' Mr. Toledano said. ''We can't do business an easier way?'' He has stopped asking himself that question. Even though some of these dresses will approach six figures, and the house sells only several hundred pieces a season, the investment is well worth it because of the publicity and the creative energy that fuels the other parts of the business. Mr. Galliano's most fertile ideas find their way into ready-to-wear and accessories. He has already ordered a print for his fall ready-to-wear collection based on a Warhol-like collage of Egypt, with a dash of Elizabeth Taylor.
''For John, success is lasting only a few seconds,'' Mr. Toledano observed. ''He is always a step ahead.''
