For Iowa Democrats, Senator John Kerry showed himself to be what he has argued all along he was: the reassuring establishment candidate with the war hero's record, solid policy positions and broad experience in government to be a strong challenger to President Bush. He shattered conventional Iowa wisdom that organization is all.
But the race for the nomination has just begun. The surprise second-place showing by Senator John Edwards of North Carolina reflected similar judgments about how he would stand against Mr. Bush, and makes him a fresh force to contend with, especially in South Carolina, which votes two weeks from Tuesday. With little organization or name recognition in Iowa, the Edwards campaign caught fire in the last 10 days -- a surge the senator attributed to his more optimistic message.
The third-place finish of Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, evaporated the aura of inevitability he once sought here, and his fiery concession contrasted sharply with Mr. Kerry's husky, ''Iowa, I love you,'' and Mr. Edwards's soft, smiling speech.
Yet Dr. Dean still has more money than any rival, a strong operation in New Hampshire, which votes next week, and legions of supporters who are sure to join him in fighting back.
Tradition holds that a victory in Iowa can be worth percentage points in New Hampshire. But the two states have chosen different winners in all but 3 of the 13 competitive nominating contests since 1972.
Perhaps the only definitive development here was Representative Richard A. Gephardt's distant fourth-place finish, which spelled the end of his quest for the White House and probably his political career. He comes from Missouri, he won the Iowa caucuses in 1988 only to run out of money, and he had staked everything on winning again.
Instead, it was Senator Kerry of Massachusetts, fighting 1,300 miles from his home base in Boston, who came back from the cold Monday night. Now he heads to his neighboring state of New Hampshire, where he had struggled for months against Dr. Dean, then Gen. Wesley K. Clark, as the man with the wind in his sails.
General Clark, who entered the race late and made a calculated decision to skip Iowa, may live to regret his choice. Mr. Kerry's victory forces General Clark to fight for the same patch of ground -- strength on national security affairs -- and it sharply shifts the rationale for his own candidacy, which had been predicated on being the Democrats' best anti-Dean choice. General Clark has led Mr. Kerry in recent New Hampshire polls, and if Mr. Kerry now comes on strong, he will face trouble.
In the end, Iowa did what its defenders say it does best: It tested the candidates, over many months, first in small settings and then in a media glare, and revealed weaknesses that were not initially clear and strengths that only gradually became apparent. Whether Dr. Dean's candidacy can be revived remains to be seen, but he was unbowed in defeat. Until now, he had defied expectations at every turn.
Mr. Kerry came here by hard necessity, hoping for a miracle. In his final weeks of frantic campaigning, aided by volunteer support from fellow veterans, he managed to change the subject from perceived doubts about his own personality -- often caricatured as cold and uncomfortable -- and his will to win into questions about whether Dr. Dean's temperament was too hot to make him electable. At his post-caucus rally Monday night, Dr. Dean looked more like Howard Beale, the angry anchor in ''Network,'' than ''Marcus Welby, M.D.,'' while Mr. Kerry was every inch the veteran senator he is.
''John Kerry is the one who has that presidential way about him,'' said Artelle Payne, a retired liquor wholesaler in Waukee, echoing the words of Mr. Kerry's own stump speech and scores of voters interview on their way into caucuses. ''He's the one who can walk right in there on Day 1 and do it.''
Dr. Dean, whose thousands of enthusiastic out-of-state volunteers initially seemed to make him a strong favorite in a caucus system that favors shoe leather and turnout, is far from politically dead. But Mr. Kerry's showing, and Mr. Edwards's rise, complicate Dr. Dean's job enormously and time is short. A campaign that began as a meandering marathon a year ago has been transformed into a mad eight-day dash to New Hampshire -- and to the seven states, from South Carolina to Arizona, that vote on Feb. 3.
''New Hampshire is not going to be the end of this thing,'' said the New Hampshire Democratic chairwoman, Kathleen Sullivan. ''New Hampshire is not last in the nation, we're first in the nation. It's not over in New Hampshire. It goes on.''
Since 1972, no nominee has finished lower than second in New Hampshire, and only Bill Clinton has finished below third in Iowa; he did not compete here in 1992, because Senator Tom Harkin was running as a favorite son.
Judy Reardon, a senior adviser to Mr. Kerry in New Hampshire, could not hide her enthusiasm. ''We're as ready as can be,'' she said in a telephone interview even before the results were in. ''Starting tomorrow, our world here is going to be turned upside down.''
Ms. Sullivan praised Mr. Kerry's effort. ''He really rolled the dice by going to Iowa and fighting there. What a brilliant strategy. He's come roaring back so hard.''
Mr. Edwards, too, vowed to fight on in New Hampshire, and told his supporters: ''Tonight started a movement to change this country that will sweep across America.''
Both Mr. Kerry, who has relied partly on his family's fortune, and Mr. Edwards, who is a millionaire former trial lawyer, will need to raise fresh cash quickly to stay competitive. But in the final days here, even their rivals conceded that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards had the momentum.
For now, all that trumped Dr. Dean's organization. But New Hampshire's motto is ''Live Free or Die,'' and its voters are famously independent.
''They're likely to notice Iowa, and then do what they want anyway,'' said Dudley Dudley, a longtime New Hampshire Democrat now backing General Clark. ''It remains its own place.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEWS ANALYSIS
