These days ambitious theater works are often accompanied by extensive program notes. At their best they are small, valuable essays that prepare the mind and stir the senses. At their worst they are pompous little lectures that let us know we need educating to grasp the full complexity of what we are about to see.
But theatergoers are very lucky to have the program notes that accompany ''Hiroshima Maiden,'' Dan Hurlin's theater piece at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn through Feb. 1. The historian David Serlin, who wrote the notes, does better by the real horrors and ironies of this story than all of Mr. Hurlin's exquisite stagecraft.
In 1955 a group of young Japanese women, disfigured from the bombing of Hiroshima and disdained by Japanese society, were brought to the United States for reconstructive surgery. The Japanese Methodist minister who helped arrange their journey was a guest on ''This Is Your Life,'' the show that helped pioneer both shlock biography and shock reality television. The host, Ralph Edwards, chose to ''surprise'' the minister by bringing him face to face with the co-pilot of the Enola Gay, the plane that dropped the nuclear bomb on Hiroshima.
Using the techniques of Japan's Bunraku puppet theater, Mr. Hurlin concentrates on one young woman. He visualizes her flight as the bomb decimates the city, her isolation and self-loathing in the postwar years and her trip to the United States, where she and the other women were nicknamed the Hiroshima Maidens by a wildly curious public.
Mr. Hurlin (who created and directed the work) also takes dramatic license to imagine that his maiden appeared on ''This Is Your Life,'' too, and that at the show's end she came face to face with the pilot. Then, to dramatize America's willful naïveté during those years, he contrasts the maiden's story with that of a sheltered, middle-class American boy. Sheltered yes, but tainted by the cold war paranoia of bomb drills in school and dire media warnings about the Soviet threat.
Then there are the boy's private moments, which are dwelt on in loving detail and are tied to the larger events with labored metaphors. The boy's mother doesn't want him to look at bad things like car accidents. But he does, and eventually he looks at the bad things of history, too, on television.
The boy's life and perceptions are much too trivial to matter here. If a writer wants to use a child's point of view to illuminate history, he must distance himself from the child. Mr. Hurlin is utterly wrapped up in his child's poignancy and sensitivity. But his prose is rhythmically monotonous and much too precious. Can the embarrassment of wetting one's pants in grade school possibly matter to us in this context?
Worst of all, the boy's words are the only ones spoken in the entire 90 minutes of a work that is, after all, titled ''Hiroshima Maiden.'' Bunraku depended on skilled playwrights. These playwrights used both narrative and dialogue but the narrator (the tayu) held a privileged position. There is no dialogue here at all (except for a few striking moments borrowed from a television broadcast). And the tayu, Dawn Akemi Saito, is made to devote herself exclusively to the American boy. The Japanese, whose story she could also tell, are kept in utter silence.
Can silence sometimes be more powerful than speech? It can, and here it is not. It is reductive, and exposes an ugly irony that I'm sure Mr. Hurlin did not intend. Once again the story of ''the other,'' the foreigner, a story Americans badly need to hear, has become less important than our own homemade American story.
There was so much historical material, including interviews with some of the Hiroshima Maidens, for Mr. Hurlin to draw on. He drew on so little. And the ending that he invents between the pilot and the maiden is infinitely less powerful -- but much more comforting -- than what actually happened.
His puppets are beautifully made, as are the sets that he designed after studying Japanese art and architecture. One feels his love for the beauty of this theatrical form. And one feels nothing else. He has not made art from history. He has been trapped in technique and artsy imagery.
HIROSHIMA MAIDEN
Created and directed by Dan Hurlin; music composed by Robert Een; lighting by Tyler Micoleau; costumes for puppets and actors by Anna Thomford; slides by Julie Alane Simons; stage manager, Brenna St. George Jones. A production of Mapp/Multiarts Projects and Productions, Ann Rosenthal, executive director; Cathy Zimmerman, co-director. Presented by Arts at St. Ann's. At St. Ann's Warehouse, 38 Water Street, Brooklyn.
WITH: Matthew Acheson, Chris Green, Deana Headley, Tom Lee, Yoko Myoi, Kazu Nakamura, Lake Simons, Nami Yamamoto and Eric Wright (puppeteers), Dawn Akemi Saito (narrator) and Jeff Berman, Robert Een and Bill Ruyle (musicians).
THEATER REVIEW
