John Fox acknowledged that a Super Bowl berth in his second season was not exactly the time frame he expected when he took over as head coach of the Carolina Panthers in January 2002.
But he was not about to admit surprise after the Panthers beat Philadelphia, 14-3, on Sunday in the National Football Conference championship game to advance to the Super Bowl on Feb. 1 at Reliant Stadium in Houston.
''Obviously, we're proud of where we are at this point,'' Fox said Monday during his news conference at Bank of America Stadium. ''To say that everybody expected it to happen in two years, I'm not sure everybody expected it to happen that fast. But I saw progress last year. We had some momentum coming out of last season, where we played some playoff-caliber teams and won.
''I think that built a lot of confidence into the off-season. We had a fast start this year. We hit a bump in the road like all teams do and were able to push through it and started playing good at the right time, and that's when the playoffs started.''
The Panthers beat Dallas, St. Louis and Philadelphia on the way to the Super Bowl and were underdogs most of the way. Fox expects the same against New England, which won the Super Bowl two years ago.
''I got asked that all three playoff games, that we hadn't been there, I hadn't been there, all those things,'' Fox said. ''Sometimes ignorance is bliss. We've got a mature group. We've coached them to deal with the present. We're not going to the Super Bowl. We're going to an away game to play the New England Patriots.''
They expect to be relatively healthy for that little away game. Although running back Stephen Davis was questionable heading into Sunday's game with a strained quadriceps, he rushed 19 times for 76 yards. Fox said Davis would be on the initial injury report heading into the Super Bowl. The backup running back Nick Goings has a bruised shoulder and will also be on the report.
The Eagles were battered by the Panthers. Quarterback Donovan McNabb was eventually lost with a rib injury after he was hit by linebacker Greg Favors in the second quarter. Although there were grumblings that it was a late hit by Favors with McNabb already down, Fox defended Favors on Monday.
''There's a lot of things that occur during the course of a game,'' Fox said. ''It's hard to always be perfect. I haven't really viewed it that close, but it wasn't anything done intentional, I can assure you of that.''
PRO FOOTBALL
