After Oleg Kvasha weaved his way to a shot that restored the Islanders' two-goal lead over Ottawa on Monday afternoon, he skated down a receiving line of teammates. He tapped knuckles with each, including goalie Garth Snow, who felt those same knuckles in a fight at practice the day before.
The Islanders found there was nothing like a victory over an Eastern Conference power to smooth the dysfunction, especially after they nearly gave away the game.
A two-goal lead dissolved into a tie in the third period before Isles defenseman Roman Hamrlik guided a nearly blind shot past Ottawa goalie Martin Prusek for his first goal of the season. Kvasha scored 21 seconds later. With the help of two goals by Cliff Ronning, the Islanders gained a 5-2 triumph before 14,213 at Nassau Coliseum.
The Islanders (22-19-4-1) captured a season series from Ottawa (24-12-7-3) for the first time in 10 years, going 2-1-1. The Islanders also avoided an awful episode of déjà vu; they surrendered four straight goals to Ottawa on Thursday and had to settle for a 4-4 tie.
The Islanders took sole possession of the eighth playoff position by coupling two straight victories for the first time since last month with the Rangers' loss Monday at Boston.
For two periods, a charitable Islanders defense kept goalie Rick DiPietro busy. On his back, on his belly and as a point-blank target, DiPietro stopped every shot, 21 in all. Then the Senators' Chris Neil nicked in a deflection off a Zdeno Chara slap shot, and Daniel Alfredsson pounced on a ricochet off DiPietro and Hamrlik to knot the score at 2-2 with 16 minutes 41 seconds to go.
''We regrouped and started to do the little things,'' said Kvasha, who sported a cut upper lip from his scuffle at practice. On Sunday, Kvasha cracked his stick in two across Snow's pads. They exchanged punches before Snow hit Kvasha in the mouth with his blocker. Snow waved off the incident after the game and walked into the weight room.
''That was just a little accident that happens on the ice once in a while,'' Kvasha said.
Coach Steve Stirling called it a positive development -- one that showed Kvasha had some ''fire in his belly.''
The tension surrendered to passionate hockey when the Islanders required it most Monday. They tightened up on defense after losing their lead, and no further heroics were required of DiPietro.
DiPietro was at his stingiest in the first period, making 12 of his 30 saves. That allowed the Islanders' attack to rev up and break through when Jason Blake rammed the puck past Prusek with a gliding left-handed shot to make the score 1-0. Blake had been foiled by Prusek just a few minutes earlier on a breakaway.
The Islanders took a 2-0 lead when Ronning snatched the puck from Ottawa's Curtis Leschyshyn and Neil, who were fumbling for possession behind the goal, and wrapped it around and into the goal.
Ronning added an afterthought goal with 6:09 remaining in the third period that turned out to be a career milestone, his 300th. ''It felt good, but the best part is when the team wins and you're a part of it,'' said Ronning, who has three goals in two games since being acquired by the Islanders Jan. 9 as a free agent. Ronning had been staying in shape by competing in far more casual circumstances.
''When you're skating with I guess you'd say beer-league players who love the game for what it is, and you're out here playing, I'm sure they'll be happy,'' he said.
With Ronning's revival and teammates showing they can thrive on turmoil, Tuesday night's game at Toronto is looking more promising for the road-awful Islanders.
HOCKEY
