The stadium lights were on at 2 o'clock in the morning Monday. It was a strange, bright beacon in the sky in a usually quiet uptown that often goes dark much earlier in the night.
The hour did not seem to matter, and the breezy, cold conditions did not keep fans away. Charlotte has never celebrated sending a team to the Super Bowl before, and thousands crowded behind barriers outside Bank of America Stadium to welcome the Carolina Panthers home after a 14-3 victory over the Eagles in the National Football Conference championship game Sunday night in Philadelphia.
The victory sent the Panthers to the Super Bowl for the first time in franchise history and sent fans into the streets of Charlotte, screaming, honking their horns, waving team flags and reveling.
''The best thing about this is you look all around this whole town, all you see is smiles,'' said Mark Tait, 40, of Rock Hill, S.C., who drove 20 miles to the stadium after the game.
Mayor Pat McCrory was among the smiling. He attended the game in Philadelphia and flew back immediately after, arriving at the stadium rally shortly before 2 a.m. McCrory said he was harassed by Eagles fans at Lincoln Financial Field and was escorted out by 25 police officers after the Panthers won.
''They know how to curse in Philly,'' he said. ''They're tough. Those are the toughest fans. I've never been called so many names in my life.''
He added, ''They found out I was mayor and we got a lot of beer thrown our way, I'll tell you that.''
The Panthers had anticipated a crowd; team security workers contacted the city police earlier in the week to prepare for such an event. Dozens of police officers were at the stadium controlling the crowd, which was estimated at several thousand. Two fire trucks were there, one with a firefighter atop waving a huge Panthers flag.
Maj. Maurice Keith said the police had to stop some fans from climbing atop the massive panther statues that adorn the entries to the stadium, but there appeared to be little problem with crowd control.
A band played in front of the stadium steps, a local disc jockey fired up the crowd while they waited for the team buses to arrive. Fans happily trampled the manicured lawns and flower beds around the stadium.
Many brought children, some carried signs. There was ''Ricky Manning Bakery -- Turnovers Made Every Day,'' in reference to the three interceptions by Manning, a Panthers cornerback; and ''How Do You Like Us Now?''
Some in the Philadelphia news media spent the week leading up to the game insulting Charlotte and the Panthers, who had reached the playoffs just once before in team history. That was in 1996, the second season for the franchise, when the Panthers lost to Green Bay in the N.F.C. championship game.
The Panthers dropped to the bottom of the league in 2001 with a 1-15 record. The resurgence began after that season with the hiring of Coach John Fox, the former Giants defensive coordinator.
Under Fox, the Panthers were 7-9 last season before this year's breakthrough 11-5 record and N.F.C. South title. Still, the Panthers have not been included on anyone's list of the N.F.L.'s elite teams.
''I told the guys on this team, I said, 'Look, don't expect any kind of respect,' '' wide receiver Muhsin Muhammad said. ''Respect is something that is not given, it's something that's taken. So we've got to go out and we've got to earn respect, and that's what we're working on doing right now, earning respect.''
The Panthers had no such problems in Charlotte. A police escort took the team buses to the stadium shortly after 2 a.m., fans roaring as the buses pulled into the stadium parking lot. Players signed autographs and offensive lineman Todd Steussie carried the George Halas Trophy, given to the N.F.C. champion, along the barrier so fans could touch it.
''Everybody's real excited,'' Fox said Monday afternoon during his weekly news conference, adding: ''They've hung with us for a long time. It's been long overdue.''
The fans are not about to believe this run is over. Tait, who showed up at the stadium wearing a Jake Delhomme jersey, a Panther tube hat and face paint, said he believed some kind of karma was carrying the Panthers. He pointed to regular-season losses to Dallas and Philadelphia, two of their playoff opponents, and a loss to the Houston Texans at Reliant Stadium, site of Super Bowl XXXVIII.
''Look what's happened now,'' he said of the Panthers' playoff run. ''We beat Dallas, then beat Philadelphia and now we're going to win in Houston.''
PRO FOOTBALL
