While most of the anguished debate about ground zero has focused on recreating and remembering what was once there, another effort has been moving forward to create on the site something that never existed, an environmentally sensitive city within a city that is attuned to nature as well as the real estate market.
Over the last year, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation and Larry A. Silverstein, the developer who holds the commercial lease on the World Trade Center, aided by environmentalists and builders, have put together development guidelines. Those guidelines will help shape how the office buildings and retail space, including the Freedom Tower, manage their energy consumption while minimizing their impact on the city's environment.
The guidelines set a new standard for New York. The roofs of buildings will be designed to catch rainwater for flushing toilets and boosting cooling systems. Developers will be encouraged to reuse pilings and other materials already on site and to specify that recycled material and products made from renewable resources, like fast-growing trees and sunflower seed husks, be used for interior and insulating materials.
The guidelines are not limited to the buildings but extend to the period of construction, requiring all large diesel engines on the building site to use ultra-low-sulfur fuel to reduce emissions. Half of all the waste wood, cardboard and metal generated during construction will be recycled, and construction crews will be encouraged to substitute corn oil or other natural substances for petroleum-based oils to keep concrete from sticking to wooden forms.
Although individual buildings in New York and other cities have been built to exacting environmental standards in recent years, such ''green'' goals have never been applied to anything as large as the trade center site, which when complete will contain about as much commercial space as the city of Indianapolis.
''We're talking about building an environmentally sensitive city. That's never been done before,'' said Daniel R. Tishman, chairman of Tishman Construction Corp., which is overseeing construction of the first building at ground zero, the new 7 World Trade Center, as well as the Freedom Tower.
Mr. Tishman, who holds degrees in environmental studies, helped devise the sustainable development guidelines.
Environmental groups in New York generally support the effort, though they expect to continue to push for even higher standards.
''This 16-acre site should not result in very good buildings, because very good is not enough,'' said Ashok Gupta, director of the Natural Resources Defense Council air and energy program, and an adviser to the group that drew up the guidelines. ''These buildings should be the best that can be built.''
The guidelines are an appendix to a draft environmental impact statement for the trade center site that is expected to be released for public comment today. But hints of how the new standards may be applied are already evident in the construction of 7 World Trade Center.
Located just to the north of the main trade center redevelopment site, the original building was destroyed in the attack on Sept. 11, 2001. So was the Consolidated Edison substation on which it stood.
Mr. Silverstein and Gov. George E. Pataki announced the start of construction at 7 World Trade Center in November 2002, disappointing critics who thought nothing should happen until planning for the trade center site was complete.
Although the design guidelines were not yet compiled, the project followed an environmentally sensitive course that added roughly $10.3 million to the cost, company officials said. In most instances, energy savings will not offset the added costs in the three to four years by which developers generally expect their payback, but meeting strict environmental standards can bring other rewards.
Janno Lieber, director of the trade center project for the Silverstein organization, said that building an office tower that uses less energy, recycles water and triple-filters inside air enhanced the marketability of the project, but that was not the only reason for taking the extra steps. He said Mr. Silverstein considered the trade center redevelopment a personal mission.
''This was a down payment on the broader commitment that Larry has made to having the trade center redevelopment be state of the art from an environmental standpoint,'' Mr. Lieber said.
The first bows to the environment came as construction began. Diesel engines at construction sites are largely unregulated sources of air pollution. To lower emissions, large diesel engines were fitted with powerful filters and switched to ultra-low-sulfur fuel. Bulldozers and backhoes used to clear the site were also converted. Now that steel is going up, the crane that hauls girders into place uses the new filters and fuel.
The success of the program helped lead to the adoption of a city law mandating the use of low-sulfur fuel and high-efficiency filters in all public construction.
At 52 stories, the building will be taller than its predecessor but will have a smaller footprint and less space. It will harvest natural sunlight through floor-to-ceiling windows specially coated to reflect heat and allow plenty of natural light into the building. Rainwater collected on the roof and stored in tanks in the building will be reused in toilets or will flow into the drip irrigation system for a small park that will be built next to the site. The architect designing the park will select hardy plants and trees that need little water.
Computers will control heating and lighting throughout the office building. Power to commercial tenants will be metered, which is expected to encourage conservation. A system to use some of the heating steam to generate electricity will produce about 150 kilowatts, reducing the building's reliance on the energy grid by about 3 percent.
Mr. Lieber, the project manager, said the environmental features accounted for 3 to 5 percent of the cost of constructing 7 World Trade Center. The total cost of the project, comprising direct and indirect costs, was given in Liberty Bond filings at $540 million. Commercial tenants, not the building's owners, will realize most energy savings, Mr. Lieber said.
The Freedom Tower, which the Tishman company will also build for the Silverstein organization, will incorporate many of the same environmental features as 7 World Trade Center, and a few not put in effect there. For instance, the tower, a much larger building, will be more energy independent because it will have propeller-driven wind turbines proposed by David M. Childs, a partner in the firm of Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill who was design architect for 7 World Trade Center. Wind power is to furnish up to 10 percent of the tower's electricity.
Not every proposal made it into the guidelines. One that was abandoned as impractical called for all the steel and other construction material to be delivered to the site aboard a specially designated PATH train. Mr. Tishman said such a plan would not work because suppliers are too dispersed.
Meeting the guidelines will make it possible for developers to win rankings under a system known as Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design, or LEED, a national standard. No building in New York City has won a LEED award. But as environmental efficiency becomes more expected, New York builders have felt compelled to respond with greener buildings.
The Tishman company, which has developed a reputation for environmental awareness, has built several such buildings in recent years, including the Condé Nast building at 4 Times Square and the Westin New York at Times Square.
The Hearst Corporation is putting up a tower above its headquarters at Eighth Avenue and 56th Street that may receive national energy efficiency certification.
