Streaking Pittsburgh was due to lose, and Connecticut  well, the Huskies were expected to win, especially playing at home Monday night after losing that big one out of conference on the road over the weekend.
That is the way it ended up in the din of the Hartford Civic Center, with Connecticut prevailing, 68-65, to improve its overall record to 15-2 and its Big East record to 3-0. But what a fight the Panthers put up in falling to 18-1 and 4-1, ending the nation's longest winning streak. What a game. What a rivalry.
After trailing early by 10 points and for the first part of the second half, Pittsburgh seemed relentless under the leadership of guard Carl Krauser. He scored 24 points and did a little bit of everything else. Appropriately, on the last play of the game, Krauser had the ball and he gave his team a chance to tie.
Taking an inbounds pass at the baseline, he dribbled past Ben Gordon on the right side, raced downcourt, found Antonio Graves open on the left side and passed to him.
Graves attempted a 3-pointer that hit the rim and bounced out as the buzzer ended the tension and started the celebration. Graves is a freshman who played only six minutes. Why pass to him instead of shoot?
''I didn't want to be selfish,'' Krauser said. ''I believed in him.''
Pittsburgh beat Connecticut last spring in the Big East tournament championship game; the Huskies beat the Panthers in that game the year before. This year they play once more in the regular season. After that, who knows?
''It's going to be good for us, it's going to be good for UConn, it's going to be good for the Big East,'' Krauser said of the growing rivalry.
Jim Calhoun, the coach of the Huskies, said of this game: ''We're better than we were last year, and they gave us everything we could handle. They're the real deal. They're really, really good. Only the brave dare report for that game. If you weren't going to stand up, you were going to get knocked down.''
The lead changed 10 times, and the score was tied six times. Pittsburgh had a rebounding edge of 37-30. The Huskies had more fast-break points, 10-4, but they did not run as much as they wanted to.
Denham Brown led Connecticut with 20 points; Gordon added 16. Emeka Okafor had seven rebounds and five blocked shots against the big Panthers front line of Chevron Troutman and Chris Taft.
Besides his 24 points, Krauser also had 5 assists, 4 rebounds and 3 steals. Julius Page of the Panthers had 14 points and Jaron Brown added 12.
One of Okafor's blocks came after Krauser drove and tried to lay it up, his team down by 3 points with 14 seconds left. ''He hit that exact same layup two times earlier,'' Okafor said. ''So I was looking for it.''
The Huskies, ranked first in the nation last week, fell to fourth in the Associated Press poll because they lost on Saturday at North Carolina, 86-83.
''We're a tough team,'' Okafor said. ''We learned from our mistakes in the N.C. game.''
The Panthers, ranked 13th last week, moved up to eighth after increasing their winning streak to 18 with a 59-49 victory over Rutgers.
Despite the defeat and the end of their streak, the Panthers seemed proud that they had played so well against such a good team in hostile territory. They were sensitive to criticism that they had padded their record with victories against weak teams at home.
Jamie Dixon, who replaced Ben Howland as coach this season, said: ''I've never been more proud of them. They battled. They competed. You can't win every game. We're going to respond. We've got character. We've got the kids.''
Of Krauser, Dixon added: ''He learned as the game went on tonight. He just seemed to get better and better.''
Krauser, a sophomore from the Bronx, has replaced Brandin Knight, an all-American, with a different kind of leadership. He acknowledged that his critics find him too flashy. He did not seem to mind. He dribbles with both hands and takes the ball up against anyone, anywhere.
''Coming from New York, I live for situations like this,'' Krauser said. ''Soon as the lights go on, I'm there like a Broadway show.''
Of the end of the streak, Krauser smiled and said: ''Eighteen and one. I can deal with that.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
