On Monday night, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri came back to the Starlite Ballroom, where it all began.
Mr. Gephardt was 47 and strawberry blond when he stood in the ballroom in 1988 and celebrated his victory in the Iowa caucuses before a delirious crowd in his first presidential campaign. He dropped out of that race later, but his victory here propelled him to the leadership of the Democratic Party in the House.
This time around, the ballroom was again full of friends, relatives and supporters, many of them veterans of that first campaign.
But the magic he hoped to recreate was gone.
Mr. Gephardt, now 62 and with silver-tinged hair, conceded his defeat in Iowa, and three campaign aides said he would drop out of the race. Mr. Gephardt implied that he was abandoning his presidential bid after a fourth-place showing in the caucuses here, and acknowledged that someone else would be the nominee. ''I will support that candidate in any way that I can,'' he said.
''My campaign to fight for working people may be ending tonight, but our fight will never end,'' he said.
''This didn't come out the way we wanted,'' he said, his voice quavering. ''But I've been through tougher fights in my life.''
As he spoke, almost everyone understood that they were witnessing the likely end of the career of a man who had served as the Democratic leader in the House for 13 years, leading some of the most important legislative battles over trade, Medicare and the economy.
Instead of heading to rallies in New Hampshire and South Carolina on Tuesday, he was scheduled to fly on Monday night to St. Louis, the city where his political career was born.
Bob Dole, the former Senate Republican leader, said in an interview on CNN: ''I feel bad for Dick Gephardt. His campaign is likely over.''
Republican leaders had described Mr. Gephardt as one of the most formidable Democratic contenders in the race. And Mr. Gephardt had hoped to repeat history by recreating the coalition of the elderly, union members and farmers who swept him to victory in Iowa in 1988. He developed a broad plan to provide universal health care to all Americans, garnered the support of 21 unions and reassembled much of his former campaign team.
But he struggled to raise money, falling short of his goals. He repeatedly battled the perception among voters, friends and supporters that his time had come and gone. He lost one prominent endorsement after another and fought a campaign that some voters believed was too negative and that other voters believed lacked passion.
''Dick Gephardt was one of the strongest possible contenders, not only because of his Midwestern roots, his experience in Washington, D.C., and his integrity,'' said Donna Brazile, who worked for his 1988 campaign and managed the Gore-Lieberman campaign in 2000. ''He also had the army of organized labor, the muscle of the Democratic Party.
''But Dick's support, in many ways, was frozen in time. He has tremendous, strong and loyal supporters. But they're the same people who embraced him in 1988, and they didn't bring their neighbors with them this time.''
Mr. Gephardt recognized early on that his 27 years in Congress might seem a disadvantage to Democratic voters. In his speech announcing his candidacy in February 2002, he acknowledged that he might not appeal to voters looking for a fresh face or ''the flavor of the month.''
And on the campaign trail, he took pains not to look and sound like a Washington bureaucrat. He shed the sober business suits he typically wore on Capitol Hill in favor of V-neck sweaters and khaki trousers. He talked about growing up in the Baptist Church, about his son's battle to overcome cancer and about his own hardships growing up in an impoverished family in St. Louis.
But he also believed that after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, his long years of experience would appeal to an electorate looking for steady hands. And so he darted through rusting industrial towns and farming communities here describing how he had fought to pass President Bill Clinton's economic plan in 1993 and to prevent Republicans from cutting Medicare in 1995.
It was a gamble, particularly with rivals like Howard Dean, who galvanized support as a self-proclaimed outsider. But it was the only card he had to play.
Norman Ornstein, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and an expert on Congress, said Mr. Gephardt knew, going into this race, that ''he wouldn't emerge as the slam-dunk guy here.'' Mr. Ornstein also said that Mr. Gephardt believed he had done what he could in Congress and that it was time for him to give up the comfort of his House seat to reach for higher office.
Brenda Thies, a 44-year-old pharmacist who attended one of Mr. Gephardt's rallies this month, said she was concerned that he was ''seen as the old guard.''
Ms. Thies said she liked his promise to provide universal health insurance and his commitment to renegotiating trade deals. But she said she worried about the viability of his candidacy. ''It's not the issues this time,'' she said. ''This time, I want someone who's going to win.''
It was a question that haunted his campaign, even in a state he had cultivated for more than a decade.
''He's put in so much time and effort here,'' said Laura Nichols, who worked for Mr. Gephardt's campaign in 1988 and served as his spokeswoman for years. ''It's heartbreaking.''
In recent days, Mr. Gephardt seemed at times to sense what was coming. On Sunday, he told a crowd of supporters that he had been thinking about his life.
''A flood of memories comes back to me now,'' Mr. Gephardt said as he stood on a stage flanked by his wife, Jane, his son, Matt, and his daughters, Kate and Chrissy. ''I've tried to shut my eyes and just reflect on what I've done through the years.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MISSOURI CONGRESSMAN
