Twenty-five years ago Brooke Adams was making moviegoing men sigh with her effortless beauty and killer smile. Now, midway through middle age, she is promoting a new film whose central premise is that she looks like hell.
The film, which has its New York opening on Friday, is a subtle comedy called ''Made-Up.'' Ms. Adams plays a former actress named Elizabeth who has the dubious pleasure of being given a makeover by her teenage daughter while having the whole thing filmed for a documentary. Elizabeth is that woman of a certain age, left by her husband for a younger woman, often at war with her teenager, ambivalent about her own looks. She is, in fact, a woman not unlike Brooke Adams.
''Certainly it's true that the relationship between my aging self and my 15-year-old daughter is very much like the one in the movie,'' Ms. Adams said in a telephone interview from her home in Los Angeles. ''The actress having given up her career to be a mother is definitely autobiographical. My husband, luckily, has not left me for a younger woman. Yet.'' (He is the actor Tony Shalhoub, and he makes his directing debut in ''Made-Up.'')
Elizabeth fluctuates wildly between not caring about her looks and caring desperately, between despising those younger and prettier and envying them. How much of that emotional roller coaster has Ms. Adams herself ridden over the years?
''All of it,'' she said. ''Absolutely all of it.''
In Hollywood's version of her prime, Ms. Adams played the love interest of some dashing men: Richard Gere in ''Days of Heaven'' (1978), Sean Connery in ''Cuba'' (1979), Christopher Walken in ''The Dead Zone'' (1983). These men of course are still considered dashing, while women in Ms. Adams's age bracket -- she turns 55 next month -- are barely considered at all. With the exception of the occasional film like ''Something's Gotta Give,'' with Diane Keaton, they are cinematic second-class citizens.
Some actresses fight against that tide more than others. Ms. Adams had an active decade and a half; in addition to her films, there was stage work like ''Key Exchange'' off Broadway and ''The Heidi Chronicles'' on Broadway. But after starring in the acclaimed Allison Anders film ''Gas Food Lodging'' in 1992, she more or less gave up the business. Or vice versa. ''There were no roles,'' she said. ''I suddenly would find myself sitting in the waiting room to go in for a five-line part that they were making me read for. My ego couldn't take it; it was too depressing. So it kind of gave me up.
''Then there was a moment when I actually said, 'Damn it, I'm leaving,' '' Ms. Adams continued. ''Sort of hoping that everybody would say: 'You can't! You can't!' And nobody did.'' It's a deflating transition for any actress. ''I think it's especially hard for someone who was really considered a beauty,'' Ms. Adams said. ''It's just very hard to suddenly become invisible when you walk on the street, not to get those looks from men -- all of that stuff that you kind of take for granted and pretend you don't care about or don't like, but you rely on a lot.''
Ms. Adams had a good reason to leave the business: being a parent was becoming more important than being an actress. In 1988, as a single mother, she had adopted a girl named Josie. After she married Mr. Shalhoub in 1992 (they had met when both were in ''The Heidi Chronicles''), they adopted Sophie, now 10.
There have been periodic small roles, including one last season on Mr. Shalhoub's widely praised television show, ''Monk,'' but mostly she has found that the two worlds do not mix well.
''It's such a weird thing to be a mother,'' Ms. Adams said. ''Being a mother is more like being wallpaper. It's not being the center of attention. And so I think for a woman who's a mother, it is very hard to be an actress, to get all excited about yourself in the center seat.''
All of that is embodied in ''Made-Up,'' a droll mockumentary in which there is a film within a film, and another layer of unstated story on top of that for anyone who knows the players. The movie was written by Lynne Adams, Brooke's older sister, who portrays Elizabeth's older sister, the one making the documentary. (Lynne Adams has her own used-to-be-famous lament; she was Leslie Bauer on ''The Guiding Light'' for much of the 1960's and 70's.)
Mr. Shalhoub not only directed the film, but he also plays Elizabeth's love interest. Oh, and some of the artwork on the walls of Lynne Adams's house in Massachusetts, where parts of the film were shot, are by an aspiring artist named Brooke Adams.
All three stars will be on hand for question-and-answer sessions after the film's Friday afternoon and evening showings at the Angelika Film Center in Greenwich Village. The next day they travel to the Cinema Arts Center in Huntington, on Long Island; in coming weeks the film opens in Los Angeles and Boston.
''Made-Up,'' with its themes of outer vs. inner beauty and the shallow pursuit of good looks, feels as if it were commenting on the mania represented by television shows like ''Extreme Makeover'' and ''Nip/Tuck.'' But it had its genesis years before those shows, as a one-woman play written and performed by Lynne Adams. The play, titled ''Two-Faced,'' had success in Los Angeles and elsewhere and was eventually optioned for a movie. When that deal fell through, the Adams sisters decided to make the film themselves. In the process the story written by Lynne started to sound more and more like the real-life story of Brooke.
''Brooke and I have this phenomenon,'' her sister said. ''When I write something, it turns out to be true for her.''
One thing in Lynne's script, though, is not exactly true: Brooke Adams hardly needs a makeover, even if she didn't pursue the fountain of youth as rabidly as some of her contemporaries.
''It really was actually a problem in the beginning when we started thinking about it,'' Lynne Adams said. ''If Brooke looks pretty good and is sitting saying she hates how she looks, that's not going to work very well.''
And so for the film, Brooke had to be uglied up a bit. ''The prosthetics were crazy,'' she joked. ''It was like Charlize Theron in 'Monster.' '' That sense of humor pervades ''Made-Up.'' Both sisters seem to have arrived at a place where the obsession with appearance is more a source of amusement than a source of anguish. The cult of beauty doesn't need to be condemned, just considered.
''Personally, I don't make a judgment about it,'' Lynne Adams said. ''My feeling is that we just have to think about it, be aware of it.
''Of course it's bad, it's superficial, it's a whole lot of things, but we all know that. We don't need to tell people that. What I would like is that women, when they look in the mirror and they start hating the way they look, that they just remember the movie, and it kind of makes them laugh a little.''
