The man convicted of masterminding the kidnapping and killing of the American journalist Daniel Pearl was transferred Sunday to a prison here, and a leading Pakistani newspaper reported that he had been moved so he could be interrogated about assassination attempts last month on the country's president.
Abdur Rauf Chaudhry, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said the prisoner, Ahmed Omar Sheikh, who has been sentenced to death, had been transferred from a prison in central Pakistan for security reasons. ''Such hardened criminals form groups if they are allowed to stay at one place for a long time,'' he said. ''This is why, because of security concerns, criminals are shifted to various jails.''
But other government officials said Mr. Sheikh had been moved so he could be interrogated about the twin assassination attempts on the president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, a leading Pakistani newspaper reported. The newspaper, Dawn, also reported that officials planned to ask Mr. Sheikh about links to Al Qaeda.
Before Mr. Pearl was kidnapped two years ago, Mr. Sheikh was a leading member of the militant group Jaish-e-Muhammad, or Army of Muhammad. Investigators have identified one of two suicide bombers who tried to kill General Musharraf on Dec. 25 as an ethnic Kashmiri who was once a member of the group, said a senior Western diplomat. The second man was an Afghan.
Mr. Sheikh could have information about how Jaish-e-Muhammad cells operate. Mr. Sheikh, an astute British-born militant, who had kidnapped other foreigners in the past, also appears to sit at a nexus of Pakistani militant groups and Al Qaeda operatives that is far broader than investigators first thought.
In January 2002, Mr. Sheikh lured Mr. Pearl to a trap, offering him an interview with an Islamic cleric having ties with the ''shoe bomber,'' Richard C. Reid, a man accused of trying to blow up a trans-Atlantic flight in December 2001 with explosive-laden sneakers. In the months after Mr. Pearl was killed and Mr. Sheikh arrested, most investigators believed Mr. Sheikh and other Islamic militants hatched the plot.
