At any violin recital the performer's challenge can be simply stated: How do you combine two hours, four strings and an unforgiving box of wood to achieve transcendence?
Four players -- Alexander Sitkovetsky, Carmit Zori, Frank Huang and Jennifer Koh -- offered widely varying suggestions at recent recitals around Manhattan. These violinists are at different stages of their careers, but in each case the performance offered an important chance to convey a sense of individuality in a crowded field of aspiring soloists.
Mr. Sitkovetsky would seem to be in an enviable position. Born in Moscow and educated in London, he hails from a distinguished musical family and already has two CD's on EMI. His mother, Olga Sitkovetsky, was the piano accompanist on his first disc, and on his recently released second disc, his uncle, Dmitri Sitkovetsky, conducts the New European Strings and joins him in the Bach Double Concerto.
But sometimes the best thing a family can do is step back. That is certainly what Mr. Sitkovetsky needed for his performance at the Frick Collection on Jan. 11. It was after all his New York debut, a chance to sound a real notice of arrival. Instead the afternoon was dominated by his great-aunt, the formidable Russian pianist Bella Davidovich. She accompanied him but also performed solo works for a full half of the program.
One couldn't help feeling a little sorry for Mr. Sitkovetsky, who spent the first half-hour of his debut offstage while Ms. Davidovich played outsize Mozart.
When the violinist finally emerged for the Ravel Sonata, the balances were skewed and his own more modest sound was routinely covered by the throbbing piano.
The Franck Sonata in the second half was better proportioned, and Mr. Sitkovetsky poured his lean yet warm tone into the music's soaring phrases, managing to sustain its impassioned lyricism and preserve its broad arcs of sound. Perhaps next time he can find an accompanist with whom he stands on more equal footing.
Two days later in Weill Recital Hall, the Israeli-born violinist Carmit Zori offered a more traditionally formatted recital, accompanied by the veteran pianist Gilbert Kalish and presented by Pro Musicis. Ms. Zori is not a flashy player, but her technique is solid, and she has a way of drawing in the listener through genuine musical commitment and a sincere expressivity. She also demonstrated that violinists, like singers, can inhabit many different dramatic personae over the course of a recital, changing characters with each new work by transforming her tone and musical coloring as the program progressed.
A sprightly and insouciant sonata by the 18th-century composer Jean-Marie Leclair occasioned an open and bright sound, which gave way to a focused, dark and probing tone for Beethoven's Sonata No. 7.
Later she found a rawer and more cutting tone for the American premiere of Boris Pigovat's ''Prayer,'' a somber memorial work full of long sinuous violin lines and eerily glowing harmonies that called to mind an intermingling of Messiaen and Shostakovich.
If Ms. Zori sought to enchant through her musical commitment and her varied characterizations, Frank Huang's recital the next night in Alice Tully Hall beguiled with old-fashioned virtuoso flair. Mr. Huang, who won the prestigious Naumburg competition last year, plays with a smooth tone and a sleek and powerful technique. This was most evident in a dazzling encore performance of ''La Campanella'' by Paganini, a fiendishly difficult work that presents one instrumental stunt after another. Mr. Huang navigated the hurdles with seeming ease, at one point tossing off fistfuls of left-hand pizzicato as if he were simply scattering sand on a beach.
But the recital was not all virtuoso high jinks. Mr. Huang presented the world premiere of a solo sonata by Donald Martino, commissioned for him by the Naumburg Foundation. Building on the solo sonata tradition of Ysaye and Bartok, Mr. Martino's work is dense and rugged with a visceral immediacy extending from its jagged lines and piquant harmonies. Mr. Huang admirably captured its driving energy.
He also offered fine renditions of Ravel's Sonata and the Schubert's C major Fantasy, though he seemed less assured in the music's slower and more searching passages. Surely a player of his facility could sing more through the meltingly beautiful opening gestures of the Schubert. The pianist Dina Vainshtein gave ample support, though their collaboration seldom reached the seamless give and take of chamber music.
The final recital of the group took place on Sunday at Town Hall, where the violinist Jennifer Koh and the pianist Benjamin Hochman played music by Schubert, Chopin, Ysaye and Beethoven. The program seemed on the conservative side for Ms. Koh, who has distinguished herself as an adventurous musician with a flair for performing contemporary music, including concertos by the downtown avant-gardist John Zorn and the West Coast pioneer Lou Harrison.
Still, her playing was fiery and impassioned, most of all in Ysaye's Sonata No. 4, where she routinely pushed notes almost to their breaking point in a way that sent the pulse racing. The sonata was written in the early 20th century, but in her hands it felt thrillingly modern.
Ms. Koh poured the same intensity into Beethoven's Sonata No. 7, though here it seemed less organically suited to the music and often came at the expense of tone quality, particularly in her fiercely bowed triple-stopped chords that sounded full of wood. I would much rather hear this music played too aggressively than too timidly. And to their credit, Ms. Koh and Mr. Hochman listened carefully to each other, rendering the sonata not as a soliloquy for either player but as a well-balanced dialogue of equals.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
