Two years after President Bush described Iraq, Iran and North Korea as an ''axis of evil'' -- perhaps the signature phrase of his presidency -- his foreign policy aides contend that his uncompromising language and willingness to use military force have changed the behavior of potential enemies.
But that change has come at a cost, government officials from Asia to the Islamic world say, as resistance to Mr. Bush's calls for reform and democratization has hardened in some places.
Mr. Bush plans to return to the theme of reform in his State of the Union address on Tuesday, his aides say, though he will not repeat the phrase that prompted an outcry from his critics and allies alike.
Iraq, with its long record of defying the United Nations, was the first to absorb the Bush administration's wrath. But the decision to invade Iraq 14 months after the president's speech changed the diplomatic landscape.
With Iran and North Korea, the administration has so far pursued diplomacy, and administration officials acknowledge that military force would be far riskier to use against either country.
In the State of the Union speech, which is to begin at 9 p.m. Eastern time, Mr. Bush will urge countries to follow the example of Libya, which recently announced that it would dismantle its nascent nuclear weapons program, a step the administration attributes to Mr. Bush's confrontational stance toward nations seeking chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
Administration officials say Iran, Sudan and to some extent Syria appear to be doing what they can to avoid confrontation with the United States.
Iran's reluctant agreement to let international inspectors explore nuclear facilities kept secret for 18 years seems at least partly driven by the fear of attack. Syria has embraced a pragmatic approach, and its border with Iraq is no longer viewed as a passage for militants seeking to attack American forces in Iraq.
North Korea remains the stubborn outlier. Last week, its foreign minister boasted to a delegation of visiting Americans that the more time Mr. Bush spent trying to build pressure on the country to disarm, the more time North Korea had to add to its nuclear arsenal.
The C.I.A. believes that North Korea has done exactly that, producing the fuel for two or three more bombs while Mr. Bush was focused on Iraq.
Across the Islamic world, reformists from Iran to Egypt say Mr. Bush's words and style have made it easier for their opponents to tar them as lackeys of Washington.
On issues from political reform to rewriting school curriculums, those pushing for democracy or expanded rights for women find themselves facing vociferous accusations that they are pursuing an American agenda, or American dictums.
Administration officials respond that over time Mr. Bush's pressure will aid those reform movements, not hurt them. ''I cannot see how being truthful about the nature of regimes is harmful to those who want to change those regimes,'' Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's national security adviser, said in an interview from Camp David, where she was editing the last drafts of the State of the Union speech that the president will deliver on Tuesday.
''When Ronald Reagan spoke out against the Soviet Union,'' she said, ''it stimulated those inside, who saw they had friends around the world, and they were able to speak out. It will be easier, not harder, for democratic forces to prevail.''
Ms. Rice is among the most passionate advocates of the position that Mr. Bush changed the landscape when he uttered the phrase two years ago, though she and others say it will not appear in this year's speech. It was not repeated in last year's State of the Union address either.
She insisted that despite the criticism directed at Mr. Bush after the speech two years ago -- that there was no axis, and that Mr. Bush hurt America's cause by labeling certain states as outlaws -- the approach had been vindicated. ''It really challenged the international community to get serious about this class of states pursuing weapons of mass destruction,'' she said.
Ms. Rice cited Mr. Bush's Proliferation Security Initiative, in which a dozen or so countries have begun to intercept suspected weapons shipments, as an example of how the White House had motivated allies to act.
A senior defense official said: ''What he did was get the whole world's attention. It's had an effect beyond the three nations, and whether that was accidental or calculated, in retrospect I think it was a smart thing to do.''
Whether it was smart or not, Muslim scholars and officials have acknowledged in interviews that Mr. Bush fundamentally altered the way the United States dealt with the Islamic world once he spoke in such stark terms.
''It changed the status quo in the region for the first time since the 1979 Islamic revolution in Iran,'' says Abdul Rahman al-Rashed, a Saudi columnist and former editor of the pan-Arab daily Al Sharq al Awsat published in London.
''Did Bush scare people?'' Mr. Rashed said. ''In my opinion, yes, he did scare every single regime. Was that positive? It shows some positive elements, except in the street: it was perceived in the street as arrogance.''
The administration and its supporters say the evidence that Mr. Bush's combination of stark language and willingness to use force had the greatest effect on countries like Syria, which has softened its tone and heeded warnings to patrol its border with Iraq.
But when Secretary of State Colin L. Powell suggested Friday that Syria should follow Libya's example and give up its unconventional weapons, the country's state-run news organizations shot back that Israel should first give up its nuclear program.
Around the same time as the Iraq invasion, Iran began to concede that it had been secretly working to enrich uranium, though it denied that it was planning to use the material for an atomic bomb.
Reluctantly, it allowed international inspectors into the country and turned over documents detailing 18 years of surreptitious activities. It signed an accord allowing more intrusive inspections, all steps that Saddam Hussein refused to take.
Ms. Rice and others see a direct connection between Iran's new tone and Mr. Bush's approach, even while noting that the United States has pursued a far less confrontational strategy with Iran and North Korea than it did with Iraq. Yet even reformist members of Iran's Parliament like Ali Shakourirad said the administration overstated its own influence.
''Bush's 'axis of evil' speech did not have much effect on our policies,'' he said in a recent interview, ''except it made efforts for the détente policy with the U.S. worse.'' Mr. Shakourirad argued that pressure from the far more soft-spoken Europeans and the International Atomic Energy Agency had more to do with Iran's decisions. ''The pressure from the U.S. was not that effective,'' he said.
In Libya, the country's mercurial leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, apparently worried about sharing Mr. Hussein's fate, began negotiations with the United States and Britain to destroy his own unconventional weapons the week before the Iraq war began. He did not make concessions, though, until a ship full of centrifuge parts headed for its ports was intercepted in October.
''Libya came to the United States and Great Britain to do it,'' Ms. Rice argued. ''That said something about who was enforcing the world's demands.''
But a longtime Republican adviser to Mr. Bush suggested last week that the impact of Mr. Bush's speech and subsequent actions was ''dramatically overblown,'' and that Colonel Qaddafi had begun moving to end his isolation several years ago, when he turned over suspects in the Lockerbie airplane bombing case.
Whatever the source of the concessions, the example of force used against Iraq has become part of the public mindset.
Western diplomats report that at a recent soccer match involving Saadi el-Qaddafi, Colonel Qaddafi's soccer-playing son, fans from the opposing side chanted ''Saadi, Saadi, son of the ruler, your fate will be the fate of Uday.'' The phrase -- it rhymes in Arabic -- refers to one of the sons of Mr. Hussein who was killed in an American raid.
On the Democratic campaign trail in Iowa and New Hampshire, Mr. Bush's ''axis of evil'' speech is often cited as an example of how he needlessly alienated other nations.
''I think it was one of the braggadocio moments for the administration that invites scorn and ridicule,'' Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts said in a recent interview in New Hampshire. ''I was surprised that he would base a foreign policy on it.''
In fact, by all accounts it began as a speechwriter's turn of phrase, meant to signal that the president planned to deal with far more than just Al Qaeda in a post-Sept. 11 world. Two people close to the White House said Andrew H. Card, the White House chief of staff, had raised the question of whether its inclusion would so overwhelm news coverage of the 2002 State of the Union address that it would drown out the rest of the president's message.
''No one seemed that concerned,'' one official reported. But Mr. Bush has not repeated the wording in more than a year.
Perhaps the reason, some American and Arab officials say, is that Mr. Bush has come to see that there has been far less progress than he hoped in encouraging wider adoption of democracy in the Islamic world by promoting the examples of emerging movements in Afghanistan and Iraq.
That initiative, which Mr. Bush touched on in his 2002 address and amplified last fall, is often viewed with suspicion, if not downright hostility.
Syrians bridle at the idea that the Americans can teach others about democracy, making the argument, often heard throughout the Arab world, that civil rights have eroded in the United States itself since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. But they concede that they have no choice but to try to work with the Bush administration.
In an interview in late November, Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, insisted that the critical issue was whether the United States was using its power to act as a force for stability in the region or whether its attitude was promoting instability.
''The issue here is whether the United States has a vision to solve problems in Iraq, in the region, in the Middle East, or whether the United States doesn't have that vision,'' he said. ''I hope we can make better steps toward democracy in our country, but that takes time.
''No one in Syria, or maybe in the region if I want to exaggerate a little bit, asks for help from any country to have his own democracy.'' He added later that most Arabs now believed that the Iraq example, even if it had rid the Middle East of a leader whom many feared, was ''a bad example of bringing democracy.''
In the Tuesday night speech, Mr. Bush has the opportunity, officials say, to move the debate beyond the ''axis of evil'' phraseology. In the Middle East, Iraq has faded from the headlines somewhat. But the public zeal to solve the Arab-Israeli dispute has not, and even those pursuing the kind of reform agenda Mr. Bush would applaud say American pressure has been counterproductive.
''We are not yielding to the American threat,'' said Aziz Shukri, the dean of the school of international relations at the University of Kalamoon, one of Syria's new private universities, its creation an innovation in a country where the state has dominated every institution.
''The whole world is witnessing a new era of American hegemony, American dominance,'' he said, ''so we have to coexist with it. It doesn't mean we like it.''
