What Would Sappho Say?
''The L Word,'' the Showtime series that opened to good notices on Sunday, has a great deal of lesbian sex and nudity, thanks in part to MIA KIRSHNER, one of the stars of the series.
Ms. Kirshner, who looks like a teenage WINONA RYDER, met the press at a luncheon at Blue Fin in Times Square, along with other stars of the series: JENNIFER BEALS, PAM GRIER, ERIC MABIUS, KATHERINE MOENNIG and KARINA LOMBARD.
Ms. Kirshner, who last year played a lesbian who's a contract killer in Fox's political thriller ''24,'' is way beyond the nudity-is-O.K.-as-long-as-it's-part-of-the-story school.
''I do nudity,'' said Ms. Kirshner, who in the new series plays a woman trying to decide whether she is a lesbian. ''And I feel very comfortable in it.''
In fact, Ms. Kirshner said, to make the relationships more realistic she suggested more nude scenes.
Such as, our Boldface correspondent asked?
''Like scenes where we were just having regular conversations and folding laundry,'' Ms. Kirshner said.
Oh, my. What did the cast do between all the, um, folding-laundry scenes?
They went off to a corner, Ms. Kirshner said, and knitted.
ERIN DANIELS, who plays a tennis star still in the closet, knitted four scarves in two weeks.
''I was the only one who wasn't knitting,'' Ms. Kirshner said. ''There was one time, like in the middle of the series, when I looked around and all these women were knitting, and I was like, what's happened to everybody?''
Perhaps the Queen Knitter was Ms. Lombard, playing a cafe owner with a lesbian clientele who makes a pass at Ms. Kirshner's character. Ms. Lombard, born in Tahiti and brought up in Spain and Italy, learned knitting at a Swiss boarding school.
Does Ms. Lombard, arguably the most striking of a strikingly beautiful cast, anticipate a lot more romantic attention because of the series?
''I've never gotten so much attention from women,'' said Ms. Lombard, whose accent is somewhere between INGRID BERGMAN and ISABELLA ROSSELLINI. ''Men always I'm used to that. But women. That's been quite a new, oh, well '' And then, tremulous and bright-eyed, Ms. Lombard actually trilled a bit.
Ms. Beals -- still best known as the iron welder in an off-one-shoulder sweatshirt and leg warmers in ''Flashdance'' -- was the best-dressed of the lunch bunch in a slinky long black gown (''I look like a schlub most of the day'').
Will the series be a hit with straight men, Ms. Beals was asked? With a smile she replied, ''There are going to be a lot of 18- to 25-year-old boys TiVo-ing.''
Or the Ayatollah Khomeini?
At the Asia Society across town on the Upper East Side, SUSSAN DEYHIM, SADEGH TIRAFKAN, LAYLA DIBA and AZAR NAFISI last week discussed art and censorship in post-revolutionary Iran.
Mr. Tirafkan, a photographer of note, said, ''After the revolution, art went into darkness.'' In film, he said, depictions of men and women were unrealistic, like requiring a wife in the bedroom to be shown wearing a headscarf.
Ms. Deyhim, once a ballet dancer in Iran and now a singer in New York, said she bridled at another kind of censoriousness, the one that tended toward caricature. Ms. Deyhim, who wore her waist-length hair in a thick hank over her shoulder, is constantly asked by non-Iranians about wearing a veil. ''I sometimes say I'm from Brazil,'' she said.
Ms. Nafisi, a Nabokov scholar and author of the best-selling ''Reading Lolita in Tehran,'' was expelled from the University of Tehran for refusing the veil. She noted that the film censor in Iran was almost totally blind, which did not stop him from being named the censor for television.
''How can someone write in a country,'' Ms. Nafisi said, ''where the censor is his own metaphor?''
Later, a few dozen people lined up so Ms. Nafisi could autograph copies of her book. Write something about Nabokov in it, a man named Behdad requested.
Ms. Nafisi inscribed a line from ''Bend Sinister,'' one of Nabokov's most overtly political novels. ''Curiosity is insubordination in its purest form.''
with Paula Schwartz and Tara Bahrampour
Boldface Names
