Good news: there were no sliced eyeballs at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night.
That's when Compañía María Pagés danced two unusual works: ''El Perro Andaluz. Burlerías'' and ''Flamenco Republic.'' Ms. Pagés's Spanish troupe seeks to develop traditional flamenco in new ways, and what she showed could be termed modern dance based on flamenco technique.
Because she favors experimentation, it was easy to worry about what might happen in ''El Perro Andaluz. Burlerías.'' A news release explained that the title's last word derives from both a flamenco form known as burlerías and burlería, a word meaning a kind of trick.
That same statement noted that the title also refers to ''Un Chien Andalou'' (''The Andalusian Dog'') the 1929 Surrealist film by Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí that has a scene showing a razor slicing a woman's eyeball. Ms. Pagés avoids slicing eyeballs. What she has choreographed is an austere plotless work to a recorded potpourri that includes Spanish music as well as Argentine tangos by Astor Piazolla and gravel-voiced songs by Tom Waits.
''El Perro'' looks austere. José María Sánchez, who directed the overall production and designed the lighting, often keeps the stage dim. Christian Olivares's costumes are in black and various shades of gray.
The choreography is equally severe. Figures emerge from and melt into shadows. There are moments when the action is suspended and time seems to stop until bursts of energy set everyone going again. Unlike some flamenco works, which create an illusion of spontaneous abandon, this one features rigorous patterns for groups.
All the dancers are capable. But the only ones who dominate the action as individuals are Ms. Pagés herself and her partner, Angel Muñoz, strong performers with compelling stage presences. The contrasts between these featured dancers and the well-drilled ensemble help make ''El Perro'' visually imposing.
In ''Flamenco Republic,'' choreographed by Ms. Pagés and Fernando Romero, the dancers were joined by a singer, a percussionist and two guitarists. This was basically a suite of flamenco dances. But as in ''El Perro,'' there were many ensemble sequences. Despite its title, the realm of this dance did not appear to be a republic but a flamenco empire ruled by Ms. Pagés.
You could wish other dancers had been assigned more individualistic choreography. Yet you had to admire Ms. Pagés's sinuous and almost serpentine arms, her quick feet and her juxtapositions of smooth and jaggedly staccato steps.
Near the conclusion came the most unusual episodes, which let all the dancers briefly display their stage personalities. Dancers appeared to be having competitions by waving fans, tapping canes and, in Ms. Pagés's case, clicking castanets. At times, the flick of a fan became a taunt. And Ms. Pagés's castanets uttered edicts no one could contradict.
She has a quirky choreographic mind. Her company continues through Sunday at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street, Chelsea).
DANCE REVIEW
