Longwood Art Gallery  Hostos Community College  450 Grand Concourse, at 149th Street, Mott Haven, the Bronx  Through April 10
This spicy survey of work by the Dominican-born artist Nicolás Dumit Estévez opens on a generous note with ''The Passerby Museum,'' a collaboration with María Alós consisting of dozens of small plastic bags pinned to the wall. Each bag holds an item donated by a friend or a stranger: a candy wrapper, a Metrocard, a snapshot. And each item, upon receipt, was assigned an accession number and entered into the museum's catalog. Further contributions, of anything, by anyone, will be similarly welcomed and displayed.
Most of Mr. Estévez's art is similarly democratic, particularly his audience-engaging performances, which can be sampled in video documentation. And while most of the objects in the show make the most sense in a performance context, some have punch on their own. Among these are some terrific drawings and the costume for the performance ''Super Merengue'' (2000), in which Mr. Estévez played a Superman-angel dressed in a tassled cape and flip-flops, which double as flotation devices to escort immigrants between the Dominican Republic and the United States.
That piece gives a nice sense of the sly wit and tart sweetness of Mr. Estévez's art and of its recurrent themes: Latino-ness in a greater American culture and machismo in Latino culture. Both are addressed in ''The Flag,'' a continuing performance that finds the artist spending afternoons in the gallery to chat with visitors while he sews a banner joining elements from the Dominican and American flags. A display of snapshots of Betsy Ross House in Philadelphia and the artist's Washington Heights apartment clinch a historical connection, while the flag-in-progress replaces the words ''God, Fatherland, Liberty'' from the Dominican original with a logo of the American Airlines Airbus that now connects countries and cultures.
''The Flag'' has already raised hackles with some Hostos students, though it says something about the elasticity of Mr. Estévez's concept that the protests are varied and contradictory. They will all be aired tonight when the finished flag is unveiled at Hostos in celebration of Dominican Independence Day. The 7 p.m. ceremony will be followed by an audience-participation discussion, which will itself be, by default, part of Mr. Estévez's larger project: a career-long performance about art doing the stimulating work it was meant to do.
HOLLAND COTTER
ART IN REVIEW
