An Air Force review of a major training base in Texas where two dozen women reported they were assaulted two years ago has found that most military students there believe they are in a ''safe working, living and training environment.''
The conclusion, which was detailed on Thursday in a briefing to the two senators from Texas, came from a 22-member Air Force team that earlier this month interviewed 1,000 people at Sheppard Air Force Base in Wichita Falls, Tex., including students, medical personnel and chaplains. It also surveyed more than 5,000 additional trainees about their confidence in the sexual-assault reporting process and victim assistance programs at the base.
Air Force officials said the survey had found that 90 percent of the trainees on the base believed the military leadership had handled sexual assault reports properly, and that 95 percent of the women surveyed said they felt safe there.
About 45,000 students go through training programs each year at Sheppard; 15 percent to 17 percent are women.
An Air Force spokesman did not dispute that 20 to 25 women reported to a rape-crisis center in Wichita Falls that they were assaulted in 2002.
''We don't challenge those numbers,'' said Col. Robert A. Potter, spokesman for the Air Education and Training Command, ''and we are taking this very seriously.''
The review found that trainees were reluctant to report such assaults, especially to military authorities, fearing that their training would be delayed by any investigation and that they would be disciplined for misconduct related to the assault, like under-age drinking off base.
''Though the review team's preliminary findings strongly suggest the environment at Sheppard A.F.B. is safe,'' a statement issued on Thursday by the air training command said, ''student training should be expanded to include more emphasis on sexual assault awareness, deterrence and reporting.''
On Thursday, the head of the command, Gen. Donald G. Cook, gave a detailed briefing on the preliminary findings to Senators Kay Bailey Hutchison and John Cornyn, both Republicans. A day earlier, Gen. T. Michael Moseley, the Air Force vice chief of staff, gave a brief summary of the inquiry's findings to senators at a hearing of the Armed Services personnel subcommittee.
The Texas senators reacted with tempered praise for the Air Force.
''I commend the Air Force for launching an immediate, serious inquiry at Sheppard,'' Ms. Hutchison said in a statement. ''However, the findings released today are far from complete.''
''It also appears,'' she said, ''that some 10 percent of students -- that's hundreds of respondents -- apparently lack confidence in base leadership's handling of sexual assault allegations.''
A spokesman for Mr. Cornyn, Don Stewart, said, ''In the Sheppard experience, in a matter of weeks, the Air Force not only determined a problem, but sent a team there, produced preliminary results and had two senior generals brief us.''
In his meeting with General Cook, Mr. Cornyn underscored the need for the Air Force to develop a more effective victims assistance center, modeled along the lines of a system the Navy has, Mr. Stewart said.
In addition to the interviews and survey, the head of the Air Force inquiry at Sheppard, Col. K. C. McClain, a woman who is the training command's deputy director of operations for technical training, met with the leaders of a local crisis counseling center and civilian law enforcement officials.
The Air Force statement said both groups expressed support for the base's ability to respond adequately to sexual assault cases, but officials at those groups could not be immediately reached for comment on Thursday.
The inquiry also reviewed the handling of 45 sexual assault cases at Sheppard from 1993 to 2003 that resulted in courts-martial or administrative punishment. The dispositions of 69 other cases since 1996 in which no disciplinary action was taken are under review, the Air Force said. Ten current accusations of misconduct are also under investigation.
