The Genentech drug Avastin, which validated a decades-old theory about a new way to attack cancer while spurring investor enthusiasm for the biotechnology industry, won approval yesterday from the Food and Drug Administration.
The drug, approved for patients with colorectal cancer that has spread to other organs, is far from a cure. But in a clinical trial in which it was used with chemotherapy, people who received the drug lived a median of 20.3 months, almost five months longer than those who received only chemotherapy.
Many analysts characterize the drug as the most significant to come from the biotechnology industry in years, with sales expected to eventually reach $2 billion a year or more. Those estimates might grow because the approval by the F.D.A. was worded in a way that might allow doctors to use the drug more liberally than expected.
Avastin is the first drug to be approved that works by choking off the blood vessels that provide a tumor with oxygen and nutrients. That idea for fighting cancer, first proposed by Dr. Judah Folkman of Harvard and Children's Hospital Boston more than 30 years ago, has been difficult to get to work in practice.
The approval comes two weeks after the F.D.A. approved another biotechnology colorectal cancer drug, Erbitux from ImClone Systems. Combined with the approval in 2002 of Eloxatin, sold by Sanofi- Synthélabo, doctors now have almost a confusing array of choices.
''We have too many agents; we don't know how to mix them together in the right order,'' said Dr. Louis Fehrenbacher, an oncologist at Kaiser Permanente. ''But that's an awfully nice luxury to have, because five years ago we didn't have much.''
The one drawback, some experts say, is that the new drugs will greatly increase the cost of treating colorectal cancer. ''This will be certainly reflected in the cost of health care at the end of the year,'' said Dr. Heinz-Josef Lenz, a colon cancer expert at the University of Southern California.
Avastin will cost about $4,400 a month, and data from clinical trials suggest that it will be used for about 10 months. ImClone's Erbitux will cost about $10,000 a month but will probably be used for a shorter period because it was approved as a last-ditch treatment while Avastin was approved for use with initial chemotherapy.
Genentech executives defended the price and predicted insurers would pay for it. ''We think it's a fair price and we think our customers will see it that way,'' Ian Clark, a senior vice president, said. But while analysts and doctors expect insurers to pay for Avastin when used for the approved purpose, some said they expect payers might balk if doctors try to use Avastin for another type of cancer, which doctors often do.
Genentech's stock rose $7.02, to $103.10, yesterday, a 52-week high. The stock has nearly tripled since last May, when Genentech first announced that Avastin, contrary to Wall Street expectations, had worked in the colorectal cancer clinical trial. The success of Avastin has also helped lift biotechnology stocks in general since last spring.
This is the third drug approval for Genentech since last June, following Xolair for asthma and Raptiva for psoriasis.
Avastin is expected to have the largest effect on Genentech's profits, not only because its sales will be bigger but because the two other drugs are shared with other companies while Genentech gets all the proceeds from sales of Avastin in the United States. In Europe the drug will be sold by Roche, Genentech's majority owner.
Avastin, known generically as bevacizumab, is a monoclonal antibody a type of genetically engineered protein. It binds to a protein in the body called vascular endothelial growth factor, or V.E.G.F., which spurs the growth of blood vessels. So blocking V.E.G.F. can cut off the supply of vessels that spring up to feed a tumor. But some experts said, there is still some uncertainty about exactly how Avastin works.
Drugs like Avastin and Erbitux, also a monoclonal antibody but directed at a different protein, can be more tolerable to patients than chemotherapy. However, Avastin's label contains a warning of what the F.D.A. said were serious but uncommon side effects the formation of holes in the colon that could require surgery and lead to infections, impaired wound healing and bleeding from the lungs or internally.
SG Cowen, in a report issued Monday, predicted most patients with advanced colorectal cancer would be receiving Avastin as part of their initial chemotherapy within 6 to 12 months. But on the conference call yesterday, Genentech executives urged analysts to be cautious in their projections.
One factor that could speed adoption is a broader than expected wording of the drug's label. The clinical trial was done using Avastin in combination with two other chemotherapy drugs, irinotecan and 5-FU. But since the trials were done, many doctors have shifted their initial therapy to use Sanofi's Eloxatin instead of irinotecan.
So doctors will face a problem of whether to go back to irinotecan for initial therapy in order to use Avastin, or to stick with Eloxatin and forgo Avastin, or to combine Avastin and Eloxatin, even though there is no data yet showing that combination to be effective. But the F.D.A. approved Avastin for use with any chemotherapy combination containing 5-FU, not just for the combination of irinotecan and 5-FU. That would give doctors license to use Avastin with Eloxatin, though some doctors are still expected to wait for data.
