PHYLLIS NEWMAN lounges on her library sofa with one black-trousered leg tucked under her, starlet style, and leans into the cushions as if bracing herself to give a performance. Or maybe she's feeling faint from hunger pangs unleashed by that annoying South Beach diet, embarked on at the 11th hour as she crams for appearances next week on Broadway (charitable) and at a Fox Television taping (she plays a meddlesome juror) for Tom Fontana's new series, ''The Jury.''
She mutters about making silly sacrifices for showbiz and sips water from a polka dot tumbler while looking longingly at a silver dish of chocolate-covered macadamias. Nuts are her emergency stopgap; the chocolate coating, a hush-hush bonus. She's entitled.
She continues to pursue acting assignments at 70, ''proud as hell'' of spilling her real age but living in fear of casting agents taking chronology too literally, lest they pigeonhole her as an over-the-hill granny and siphon off what little intriguing work comes her way. Although knocked for a loop by widowhood in 2002 after a happy 42-year marriage to the legendary lyricist Adolph Green, she is still something of a coquette beneath that caramel pageboy. Go gray? No way. Not in real life. But for a part? No problem.
Considering she's been at it since age 4 when, with her entrepreneurial papa (a hypnotist, and mom was a fortuneteller) egging her on, she did a rip-roaring Carmen Miranda routine onstage in Atlantic City, Ms. Newman's entertainment prowess seems as natural as the nose on her carefully made-up face. And protean: sure, she got her start as Judy Holliday's understudy in ''Bells Are Ringing'' and won a Tony for ''Subways Are for Sleeping,'' where her costume consisted of a bath towel, but she was a regular on quiz shows like ''What's My Line?'' and ''To Tell the Truth,'' was the first woman to be a guest host for Johnny Carson on ''The Tonight Show,'' and was recently in the plays ''Shyster'' and ''The Food Chain'' and in the film version of Philip Roth's ''Human Stain,'' a far cry from musical comedy. She also raised two children, Adam and Amanda.
''I suppose what I'm proudest of is the way I've gone from category to category and kind of rewritten my professional life,'' she says. ''I haven't held onto what I once was. I'm up for whatever there is. People in this business tend to think of you as decrepit when you're 70, but inside, nothing has changed.''
On Monday, she'll be the M.C. of the ninth annual ''Nothing Like a Dame'' gala at the St. James Theater, an all-female convocation of Broadway Babies like her and assembled by her to benefit the Phyllis Newman Women's Health Initiative. ''A terrible name for a great cause,'' she says. Administered by the Actors' Fund of America, the program has raised $3 million to assist women in entertainment with health and family care issues. She calls it the first and only women's health organization in her industry; last year it assisted 500 clients.
Ms. Newman formed it in 1995 after her assistant, an aspiring actress, was advised to get a mammogram but, lacking money or insurance to pay for it, decided to let it slide. Ms. Newman, a breast cancer survivor (she published a book about it, ''Just in Time: Notes From My Life''), lent her assistant the money for the test and then, irate but inspired, got on the phone to the Actors' Fund to remedy ''an insane situation.'' She also phoned pals like Lauren Bacall and the two Carols, Burnett and Channing, and lined up the inaugural benefit.
This year's prospective cast includes Sutton Foster, Donna Murphy and Audra McDonald; the talent pool is so deep that Ms. Newman won't perform. But if anything impromptu occurs, her pipes are in shape: she sings at home to Ella Fitzgerald and Barbara Cook while her 18-year-old mutt, Charlie, wheezes along off-key because of a collapsed trachea. She dotes on Charlie, as did her husband. Ms. Newman, Mr. Green's third wife, gamely avoided jealousy of his 60-year collaboration with Betty Comden; she revered their work and remains bereft.
''I love Ravel, Debussy, and Mahler, but for a long while I didn't listen to classical pieces after Adolph '' she says, unable to finish the sentence. The albums that fill the library bookcases were his. The line drawing of Charlie Chaplin by the poet E.E. Cummings was a gift from her to him. The walls feature Hirschfeld caricatures -- including one of Ms. Newman performing her one-woman show, ''The Madwoman of Central Park West'' -- and a sketch of a naked King Lear by Picasso; she and her husband loved its humor. ''It's indescribable,'' she says, of living alone. ''I do a lot of talking to myself.'' She's also writing an unconventional musical about their relationship.
THE afternoon light wafting in from the terrace of the Central Park West duplex they shared (they were married in 1960 in an apartment downstairs) bounces off the jazzy, merlot-hued eyeglasses she wears ''for cosmetic purposes'' and lights up her gold jewelry. ''I dress to impress. I'm a woman of parts, you know.'' And she's resilient.
The night she won her Tony, she was seated next to the producer David Merrick, who had two actresses in contention, Ms. Newman and Barbra Streisand. ''He was really a mean man. Just as they were about to make the award, he turned to me and said, 'I voted for Barbra Streisand.' And then they announced my name. It was one of the sweetest moments in life.'' Until a streaker ran across the stage as she was accepting the award. ''I told him, 'Go away, this is my moment!'''
PUBLIC LIVES
