After what the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce has been through over the last 18 months, the decision to hold its annual meeting on Thursday in this grain and transportation center steeped in the history of the Canadian prairies seemed entirely appropriate.
Canadian Imperial, Canada's third-largest bank, has seen its reputation sullied by run-ins with regulators in the United States, and by other embarrassments stemming from an ambitious foray during the late 1990's into the major leagues of North American investment banking.
Now, seeking a less swashbuckling image, the 136-year-old bank is switching its focus from Wall Street back to its retail banking roots on Main Street, Canada. But the more cautious approach has also raised questions about the bank's future as an independent financial institution.
John S. Hunkin, the bank's chief executive, said in an interview shortly before Thursday's meeting that the bank's operations in the United States would in the future focus on supporting its business north of the border.
Commenting on the year's turmoil, Mr. Hunkin told shareholders, ''We stumbled where it counts in 2003, and that is in the intangible and invaluable realms of trust and reputation.''
Nonetheless, William A. Etherington, Canadian Imperial's chairman, said that the board had not asked for Mr. Hunkin's resignation. ''There was never a discussion that Mr. Hunkin was not the right person to lead us,'' Mr. Etherington said.
Nor was a single question asked by shareholders at Thursday's annual meeting here.
Mr. Hunkin, 58, said that he had reacted ''quickly and clearly'' to the recent scandals. The bank has set aside 50 million Canadian dollars ($37.46 million) to improve its corporate governance, including a hotline for employees to report wrongdoing.
Canadian Imperial has also put in place what Mr. Hunkin called a ''transformational'' shift in its business strategy. It has earmarked almost two-thirds of its capital to support its Canadian retail business, up from 50 percent a year ago. Mr. Hunkin says that figure will eventually rise to 70 percent.
In spite of the string of embarrassments, Canadian Imperial's bottom line remains strong. For three of the last four years, it has posted the highest return to shareholders among Canada's big five banks.
The bank on Thursday reported net income of 609 million Canadian dollars ($456.25 million) in its first quarter ended Jan. 31, a 37 percent increase over the period a year earlier. The stock has almost doubled since hitting a trough in late 2002. It gained $1.97 in trading Thursday on the New York Stock Exchange, closing at $50.
''Over the past year and a half, John Hunkin has fundamentally changed the nature of the bank,'' said Alex Zivic, vice president for portfolio management at the CI Mutual Funds group in Toronto, reviewing the bank's recent history.
As head of Canadian Imperial's investment banking arm in the mid-1990s, Mr. Hunkin spearheaded the bank's search for a business with a more exciting future than its highly profitable, but slow-growing, domestic retail banking franchise. ''The strategy was to be a very serious player in the U.S. marketplace.'' Mr. Hunkin said.
The Canadians began in 1995 by buying the Argosy Group, a New York firm specializing in leveraged buyouts. Two years later, Canadian Imperial acquired the securities firm Oppenheimer &amp; Company, merging it with its own investment banking unit to create CIBC World Markets.
The aggressive approach initially paid off. David Kassie, Mr. Hunkin's successor at CIBC World Markets, ''should be credited with accomplishing quite a bit,'' said a former colleague, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
The bank posted gains of more than $2 billion from the purchase and subsequent sale of stock in Global Crossing, the once highflying telecommunications company. Gains from the Global Crossing investment made up almost a fifth of total profits in 2000.
But those bright spots were later overshadowed by missteps.
Last September, a jury in Los Angeles found that Canadian Imperial had failed to provide complete financial information to investors in a high-yield bond offering. Three months later, the bank reached an $80 million settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission over financings that allowed the disgraced Enron energy group to inflate its profits by more than $1 billion.
As part of the Enron settlement, the bank has agreed to stay out of some types of corporate finance in the United States for the next three years. Last week, for instance, it resigned as administrator of Rhineland Capital Funding Corporation Conduit, a structured finance vehicle.
On another front, a former senior executive at CIBC World Markets' arbitrage unit in New York, Paul Flynn, has been charged with helping hedge funds carry out an illegal mutual fund trading scheme. Mr. Flynn has pleaded not guilty.
The bank has said that it is considering a settlement with the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, over its role in financing the trades. It set aside 50 million Canadian dollars ($37.46 million) from earnings for the quarter to Jan. 31 to cover any settlement.
Canadian Imperial ''pushed the envelope a little bit because they wanted to gain market share,'' the fund manager, Mr. Zivic, said.
There have been other distractions too. Another ambitious venture in the United States, to provide electronic banking services in supermarkets, has been abandoned. And Conrad M. Black, the controversial media tycoon, recently stepped down as a director of the bank after 26 years on the board.
In the view of the former CIBC World Markets executive, the bank was for the most part a follower on Wall Street. ''There was not a lot of original thinking going on,'' Mr. Zivic said.
In his view, one of the bank's mistakes was to allow some managers to run their own leveraged buyout fund. ''It drove a wedge between the principal business and the client business,'' he said. ''They didn't much care for the client business.''
Canadian Imperial is now winding down much of its investment banking business south of the border. It has sold the bulk of its interest in Oppenheimer, and has put 2.9 billion Canadian dollars ($2.17 billion) of risky corporate loans up for sale.
CIBC World Markets' staff has shrunk by two-thirds. Mr. Kassie, once Canada's highest paid banker, left the bank earlier this month.
Sharon Haas, a managing director at Fitch Ratings in New York, said that Canadian Imperial ''still benefits from a tremendous franchise,'' including its domestic wealth management, mortgage and credit card businesses
Still, Ms. Haas said she was concerned that after a series of knocks to its reputation ''it will be easier for a competitor to bid for mandates, and it will be more challenging for C.I.B.C. to win those mandates.''
Earlier this month, Fitch shifted the bank's credit rating outlook to negative. But it said that the outlook would revert to stable, ''should C.I.B.C. prove capable of navigating these challenges will little or no business disruption.''
A more important consequence of the recent missteps could be Canadian Imperial's role in looming consolidation among Canada's financial institutions.
Over the last six years, the government in Ottawa has blocked several proposals for mergers and takeovers among Canada's big five banks and three life insurance companies, fearing diminished competition and massive job losses.
But a review of that policy is under way, with fresh -- and possibly more liberal -- guidelines expected to be announced later this year.
Correction:  March 1, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, an article in World Business on Friday about efforts by the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce to improve its image misattributed a passage on problems at the bank. It was a former CIBC World Markets executive, not Alex Zivic, vice president for portfolio management at the CI Mutual Funds group in Toronto, who said, ''There was not a lot of original thinking going on.'' The passage continued: In his view, one of the bank's mistakes was to allow some managers to run their own leveraged buyout fund. ''It drove a wedge between the principal business and the client business,'' he said. ''They didn't much care for the client business.''
