Well, it's official. This has been the cleanest, most aboveboard, most decent Oscar race in years.
And the most boring.
What can you do when a billion-dollar juggernaut called ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' hogs the playing field? (It recently hit a cumulative $1 billion at the box office.) This New Line Cinema film, third in the hobbit-inhabited trilogy based on the novels by J. R. R. Tolkien, snagged the most nominations of any film (11) and sailed through the campaign season as the presumptive winner of the best-picture race.
Which is not to say there has been no campaign. All the major studios with films in the running have spent millions on the usual avalanche of glossy, four-color advertising in the entertainment trade press; the Oscar magazine specials that promote one nominee or another; radio and television ads; and cocktail and dinner parties from opulent homes in the Hollywood Hills to private reception rooms in Manhattan.
The actress Julianne Moore gave a party for her pal Patricia Clarkson, a best-supporting-actress nominee for ''Pieces of April,'' while the producer Mitch Glazer had an event for his friend Sofia Coppola, nominated for writing and directing ''Lost in Translation.''
But on the whole, the publicity frenzy and dirty dealing that marked previous years has been absent. Nasty remarks about ''A Beautiful Mind'' marred the Oscars two years ago, and last year the best-actress nominees Nicole Kidman and Renée Zellweger went head to head on rival talk shows.
''I think people have been playing nicely this year,'' said Bruce Davis, executive director of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which awards the Oscars. ''Clearly there was a lot of discussion in the industry prompted by our little pamphlet.'' He was referring to one sent to academy members asking them to scale back the intense campaigning, warning that it had begun to damage the prestige of the awards.
''I think there are definitely fewer parties this year than there were last year,'' said Cynthia Swartz, a senior executive at Miramax. ''Everybody agrees there were too many parties last year. And there was pressure to have parties last year. This year that doesn't exist, and that's a good thing.'' But, she added, ''there hasn't been a scaling back of anything else.''
Still, even Peter Jackson's ''Return of the King,'' the front-runner, hasn't suffered from much mudslinging. ''In earlier years, there'd have been under-the-table and even above-the-table campaigning against the perceived front-runner,'' Mr. Davis said. ''And this year there wasn't. I'm not saying I'm living in a paradise, but I'm happier.''
Several factors have contributed to the new atmosphere. First, the academy shortened the awards season by a full month, moving the Oscars to the end of February from the end of March in another gesture to reduce campaigning. Then, for the first time in 11 years, Miramax, by far the most relentless and creative of Oscar campaigners, is missing from the best-picture race.
Meanwhile, Universal has been spending millions to promote its best-picture nominee, ''Seabiscuit,'' though even within the studio few think the movie has a chance to win. Instead, one senior Universal executive said, speaking on condition of anonymity, the spending was ''a good investment in a relationship'' with the writer and director Gary Ross and the producers Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall.
The furor and debate over Mel Gibson's new film, ''The Passion of the Christ,'' has also overwhelmed the usual gossip about Oscar leaders and underdogs.
Some say a dispute last year over whether the studios could send videotapes of their films, called screeners, to Oscar voters wore people out early. The Motion Picture Association of America precipitately banned all screeners last fall, only to face a revolt from art-house studios, which sued for the right to continue to send them. The art-house studios won the lawsuit, and screeners were delivered toward the end of the year.
But the wrangling took its toll on Oscar campaigners. ''My theory is, people were completely exhausted by the screener thing,'' said Terry Press, who directs marketing at DreamWorks. ''All the hostility, rage, plotting, scheming and brilliance that goes into this -- all of it went into the screener thing instead. By the time the screener issue was resolved, you had the equivalent of weary troops.''
Meanwhile, the largest contretemps of the campaign season erupted between two studios that are not even in the race for best picture. This week Miramax complained about an ad run by DreamWorks that unfavorably compared Miramax's best-supporting-actress nominee, Ms. Zellweger in ''Cold Mountain,'' with DreamWorks' nominee, Shohreh Aghdashloo from ''House of Sand and Fog.''
The ad juxtaposed comments from critics at The New York Times and Rolling Stone who had contended that while Ms. Zellweger would probably win, Ms. Aghdashloo deserved the prize. (Several attendees noted that the applause was thin when Ms. Zellweger won best supporting actress at the Screen Actors Guild Awards on Sunday. The acting branch of the motion picture academy is by far the largest voting bloc for the Oscars.)
But even that conflict was quickly dispelled. Jeffrey Katzenberg, a co-founder of DreamWorks, called the academy's president, Frank Pierson, to apologize for the ad, and Mr. Davis said there would be no sanction against DreamWorks.
''Jeffrey was effusive in his apology, and the academy officers decided it was enough,'' Mr. Davis said. ''It was clear it wasn't going to happen again.''
There was a brief controversy over whether Charlize Theron's depiction of the serial killer Aileen Wuornos in ''Monster'' was accurate. A Washington Post article criticized the movie's inclusion of a scene in which Wuornos is raped before she begins killing, saying it was unclear that this actually happened. But that, too, quickly faded, and Ms. Theron is considered almost unbeatable for best actress.
Smaller controversies have also arisen, one concerning the director's credit on the Brazilian film ''City of God.'' Fernando Meirelles was nominated for best director for the film, but his co-director, Katia Lund, was ignored. And two victims of a father and son convicted of child molesting, Arnold and Jesse Friedman, have said that the nominated documentary ''Capturing the Friedmans'' should not win an Oscar because it misrepresents the abuse they suffered.
The one major category up for grabs appears to be best actor. Ben Kingsley, star of ''House of Sand and Fog,'' is the only one of the five nominees who was even here to press the flesh during the awards season. He is not a front-runner, however, and his insistence on being called Sir Ben in social settings appears to have put off some academy members.
The race seems to be split between an early favorite, Sean Penn, nominated for his searing performance as an ex-convict whose daughter is killed in ''Mystic River,'' and Bill Murray, whose droll acceptance speech at the Golden Globes was much discussed about town. He is nominated for playing an American actor having a midlife crisis in Tokyo in ''Lost in Translation.''
The surprise third candidate is Johnny Depp, who played a loopy, kohl-eyed pirate in ''Pirates of the Carribean.'' Mr. Depp won best actor at the Screen Actors Guild Awards and seems to be benefiting from a sudden surge of support.
''A week ago I would've said it was Sean Penn,'' said Tony Angellotti, an Oscar campaign expert working for Universal this season. ''But at my table at the S.A.G. Awards,'' he said, referring to the guild ceremony, ''we all looked at each other and realized we'd voted for Johnny'' for the Oscar.
''I'm not sure Johnny Depp is going to win, but he's getting a lot more votes than I suspected,'' he added.
This year public television and radio also became prime territory for Oscar campaigning, more than the late-night talk shows, which had been favored in recent years. ''The Charlie Rose Show'' on PBS featured Ms. Theron; the director Jim Sheridan, nominated, with his daughters, Naomi and Kirsten, for the screenplay for ''In America''; and Naomi Watts, nominated for best actress for ''21 Grams,'' among others. ''Fresh Air'' on National Public Radio has also had a parade of nominees. Even a local classical music station, KUSC, has had guests who have been nominated for best film score, like Howard Shore (''The Return of the King'') and James Horner (''House of Sand and Fog'').
The Envelope, Please
The 76th Annual Academy Awards will be broadcast live on ABC (Channel 7 in New York) on Sunday at 8:30 p.m., Eastern time; 7:30, Central time; and 5:30, Pacific time. ''Countdown to the Oscars 2004,'' a live broadcast featuring celebrities as they arrive, will precede the awards show at 8, Eastern time; 7, Central time; and 5, Pacific time.
The 2004 Independent Spirit Awards will be broadcast live on the Independent Film Channel (IFC) tomorrow at 5 p.m., Eastern time; 4, Central time; and 2, Pacific time. There will also be two rebroadcasts tomorrow: on IFC at midnight, Eastern time; 11 p.m., Central time; and 9 p.m., Pacific Time; and on Bravo at 10 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 9, Central time.
