Faced with a refusal by the Bush administration to provide certain documents related to prewar intelligence on Iraq, the Senate intelligence committee voted in a closed session on Thursday to move toward a possible subpoena, according to senior Congressional officials.
The bipartisan vote on the Republican-led panel sets a three-week deadline for a voluntary handover by the administration, after which the committee would employ unspecified ''further action,'' which could only mean a subpoena, the officials said.
In a brief telephone interview, the top Democrat on the panel said that ''there's no other interpretation'' of the committee's action if the White House fails to turn over the documents by late March.
''We need these things, we want them, and if we don't get them, we will resort to other means,'' said the Democrat, Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, who declined to discuss the committee's deliberations in detail.
The plan approved by the panel calls for Senator Rockefeller and Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas, the top Republican, to issue an explicit warning in a letter to President Bush if the documents are not received, Congressional officials said.
The panel requested the information as part of its inquiry into the administration's prewar intelligence about Iraq, including the disputed intelligence about Iraq's illicit weapons and ties to terrorism, the officials said.
The White House has said publicly that it is complying with the panel's requests. But Congressional officials say the administration is continuing to withhold important information, including copies of the president's detailed daily written intelligence digest.
After the independent commission looking into the Sept. 11 attacks issued its own subpoena threat, the White House and the commission agreed earlier this year on a plan that is to allow representatives of that panel to review some copies of the presidential briefings, which are highly classified. But in discussions with the Senate committee, the White House has so far insisted that the documents be kept away from Congress, on the ground that they are covered by executive privilege.
In a letter in October to Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, the committee demanded that the White House lift its objections to releasing the documents.
Earlier this month, the committee staff completed a draft report on the first phase of its investigation, covering the quantity and quality of prewar intelligence on Iraq. But Congressional officials say that to complete their work, they still need access to documents and interviews that have not been provided.
Editors' Note:  February 28, 2004, Saturday  An article yesterday quoting senior Congressional officials reported that the Senate Intelligence Committee voted in a closed session on Thursday to move toward a possible subpoena if the Bush administration failed to produce, within the next three weeks, certain documents related to prewar intelligence on Iraq. The article referred to a bipartisan vote on the Republican-led panel, noting that it had set a three-week deadline for a voluntary surrender of the documents.
Late Thursday a senior member of the committee's staff telephoned The Times to dispute the account. When asked to elaborate, the staff member would say only that ''there was no timetable.'' That assertion was omitted from the article because it seemed to be contradicted by authoritative officials. It should have been reflected, and further reporting should have been done to reconcile the versions.
Yesterday the senior Congressional officials who provided the initial account of the vote and the timetable said they had misspoken. Senior Congressional officials said there had been only general discussion -- not a vote -- about a plan to compel the release of certain documents. A corrective article appears today, on Page A6.
