Deutsche Bank reached agreement yesterday with the state, insurers and downtown rebuilding officials on the fate of a 40-story skyscraper near the World Trade Center site that still stands despite being badly damaged in the Sept. 11 attacks.
The tower at 130 Liberty Street, which is draped in a black shroud to hide a deep 24-story-long gash in its northern facade, would be demolished, according to several executive and government officials who had been briefed on the negotiations. The grim remnant of the attack on the trade center would become the site of a new park, and possibly, an office building and an underground garage for the hundreds of buses that are expected to bring tourists to a trade center memorial.
''This constant reminder of that dark day will be gone,'' said Madelyn G. Wils, president of Community Board 1 and a director of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. ''Everyone will feel relieved that this building will be coming down. It'll give us room for a park, a church and maybe an office building.''
Rohini Pragasam, a spokeswoman for Deutsche Bank, declined comment. George E. Mitchell, a former United States senator, played a central role in resolving what had been a long dispute between Deutsche Bank and two of its insurers over the building. The building also became a sore point with downtown residents and employers anxious to have it wiped from the scene, the executives and officials said.
Gov. George E. Pataki appointed Mr. Mitchell, a Democrat, four months ago to mediate the discussions. But by mid-December, the two sides were at an impasse.
Mr. Mitchell then put his own proposal on the table and set a deadline for an agreement. The proposal involved government purchase of the property so that it could be incorporated into the trade center site. But rebuilding officials needed an assessment of their potential environmental risks. After several extensions, Mr. Mitchell ultimately set his deadline for today, which was met with hours to spare. ''The governor had a lot of confidence that George Mitchell could bring this to a resolution'' said Lisa Dewald Stoll, a spokeswoman for Mr. Pataki.
Built in the early 1970's, the 1.4-million-square-foot tower was known as the Bankers Trust Building until Deutsche Bank merged with Bankers Trust a few years ago. Today, it is considered uninhabitable.
Under the terms of the agreement signed yesterday afternoon, two insurance companies, Allianz and AXA, would pay Deutsche Bank $140 million toward its insurance claim for the property, according to the executives and officials. The Lower Manhattan Development Corporation would then buy the property from the bank for $90 million and take over a $45 million contract to demolish the structure. The insurers would be responsible for any demolition costs above $45 million.
Early on in the dispute, Deutsche Bank said it would cost $1.86 billion to demolish the tower and build a new one. Aside from the physical damage, the bank said the building suffered from water damage and mold. But the two insurers countered that the building could be salvaged and repaired for about $170 million.
Last year, the bank settled with the two other insurers, Zurich American and Chubb, that provided coverage for the property. But it sued Allianz and AXA for their portion of the coverage, about $857 million.
The Deutsche Bank property will now be added to the 16-acre trade center site, allowing planners to spread a proposed 10 million square feet of commercial space over a bigger footprint.
