Seventh Regiment Armory  Park Avenue at 67th Street  Through Sunday
As art fairs go, ''Works on Paper'' must have one of the highest ratios of useful visual information to square footage. Prints, drawings, photographs, posters and illustrated books encourage dense presentations, including bins of unframed works for browsing. Spare elegance usually indicates expensive goods, as at R. S. Johnson, where a light-drenched version (third state) of Rembrandt's etching ''Christ Crucified Between Two Thieves'' can be had for $1.5 million, the show's most expensive work by far.
Quality is high this year. The range, as usual, is mind-boggling: from old master drawings (those by della Bella and Luca Cambiaso at Goodfriend, for example) to the white-on-black scrolling signs that were once used atop New York City buses (at the Winter booth, along with much else, including beautiful photographs by Ho Fan, a Chinese filmmaker, from the 1950's and 60's).
The best strategy is to scan every wall of every booth, then look closely at what grabs your eye. Often it will be a work by an unfamiliar artist, frequently a woman, paper being the most common and democratic of artistic materials. At Aaron Payne, the delicate works of the American painter Gina Knee (1898-1982) mix aspects of the work of Milton Avery and Paul Klee to good effect. The Martin du Louvre booth is flanked by two large Cubistic gouache studies from around 1920 by François Angiboult, also known as the Baroness Hélène d'Oettingen, a Parisian artist, patron, hostess and muse.
Some walls to remember are those with Bonnard drawings at Elrick-Manley; Milton Avery at Chambers; small pencil studies by Alexander Corazzo, a student of Maholy-Nagy, at Richard Norton; and German Expressionist prints at Jörg Maass, including an uncharacteristically velvety drypoint of a crowded bar by Max Beckmann. At Bergquis a drypoint-aquatint of a trolley car by another German artist, Bernhard Ketzschmar (1889-1972), reflects Beckmann's influence but has its own contrast of lush and harsh. Reinhold Berg is full to the brim, mostly with hand-colored copper etchings of plants and flowers by 17th- and 18th-century artists like Daniel Rabel and Matthew Merian.
At Boss Fine Art two lively chalk drawings attest to the artistic ambitions of the designer Donald Deskey. At Thomas French stop in your tracks for crystal-fine drawings by the 19th-century Japanese printmaker Yoshitoshi Taiso, sketched in red ink and finished in black, and two pencil sketches by Hokusai. At Andrew Stasik the treats include a vivid little pastel by Jan Matulka showing houses and boats on Lake George and a quick oil sketch by Arthur Dove. At Leila T. M. Heller a small Cubist gouache of a woman by Jean Metzinger is worth a stop.
Just inside the entrance to the fair brake for an unusual Warhol monoprint, ''Multiple Marilyn Monroe,'' that is too large for the Bjorn Ressle booth. Its cascade of images made with the ''Reverse Marilyn'' silkscreen appropriately suggests images strewn nonchalantly about the studio floor. For carefully wrought monoprints, see Naum Gabo's at Hirschl &amp; Adler across the aisle. And finally, Gerald Peters has a large monoprint that Willem de Kooning made in 1987 on the 80th birthday of his friend Eloise Spaeth, a founder of the Archives of American Art. Her happy face appears on handmade paper spiked with tiny scraps of pages from the Manhattan telephone book. Hours: Today, noon to 8 p.m.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 7 p.m. Admission: $15. Information: (212) 777-5818.
ROBERTA SMITH
ART IN REVIEW
