A man picked out of police lineups by four victims in a seven-day rampage of sexual assaults and robberies that terrorized the Upper East Side last month has been cleared by DNA evidence in one case and by substantiated alibis in the other three cases, a law enforcement official said yesterday.
The accused man, Kevin White, 34, a career criminal whose arrest on Jan. 31 prompted expressions of relief by many Upper East Side residents and demands by Gov. George E. Pataki and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg for ways to end revolving-door justice, is still being held without bail at Rikers Island and is not likely to be freed soon.
The Manhattan district attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, announced yesterday that Mr. White had been indicted on charges of robbing and sexually abusing a man on the Lower East Side last Oct. 16. The victim in that case, who was beaten, shot with a stun gun, robbed of $300 and sexually assaulted, also identified the suspect in a lineup after his arrest last month.
But a long list of charges that Mr. Morgenthau's office had brought against Mr. White in the assaults and robberies of three women and a man between Jan. 24 and Jan. 30 -- charges based on identifications by the victims and on a remarkable resemblance between the suspect and a police sketch of the attacker -- will probably be dropped in the next week or two, the law enforcement official said.
The official, a member of the prosecutor's staff who requested anonymity because charges in the Upper East Side cases had not yet been dismissed in court, disclosed that Mr. White had been cleared by DNA evidence in one case and by substantiated alibis in the other three in order to alert residents of the area that the attacker was still at large.
A month ago, when it appeared that the authorities had arrested the man responsible for the brutal attacks, the case raised a welter of emotions -- from residents voicing gratitude and relief, and from public officials complaining of flaws in a criminal justice system that had allowed Mr. White to remain on the street despite 25 criminal convictions since 1990, all but one for misdemeanors.
Mr. Pataki used Mr. White's capture to attack Democrats in the State Assembly for ignoring his bill to put those convicted of repeated misdemeanors in jail as felons. Had his bill passed, he suggested, the suspect might not have ''engaged in these serial rapes.''
Mr. Bloomberg, saying he was ''glad they caught this guy,'' declared: ''You cannot continue to let people plea bargain their way out of serious crimes.''
But yesterday, the case appeared to be more about the frail nature of evidence: the increasing value of DNA to confirm guilt or innocence, and increasing problems with eyewitness identifications in police lineups. Numerous studies of DNA exonerations show that up to 90 percent of the wrongful convictions were based on mistaken identifications.
''The single greatest cause of wrongful convictions is lineup misidentifications caused by unreliable police lineup procedures,'' Peter Neufeld, co-founder of the Innocence Project, said in an interview. He noted that lineup procedures had been reformed in scores of jurisdictions in the United States, but that Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly had resisted such reforms in New York.
In traditional lineups, a witness views a group of people simultaneously, and -- even if the culprit is not there -- tends to choose someone who most resembles the memory of the guilty person.
Many reformers seek what is called a double-blind sequential lineup, in which a witnesses views one person at a time, and the officer conducting the lineup does not know which one is the suspect.
Mr. White, whose long criminal history included convictions on drugs, weapons and other charges -- as well as a rape charge that was reduced to a lesser offense -- was arrested after a week of sex attacks and robberies that occurred on Jan. 24, Jan. 27, Jan. 29 and Jan. 30. Three of the cases occurred on East 92nd Street and one on East 85th Street.
In each case, the assailant said he had a gun, but no weapon was displayed or found later. The victims aided the police in producing a sketch of the attacker that was widely published before Mr. White was taken into custody and again afterward, showing sketch and suspect side by side in what many saw as a startling resemblance.
Mr. White, whose last known address was in Queens, was traced to a house in Union City, N.J., where he was living with a girlfriend, the police said. After being taken into custody, he was placed in lineups and identified as the attacker by all four victims from the Upper East Side and by the Oct. 16 victim. Under questioning, he gave investigators an alibi for the times and dates of the Upper East Side crimes.
Still, he was charged by prosecutors in criminal court with three counts of sexual abuse, two counts of sodomy, four counts of robbery, and other counts of burglary, attempted robbery, sexual abuse, aggravated sexual abuse, attempted sexual abuse and other offenses.
In only one of the four Upper East Side cases was a sample of the assailant's DNA available, the law enforcement official said. That sample, and a sample of Mr. White's DNA, were sent to a laboratory. They did not match, the official said. In the other three cases, investigators checking on Mr. White's alibis found that he was, in fact, elsewhere when the crimes were committed.
''The investigation into those attacks continues,'' Mr. Morgenthau said yesterday, referring to the Upper East Side crime spree. He said that Mr. White had been indicted in the Lower East Side case on charges of robbery, burglary and sexual abuse that carry penalties of up to 25 years in prison.
