American Ballet Theater named Rachel S. Moore its new executive director yesterday, effective in mid-April. Ms. Moore has been the director of the Center for Dance Education at the Boston Ballet since 2001. The executive committee of the Ballet Theater board of directors met Wednesday, and its choice was affirmed by the full board yesterday.
Ms. Moore arrives at a time when there has been high turnover among the company's executive directors and questions have been raised by former trustees about the company's financial health. Ballet Theater's auditor and company officials say the company is in good shape. This week, the company announced three new corporate sponsors and a challenge grant of $400,000.
Ms. Moore will be the fourth executive director at Ballet Theater in four years. She follows Elizabeth Harpel Kehler, who resigned in June after less than a year on the job. Wallace Chappell, who served less than two years before moving to another position in the company in 2002, succeeded Louis G. Spisto, who was forced to resign in 2001 after accusations of mismanagement. (Mr. Chappell has just been named executive director of the Paul Taylor Dance Company.)
Ms. Moore, a former dancer with Ballet Theater, has held administrative posts at Project Step, a classical music school for minority students in Boston, at the Ballet Theater of Boston and at arts organizations including Americans for the Arts and the National Cultural Alliance, both in Washington. She taught in the graduate program in arts administration at Boston University. She graduated with honors from Brown University in 1992 and has a master's degree in arts administration from Columbia. She was a fellow at the executive program for nonprofit arts leaders at Stanford's Business School.
''What impressed me about Rachel was that she comes from within,'' Kevin McKenzie, artistic director of Ballet Theater and himself a former principal dancer with the company, said yesterday. ''She went away and got an amazing amount of training, and she's had practical experience. Ballet Theater took a big chance on me 11 years ago. Rachel has a proven managerial record.''
Ms. Moore served as an interim leader of Boston Ballet in a similarly tumultuous period for that company, during her time as director of the company school, which has a budget of $4.5 million and 75 employees. In her years at Ballet Theater, from 1984 to 1988, when Mikhail Baryshnikov was artistic director, Ms. Moore was also a member of the dancers' union committee and chairwoman of the Dancers' Emergency Fund.
''I danced anything in a tutu in a line,'' she said yesterday of her career in the Ballet Theater corps. ''It was an honor to have been able to dance at that time with the company. It was inspirational just to see that caliber of dancer every night and see artists of such a great standard keep on growing.'' A foot injury ended her career.
''I've known a lot of these people for a long time, and I know the culture of the organization,'' she said. ''I have a common artistic language with Kevin and the artistic staff. I'm never going to second-guess that we need 24 swans. And I think that having a business background I'm able to communicate with people outside the dance world why it's so important to do what we do.''
Unlike the New York City Ballet, Ballet Theater has no permanent home, which Ms. Moore mentioned when asked about issues she would address. ''Some people see that as a business disadvantage in certain ways,'' she said. ''Touring is good for the company, and all sorts of communities get to see high-quality dance. But it's hard when you don't have your own home. It's very expensive to tour and becoming increasingly so. I think one of the things that we are committed to is maintaining the leadership position as a national company and finding a sustainable economic model for that.''
