THE gulf between seasons grew much wider here yesterday when the Yankees cut ties with Aaron Boone, and a surgeon may have cost Bernie Williams center field. Hold those regular-season programs, spring training's just begun.
Even under the blue Florida sky, it's a cold, cruel Yankees reality. Williams, the widely loved, longtime fixture, was primed to fend off the challenge of Kenny Lofton until yesterday. After telling a reporter he was experiencing stomach discomfort, Williams was rushed to the hospital for an emergency appendectomy.
Manager Joe Torre estimated three weeks of recovery, resulting in a delayed start to the season for Williams. So long, job security, and thanks for the memories.
At least Williams will get paid. Boone is on his own, a free agent on crutches.
Hero today, gone tomorrow. That sums up his short stay in pinstripes. Boone beat the Red Sox with a pennant-clinching home run in Game 7 of the American League Championship Series, then tore up his knee playing winter pickup hoops. With Boone in violation of his $5.75 million contract, the Yankees had the ingenious idea of replacing him with the best player in baseball.
''Though he didn't hit in the World Series, struggling from the time we got him, he wasn't afraid,'' Torre said. ''You can put him up right with Bucky Dent.''
In other words: So long, Sox killer, and thanks for the memory.
Another day, another deletion. The Yankees, months removed from the Series, will begin the season with four new position players in the lineup. Make it five if Travis Lee -- a free agent signed earlier in the week, in case you blinked -- opens at first base with Jason Giambi as the designated hitter. There will also be four new starters in the rotation and two new bullpen recruits to go with all those imported late last season.
Anyone counting? Anyone care?
''I think Yankee fans do care,'' said Derek Jeter, one of four remaining Yankees from the last championship team, in 2000. ''I think they are especially loyal to the players they follow.''
Maybe they are, but the more changes George Steinbrenner makes, the more tickets he sells. Who would have predicted this 20 years ago when radical player movement was said to be the end of professional sports as we had known it, and maybe the end of pro sports?
Yankee fans did bark when the homegrown Andy Pettitte left, but they purred when Javier Vazquez came. No one but Jeter so much as mentioned Alfonso Soriano when he was shipped out for Alex Rodriguez. Our guys, the other guys, they are all interchangeable, depending on the need of the week.
''If we weren't winning as much, it might be different,'' the bench coach Willie Randolph said. ''People get past feeling like they need to identify with players because winning gives them something else to think about.''
That's part of it, but there's more, relating not only to the Yankees. In this high-tech, freewheeling world of diverse lifestyles and entertainment options, sports have become a reflection of fans flipping away at home to their heart's content.
Jeter made this connection when he said: ''When I was growing up, the only chance we had to see other players besides our home team was on 'This Week in Baseball.' Now you've got ESPN games, satellite, the highlights. With all the media coverage, you feel like you know all the players.''
No one's a stranger anymore. Young fans are especially conditioned to the team hopping, the player swapping. N.F.L. players switch uniforms at a dizzying pace. Isiah Thomas remakes the Knicks in a week and a half. Coaches come and go like commuters. The so-called student-athlete becomes just the athlete after a year of so-called amateur competition.
''Change is inevitable,'' Joe Girardi, back with the Yankees as a reserve catcher or a house broadcaster after a four-year absence. ''My first year I was scrutinized, booed, because so many people loved Mike Stanley.''
Girardi's point: by the end of that season, 1996, they sure weren't booing him when he hit that huge triple off Greg Maddux in Game 6 of the World Series.
Similarly, for one night in October, there was no bigger Yankee than Aaron Boone. Then again, had he put his bat on the ball against Florida's Braden Looper in the 11th inning of Game 4 with the lead run on third and the bases loaded, one out, and Mariano Rivera ready in the bullpen, the Yankees would probably have won the World Series, too.
General Manager Brian Cashman, who had to break the news to Boone by phone and didn't relish the chore, nonetheless said it would have been foolish to keep Boone on the payroll, to surrender to sentimentality based on one home run.
When Cashman was a kid, he rooted for the Dodgers. ''They had the same infield for eight years -- Garvey, Lopes, Russell and Cey,'' Cashman said. But that was a long time ago. That the Yankees of 1996 to 2001 had a most identifiable nucleus was, Jeter said, ''a credit to our owner; we were spoiled.''
Aaron Boone, a one-hit wonder, was never a part of that, and for his winter blunder, he got the boot. With A-Rod here, Boone won't be mourned or missed. Conversely, Bernie Williams, a career-long Yankee who has always had a stomach for big games, got a bad break. If there is any sentiment left in sports, let it be saved for him. If he is going to lose his job, let it happen on the field.
Sports of The Times
