Straining against the tide of record levels of homelessness in New York, the Bloomberg administration is trying a variety of new approaches to address the problem, many significantly different from those the city has followed for two decades.
In the past few years, the number of homeless families in the shelter system has risen significantly; more than 9,000 families are in need of shelter each night, an increase of almost 50 percent since 2001.
The administration's new policies have included trying to get people out of shelters and into apartments, putting millions of dollars into prevention programs, and seeking to end the litigation concerning the city office where homeless families enter the shelter system. Those steps and others are winning cautious praise from experts and advocates on homelessness, who see in them a chance to reshape the approach to a problem that has proven vexing.
''This really is a new way of looking at how you manage and respond to a homeless crisis and community that does not have the resources to respond,'' said Frederick Shack, senior vice president of client services at Help USA, one of the largest providers of shelters.
By increasing a supply of subsidized apartments, the administration moved 3,500 families into permanent housing during the last fiscal year, the largest number in the 11-year history of the Department of Homeless Services, and a 57 percent increase over the previous fiscal year. Though the list of families waiting for apartments remains long, the movement of such large numbers has left many advocates hopeful.
Last summer was the first time since 1998 that no families slept on the floor of the Emergency Assistance Unit in the Bronx during its busiest season, even though the number of families in the system -- 9,097 as of Wednesday -- is roughly double what it was 1998.
For the first time in two decades, the courtrooms that have served as battlegrounds between the city and advocates for homeless families have remained quiet for over a year. The protracted court battles have been replaced with a Special Master's Panel charged with resolving immediate problems within the shelter system.
For decades, there have been courtroom battles over matters like where homeless families sleep at night and what amenities must be available to them, but now the panel is also looking at the entire problem and suggesting long-term reforms to the system.
''It really is about solving the problem, understanding its causes and helping people get access and long-term solutions to the problem,'' Mr. Shack said. The moratorium on courtroom battles alone, he said, has ''the potential to alter the entire system.''
In many ways, the administration's approach to homelessness reflects the management template that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has placed over much of city government since he took office in 2002.
He has forced agencies that have traditionally worked independently, if not as adversaries, to attack problems as a group, supervised closely by one of his key aides. Policy decisions are shaped more by data and spreadsheets than by ideology. Mr. Bloomberg also makes ample use of private sector help, often with government subsidies. And, allergic to litigation, Mr. Bloomberg has charged his corporation counsel to avoid it.
Shortly after taking office, Mr. Bloomberg ordered his chief of staff, Peter L. Madonia, to oversee a broad initiative to tackle some of the most intractable problems in the homelessness system. Mr. Madonia began to oversee weekly meetings of the commissioners, or their deputies, of the agencies that have a hand in the issue, including the public housing authority, the tax department, the Human Resources Administration and the mayor's corporation counsel. The group meets every Friday morning, and commissioners are expected to come with new data, suggestions or solutions.
The New York City Housing Authority, consequently, devised three plans to move more homeless families into apartments. One was to release more empty apartments during midsummer, when need is the greatest, and to push homeless families up the list above others waiting for apartments. Another was to increase the number of vouchers for Section 8, the federal rent-subsidy program, available to landlords who provide housing to low-income residents. Over the last two years, the city has been able to obtain 12,000 new vouchers for Section 8 housing, up from 2,700 in the 2002 fiscal year.
At the same time, the housing authority tried to make it more palatable for landlords to accept Section 8 vouchers by addressing long-standing complaints about the system, including cumbersome paperwork and slow city reimbursement.
As a result, said the chairman of the housing authority, Tino Hernandez, ''In 2003 we had the most rentals in the history of the housing authority -- 11,000 units.'' However, the important Section 8 program may be threatened by the federal government's plan to reduce the number of those vouchers.
Soon after the Bloomberg administration took office, it sought an agreement with Legal Aid lawyers to end litigation over the Emergency Assistance Unit, the office in the Bronx where homeless families report to enter the system, and instead put in place the Special Master's Panel to mediate issues and help the city reorganize its overall approach.
The group first came out with recommendations about preventing homelessness, something that was never addressed in the myriad of court cases that dictated city policies on homelessness for years. The administration has committed millions of dollars to a pilot program in five neighborhoods to prevent homelessness.
Within a month, the panel is expected to present recommendations that would shift how homeless families enter the shelter system, perhaps eliminating the Emergency Assistance Unit in its present form, which would be the most radical change in the system since homelessness first became a major city problem more than two decades ago.
''The idea was to remove everything from the courts and glare of publicity and work quietly with a special master panel,'' said Michael A. Cardozo, the city's corporation counsel.
The mayor has not abandoned the courts completely. Last year, at the urging of his commissioners, the administration dug in and fought in court to allow the city to evict disruptive residents from shelters and to force families that refuse multiple housing offers to move into an apartment of the city's choosing.
''We felt we had the legal right to do it, and Linda felt from the policy point of view it was very important,'' Mr. Cardozo said, referring to Linda Gibbs, the commissioner for the Department of Homeless Services, who tellingly has a pair of boxing gloves hanging in her office.
The city is also for the first time holding shelter operators to performance standards that are similar to private sector contracts and will reduce payments to operators who do not meet the standards.
''They are very focused on looking at the data that exists and looking at sensible solutions,'' said Lauren Pareti, the executive director for the Council on Homeless Policies and Services, which represents shelter operators.
At the same time, she said, shelter operators had other complaints, arguing the administration has done a poor job of updating its records to reflect improvements, and keeping payments flush with rising costs. She noted that the city budget for overhead has not gone up in 12 years.
Some advocates for the homeless, while crediting the administration with increasing subsidized housing, feel the city's victories may not do enough to handle the rise in the number of homeless families.
Further, the legal cease-fire could end. Steven Banks, a lawyer for Legal Aid, hinted that he might skirt the Special Master's Panel and sue the city over the policy of separating married couples within the shelter system.
The city and the panel are both hoping to avoid such piecemeal litigation. ''The reality is that we are looking for real structural improvements, not doing patchwork on a single issue,'' said Gail Nayowith, a member of the panel.
Mr. Bloomberg has frequently cited homeless services as one of his agency's greatest successes so far. ''I think the mayor has set the tone,'' said Ms. Gibbs. ''It is clear to me that he expects individual agencies to identify the things they need to work on and do it. It is a permission, but also a responsibility.''
