The social event of the Mexican season takes place this Saturday and Wall Street analysts are paying unusual attention.
Emilio Azcárraga Jean, the chairman of the Mexican media giant Grupo Televisa, will wed Sharon Fastlicht before 1,300 guests in the garden of his home in this city's western suburbs. After a honeymoon in Asia, the couple will move to Miami.
Why would the chief executive of the world's largest Spanish-language media company take up residence in the United States? Because that is where Televisa's fastest-growing market is.
Mr. Azcárraga, 36, has long said he wants to find a way to expand Televisa's reach into the Hispanic market in the United States. Televisa now owns 11 percent of Univision Communications, the leading Spanish-language television network in the United States, and provides Univision with much of its programming.
Because Federal Communications Commission restrictions limit foreign ownership of United States broadcasters to 25 percent, Mr. Azcárraga would need an American passport if he were to seek control of the company.
Last year, Mr. Azcárraga began publicly musing on the possibility of seeking United States citizenship. Many Wall Street analysts -- citing the Australian-born Rupert Murdoch's pursuit of American nationality to create the Fox Network -- have been quick to pounce on Mr. Azcárraga's move to Miami as the first step in the lengthy process of becoming an American.
''The popular speculation sees a plot line where Emilio pursues American citizenship with an eye on acquiring Univision several years later,'' said Leland Westerfield, a media analyst with Jefferies &amp; Company in New York. ''Is that a fiction? We don't know yet.''
Mr. Azcárraga said this month that Televisa was looking at different ways of expanding its reach. ''Today, we have a partnership with Univision, which is an American group,'' he said during an informal meeting with university students, suggesting that growth could come through joint projects. ''Another possibility is obtaining double nationality and one more is to grow with other partners. We still have not decided which is the best option for Televisa.''
Some analysts have said that Mr. Azcárraga's 24-year-old bride is American, arguing that that might speed up the application, which would take at least five years. But like Televisa's breathy soap operas, this too is fiction: Ms. Fastlicht is Mexican, she confirmed in a telephone interview.
Through a licensing deal with Univision, Televisa has already proved the appeal of its programming in the United States, where almost 60 percent of the Hispanic population is of Mexican origin. Televisa's programming -- particularly its rags-to-riches soap operas, or telenovelas -- have become the prime-time staple in Spanish-speaking households from New York to Los Angeles.
The second Spanish-language network, Telemundo, owned by NBC, lags far behind.
''One way to look at the Televisa-Univision alliance is as a unified vertical media company with manufacturing in Mexico City and distribution in the U.S.,'' Mr. Westerfield said.
The Univision agreement earned Televisa $96 million last year, just a fraction of its total revenue of $2.14 billion, according to the company's fourth-quarter earnings announced on Wednesday. Profit more than tripled, to $326 million.
Nearly all of Televisa's earnings come from its operations in Mexico, where it controls four television networks, accounting for two-thirds of all TV ad spending. The company is Mexico's largest magazine publisher, a leading player in radio and the dominant company in pay television.
With Mexican economic growth tepid and the company too large to acquire any major business at home without bumping up against antitrust authorities, the only way it can grow is to expand abroad.
The United States Hispanic market is the natural outlet. Advertising dollars directed at Hispanics in the United States are expected to surpass all of Mexico's ad spending by next year.
''Our main objective is to grow both organically and through acquisitions, especially in the U.S. Hispanic market,'' said Alfonso de Angoitia, executive vice president at Televisa and Mr. Azcárraga's top lieutenant.
''The U.S. Hispanic market is very attractive for us,'' he said in a conference call with investors on Thursday. ''I think we have demonstrated that we know a lot about that market and our products are very successful in the U.S.''
Since Mr. Azcárraga took over Televisa on his father's death in 1997, he has been clear that his ambitions for the company his grandfather founded reach beyond Mexico.
But first he needed to get the company in shape. He restructured $1.8 billion in debt and set about paring costs and remaking the virtual fiefdom his autocratic father, Emilio Azcárraga Milmo, left behind. He has more than doubled margins, reduced head count from 20,000 to fewer than 13,000 employees and cut administrative expenses by two-thirds.
The result of the efficiency drive is that Televisa now has some $1 billion in cash to use in making acquisitions.
In public, however, Mr. de Angoitia is more cautious than his boss about expansion, a sign that Televisa fears that any dramatic move on Univision now would rattle investors.
''If we don't spot anything that is in our core business and that represents a growth opportunity basically in the U.S. market and that is not dilutive to our shareholders, we would pay much larger dividends and-or buy back our stock,'' he said. The company plans to pay a one-time dividend of about $136 million in the second quarter.
Beyond the citizenship requirement, there are plenty of obstacles to Televisa's acquiring a larger stake in Univision, analysts say. Univision, which reported sales of $1.3 billion last year and net income of $155 million, trades at a large premium to Televisa. Buying expensive Univision stock would dilute the value of Televisa's assets for its shareholders, analysts say.
Speculation centers on whether Mr. Azcárraga might eventually reach a deal to buy the shares held by A. Jerrold Perenchio, the 73-year-old Los Angeles media entrepreneur and Univision's controlling shareholder.
''I don't think Univision is anywhere near where he would sell it,'' said David Joyce, an analyst at Guzman &amp; Company in Miami. Univision's market capitalization is about $12.5 billion and analysts say Televisa's only other option would be to spend as much as $4 billion in the market to acquire enough shares to gain control.
But Televisa actually does not have that many ways to expand in the United States. It is already developing new pay television channels with Univision and is selling them to cable operators in the United States that want to increase anemic subscription rates among Spanish speakers.
Spanish-language magazine and newspaper publishing is another area where Televisa could expand in the United States, analysts say.
In fact, the Televisa contract with Univision in the United States hamstrings the company. Univision has exclusive rights to Televisa's programs until 2017. If Televisa wants to move boldly into Hispanic media in the United States, its most likely path would be to take a bigger stake in Univision, analysts say.
Mr. Azcárraga appears unlikely to seek incremental growth. And given his relative youth, he seems willing to wait.
In a November interview with Bloomberg News, he envisioned a Televisa-Univision merger: ''If we could be one company, you would have a North American Spanish-speaking entertainment company. That's something in the long term we would like to achieve.''
