With his future with the Jets uncertain, quarterback Vinny Testaverde said yesterday that he was considering retiring and would sit out the team's off-season workout program to give himself time to consider his options.
Testaverde, 40, made his comments after it was reported that the Jets planned to cut him after June 1, to maximize their salary cap benefits. The Jets did not confirm or deny the report, which appeared yesterday in The Daily News, but provided statements from Testaverde and Coach Herman Edwards on Testaverde's future.
''I am considering, unless something changes, bringing an end to my professional playing career,'' Testaverde said in his statement. ''In discussions with the Jets' organization, they have been very positive and supportive of me. I really appreciate the opportunity to have come back to New York, my home, and have enjoyed being part of some of the most successful and exciting years the Jets have had.''
Testaverde's six seasons with the Jets included a late-career surge that sent him to the Pro Bowl in the 1998 season after leading the Jets to the A.F.C. championship game. Despite also leading the Jets to the playoffs in the 2001 season with a 10-6 record, Testaverde lost his starting job to Chad Pennington in 2002, when the team started the season 1-4.
Since then, Pennington has solidified his role as the franchise's future and Testaverde has played only when Pennington was injured. The team has been grooming Brooks Bollinger, the third-string quarterback, to become Pennington's backup.
Testaverde is scheduled to make $1 million this season, but if the Jets cut him before June 1, he will take up $7.5 million against their salary cap because the remaining portion of his signing bonus would count. After June 1, the team can defer $4 million of the salary cap hit until 2005.
Testaverde's agent, Michael Azzarelli, said the report that the Jets had decided to release Testaverde was ''aggressive and premature.''
While Pennington was recovering from broken bones in his wrist last season, Testaverde completed 123 of 198 passes for 1,385 yards, 7 touchdowns and 2 interceptions. The Jets went 2-5 in the games he started.
His career numbers are impressive: 3,334 completions in 5,925 passing attempts for 40,943 yards, 251 touchdowns and 235 interceptions. Testaverde is one of only nine quarterbacks to surpass the 40,000-yard mark.
He has played for four teams, including Tampa Bay and Cleveland/Baltimore, but he enjoyed his best team success with the Jets, making two playoff appearances.
Testaverde was a popular player who returned to play near his hometown in Long Island. Even after his benching in 2002, he earned praise for how he continued to be a mentor to Pennington.
''Vinny is a consummate professional who represents the New York Jets and the N.F.L. in a first-class manner,'' Edwards said in his statement. ''He's thrown for over 40,000 yards and was a win away from the Super Bowl. His overall contributions to the game are a testament to his dedication, hard work and perseverance, and we support any decision he decides to make.''
While Testaverde remained supportive of Pennington, he made it clear at the end of last season that he would not hang on just to be a third-string quarterback.
''I'd rather retire than do something that I wouldn't enjoy doing, because I'm not doing it for the money anymore,'' he said in December.
Edwards has said that the Jets planned to announce some of their off-season personnel plans today, after meeting with the players earlier in the week. Most of the speculation has surrounded Testaverde, the future of receiver Wayne Chrebet after a series of concussions and some possible trades.
On the trade front, the Jets apparently have fallen out of the running for Washington cornerback Champ Bailey -- now seemingly headed for Denver in a trade for running back Clinton Portis -- and have not yet indicated if they are interested in trading for San Francisco receiver Terrell Owens.
PRO FOOTBALL
