Martin Bashir, the British television journalist whose exclusive interview last year with Michael Jackson attracted some of the biggest television audiences of the season in both the United States and Britain, is close to a deal to move to ABC News, executives at several networks that had been in negotiations with him said yesterday.
A newspaper article in The Guardian yesterday reported that Mr. Bashir had secured an agreement with ABC News.
Jeffrey Schneider, the spokesman for ABC News, said, ''Martin Bashir is a talented journalist who would be a great addition to any newsroom, but we have no further comment.'' Mr. Bashir, 41, has a contract with Granada Television that expires in July, according to British newspaper reports. One senior American network news executive with knowledge of the negotiations said ABC was close to a deal with Mr. Bashir, but the terms were not complete.
Other networks did explore Mr. Bashir's availability, the senior executive said, but it was assumed that ABC News enjoyed an advantage because that network had purchased reports by him on several occasions -- including the interview with Mr. Jackson.
That report, which included a comment from Mr. Jackson that he saw nothing wrong with sleeping in the same bed as young boys, pulled in 27 million viewers a year ago.
The report was first broadcast on the program ''Tonight'' on the ITV network in Britain, where it was seen by 14 million viewers. On Tuesday, Mr. Bashir's program on Mr. Jackson was honored as the program of the year at the Royal Television Society's journalism awards. In response to the report, Mr. Jackson's camp produced a special for the Fox network that accused Mr. Bashir of betraying Mr. Jackson by portraying him in the most unfavorable light.
A report by Mr. Bashir a year earlier, about a cheating scandal on the hit program ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' was seen by 15 million people in Britain, the largest audience for a news program in six years. ABC also imported that program.
