A teenage baby sitter in this tiny town at the foot of the Berkshires has been charged with raping and sodomizing three children he was watching in their home over a period of more than a year.
The baby sitter, Jeremy Barney, a 17-year-old from nearby Lakeville, Conn., was charged with three counts of sexual abuse and three counts of risk of injury to a minor. By state law, he will be tried as an adult.
According to an arrest warrant unsealed this week, Mr. Barney's mother, Beverly, first alerted the authorities to the abuse of the three children -- boys age 7 and 13 and an 8-year-old girl -- in October. Mr. Barney, who was being treated for depression at Charlotte Hungerford Hospital in Torrington at the time, told his mother he was ''glad someone found out about it,'' Mrs. Barney told the police.
The youth had been abusing the children since the summer of 2002, when he began watching pornographic videos with the eldest child, a boy who was then 12, the warrant said. He eventually abused all three children, the state police charged. He intimidated the children by telling them he would assault other members of the family if they did not comply with his requests, and he tortured them with a knife, among other items, the warrant said.
The victims' mother, who was not identified in the warrant, told the police ''basically every time we had Jeremy baby-sit, he raped'' the two older children, the warrant said.
After he was released from the hospital in Torrington, the youth went to live with his aunt in Everson, Wash., and he was arrested there in January. Earlier this month, he was extradited to Connecticut and is being held in the New Haven Correctional Center on a $1 million bond.
Christopher Cosgrove, a public defender who is representing the youth, would not comment on the case. James C. Fletcher, the senior assistant state's attorney handling the case, also declined to comment.
Sharon is a small enough town that many people know either the victims' family, the suspect's family, or both. News about the arrest, reported in the Lakeville Journal, came as a shock, and there was an initial buzz about the case. But now, some residents said, no one wants to talk about it.
''There was an initial reaction and that was it,'' said Rick Hotaling, the owner of Rick's Wine and Spirits.
Mr. Hotaling said he talked about the assaults with members of his church when they were first reported.
''I think that's the country way,'' he said, referring to people's reticence. ''You hate to think of these things coming here. But we have our problems, too. We'll just pray that those three children heal.''
