A Delaware judge last night blocked Conrad M. Black's deal to sell his controlling stake in the newspaper company Hollinger International to the Barclay brothers of Britain, ruling that the independent directors should be allowed to try to sell the company's assets, which include The Daily Telegraph in London, The Jerusalem Post and The Chicago Sun-Times.
The 133-page ruling by Vice Chancellor Leo E. Strine Jr. of the state's Chancery Court criticized Lord Black's deal with the Barclays -- conducted without knowledge of Hollinger's board or its investment bankers -- as ''cunning and calculated.'' The ruling represents a decisive victory for the company's independent directors, who have been running its daily operations since November. Lord Black resigned last fall as chief executive, as questions mounted over millions of dollars in payments and management fees that he received from the company in recent years. The board ousted him as chairman last month.
Vice Chancellor Strine wrote that Lord Black -- who holds about 30 percent of the shares in the company but controls about 73 percent of the votes -- ''repeatedly behaved in a manner inconsistent with the duty of loyalty he owed the company.''
The judge also questioned the accuracy of Lord Black's testimony last week in a trial in which he and the company sued each other. ''I found him evasive and unreliable,'' the ruling said. ''His explanations of key events and of his own motivations do not have the ring of truth.''
The ruling upheld an agreement that Lord Black had signed with the company in November, in which he pledged that he would not seek to sell his stake unless the company through which he holds his shares -- Hollinger Inc. -- was on the brink of financial ruin. Testifying last Friday, on the last day of the three-day trial, Lord Black had argued that the holding company was not only facing insolvency but that the agreement itself was no longer binding because he had since determined had been duped into signing it.
A spokesman for Lord Black, James Badenhausen, said that he ''respectfully disagreed'' with the decision. While Lord Black, who was represented by the law firm Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, did not rule out filing an appeal, he indicated through Mr. Badenhausen that he would support the company's plans to sell its assets.
A spokeswoman for David and Frederick Barclay, twin brothers in their late 60's who control newspapers and other businesses from a small island in the English Channel, had no comment.
Several experts on Delaware law said that if Lord Black decided to appeal the decision to the state supreme court, he would probably face a high hurdle, in no small part because victories on appeal in corporate cases in the state supreme court have been rare.
It is also uncommon in Delaware, where Hollinger International and many other companies are chartered, for the state supreme court to overturn decisions finding that companies or their officers have breached their loyalty to shareholders, according to Robert Curry Jr., a corporate governance expert at the law firm Kirby McInerney &amp; Squire. Mr. Curry has been an adviser to Tweedy Browne, the institutional investor that first formally brought the questionable payments to Lord Black to the attention of the directors last May.
In a statement, Hollinger International, which was represented by the firm Paul Weiss Rifkind Wharton &amp; Garrison, said it was ''extremely pleased'' and ''vindicated'' by the ruling.
The crucial legal question in the case was whether a controlling shareholder who was also chairman of the board could put his own financial interests ahead of the interests of the minority shareholders.
The independent directors -- led by Richard C. Breeden, their counsel and the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange commission -- had sued Lord Black, arguing that his sale to the Barclays risked jeopardizing not only the board's attempts to sell its newspapers but also the other shareholders' hopes of recovering financial damages from him. In the November agreement, Lord Black, who over the years had transformed Hollinger International from a small Canadian mining company into the operator of more than 100 newspapers on three continents, pledged to repay about $7 million that he received from the company -- payments that he acknowledged did not have the full board's authorization and had not been fully disclosed.
Lord Black had filed a counterclaim in Delaware, asking the judge to allow his deal with the Barclays to go through. In the nine months since Tweedy Browne first made its complaints known, the stock price of Hollinger International has risen fairly steadily, from $10.41 a share in May to its close of $17.30 yesterday before the court's ruling was released.
Though decided on the particular facts in the case, the ruling does appear to have some broader applicability for other corporate boards and the ways in which they conduct themselves, legal experts said.
Lyman Johnson, a professor of corporate law at Washington and Lee University, said that the case ''vindicates the importance of strong independent directors even where there is a controlling shareholder.''
Mr. Breeden, the former S.E.C. chairman advising the Hollinger International board, said the decision was a victory for the minority shareholders.
In upholding the November agreement, Vice Chancellor Strine struck down an end-run that Lord Black had sought to make around the board by attempting to change the bylaws of Hollinger International in a way that would have made it impossible for the board to sell any assets -- because any sale would have required Lord Black's approval.
Vice Chancellor Strine also upheld the board's own adoption of a so-called poison pill plan, in which Lord Black's controlling stake, if sold, would become so diluted as to strip it of its majority voting rights.
