For Mike Piazza, the most compelling subplot of this spring training is not his move to first base. He seems more intrigued by the movement to succeed him at catcher.
Between ground balls Piazza lets his eyes wander to the nearest backstop, where the next generation of catchers is auditioning. After watching Justin Huber quick-release a throw to second base or Mike Jacobs hit a hooking liner off the right-field fence, Piazza appears almost relieved. No matter where he plays, the organization has enough catchers to go around.
''We really have a lot of talent there,'' said Piazza, sounding less like a catcher and more like a superscout. ''Those guys excel in one thing or another. Huber is a talented kid, with great plate presence, who's getting some confidence. And Jacobs has got a nice swing. A really nice swing.''
Huber and Jacobs have lockers next to each other and across from Piazza. The symbolism is lost on no one. Two prospects are aiming to occupy the spot that has long been reserved for the Mets' superstar, but they must make one more leap to get there.
When Huber and Jacobs were in the minor leagues last season, reports would trickle down that Piazza was shifting to first base. They couldn't help but notice. Although Jason Phillips and Vance Wilson will catch behind Piazza this season, Huber and Jacobs are the long-term solutions.
Huber, 21, was signed by Omar Minaya, now the Montreal Expos' general manager, and has been considered the best catching prospect in the Mets' system. But Jacobs, a 38th-round draft choice, is more accomplished. Jacobs, 23, won the Sterling award last season, given to the top minor league player in the organization, after he hit .329 at Class AA Binghamton, second-best in the Eastern League.
Jacobs is that rare baseball creature, a left-handed-hitting catcher with a swing so smooth he is often confused for an outfielder or a first baseman. Growing up, Jacobs patterned his swing after that of the Atlanta Braves' Chipper Jones, complete with the subtle toe tap. His imitation has appeared authentic to his new teammates.
''A lot of guys here call me Chip, because I swing so much like Chipper Jones,'' Jacobs said. ''I'm just trying to make an impression here because, at this point, you really don't want someone to pass you up.''
That someone is obviously Huber, who has failed to approach Jacobs's hitting standards but could surpass him defensively. Gary Carter, the Mets' Hall of Fame catcher and spring training instructor, acknowledges that Huber or Jacobs may eventually have to switch positions. If the Mets can turn Piazza into a first baseman, they may try to do the same with Jacobs someday.
''Because of his left-handed bat, depending on the situation with Mike Piazza, Mike Jacobs might end up being the Mets' first baseman,'' Carter said. ''The catching position is pretty well set right now.''
Huber and Jacobs have the same primary objective, but their backgrounds could not be more different. Huber is from Australia, has a distinctive accent that makes him the target of clubhouse jokes and hardly thought about the major leagues as a youngster. He remembers playing baseball in high school in his hometown of Melbourne on fields covered with potholes and weeds.
''I had no idea about any of this,'' said Huber, who moved to the United States in 2000. ''I probably only saw half a dozen major league games on television in my whole life before I moved here. I didn't know any of the players or anything. I was completely oblivious.''
While Huber keeps a relatively low profile, Jacobs stands out with his spiked blond hair. Like several other Mets prospects, Jacobs grew up in San Diego, starring at Hilltop High School, where he played on one of the most manicured fields in a city known for its prep baseball.
Jacobs is expected to start this season at Class AAA and Huber at Class AA, but they are not the Mets' only promising young catchers. Scouts rave about the defensive abilities of Joe Hietpas, and the club also extended a spring training invitation to Tony Piazza. He is not related to Mike, but is used to the questions.
''I get them all the time,'' Tony Piazza said. ''It was pretty bad in high school, and then when I went to the Mets, it was like, 'Oh, God.' It got worse last summer in Brooklyn.''
That the Mets have two Piazzas is proof of their depth behind the plate. While the organization lacks first basemen, the Mets are fully prepared to compensate for the loss of a catcher. With one position switch, Piazza might not only help his own career. He could also help a handful of others.
Although Piazza can sometimes appear aloof, he imparts advice and encouragement to the younger catchers trying to follow him. ''They know me pretty well now, so they can come up and ask me whatever they want,'' he said. ''I've never been all that intimidating.''
INSIDE PITCH
MIKE CAMERON participated in full workouts but said the bone spur in his right big toe was still bothering him, especially when he takes batting practice. . . . ART HOWE has set his rotation for the opening series of the regular season in Atlanta. After the left-handed ace TOM GLAVINE, he will start right-handed STEVE TRACHSEL and left-handed AL LEITER so the Braves do not face two lefties in a row. . . . Mets pitchers threw live batting practice Thursday, and SCOTT ERICKSON, who hopes to become the fifth starter, was among the most impressive.
BASEBALL
