Seven percent of the priests serving since 1950 in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston, where the sexual abuse scandal erupted two years ago, have been accused of molesting children, according a report the archdiocese released on Thursday.
The report is part of a nationwide survey of abuse by Catholic priests that was undertaken by a national review board of prominent Catholic laypeople appointed by the bishops at the height of the abuse scandal in 2002. Figures from Boston show the archdiocese had a higher percentage of abusive priests than the church in the United States as a whole.
The Boston report found that 162 of the 2,324 ordained priests who served in the archdiocese from 1950 to December 2003 were accused of sexually abusing 815 children. An additional 150 complaints of abuse were lodged against three deacons, 10 priests from other dioceses serving in Boston and 44 priests from religious orders, the report said.
''It's painful to see that the numbers are high and know that the problem was not addressed the way we needed it to be,'' Archbishop Sean P. O'Malley said in an interview. ''And we are painfully aware of the suffering this has caused to the victims and to our local church and the people and clergy.''
Archbishop O'Malley, who was appointed church leader in Boston after Cardinal Bernard F. Law was forced to resign over the abuse scandal, said that he had looked at the national report and concluded that ''our numbers percentage is higher than the national numbers, at least that's my distinct impression.''
The archdiocese's figures reveal some striking patterns about the sexual abuse crisis in Boston.
Slightly more than half of the people who said they had been abused made their accusations against just seven priests, the report said. An archdiocesan spokesman, the Rev. Christopher Coyne, said that 417 people said they were victimized by the seven priests, and that the priests included the Rev. John J. Geoghan and the Rev. Paul R. Shanley.
The study also found that 59 of the 162 priests were ordained in the 1960's, and that the majority of the incidents, nearly 500, were reported to have occurred from 1965 to 1982. Fifty-eight of the 162 priests are dead. Of those priests ordained from 1980 on, only eight have been accused of sexual abuse. ''I take some consolation in the fact that the number of incidents of abuse occurring within the last 20 years seems to have dropped so precipitously,'' Archbishop O'Malley said in a statement.
Abuse victims and their advocates said the archdiocese's report understated the problem. They noted that the national review board study relied on self-reporting by the dioceses.
Phil Saviano, founder of the New England chapter of the Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests, disagreed with Archbishop O'Malley's assertion that the bulk of the abuse cases happened at least two decades ago. Most abuse victims do not come forward until they have reached their 30's or 40's, Mr. Saviano said.
''It's premature for him to say the problem has been solved and that things have dropped off in the past 10 or 15 years,'' Mr. Saviano said. ''We'll hear from those people 10 or 15 years from now.''
Roderick MacLeish Jr., a lawyer for abuse victims who has records on 177 accused priests, said: ''So many victims of sexual abuse are unreported. This was not a few bad apples, a few guys who cross the line. To pretend there were only 700 to 800 victims is nonsense. This is a systemic problem in the Roman Catholic Church in Boston.''
Nearly 500 of the accusations were reported after the abuse scandal emerged in January 2002. The report, which made no effort to establish the credibility of the accusations, also said the archdiocese had paid $120.6 million to settle abuse claims, of that amount, $22.3 million has been covered by insurance.
