Center fielder Bernie Williams quickly slipped back into his street clothes Thursday morning as he answered questions from a reporter and began edging toward the Yankees' clubhouse exit. Williams appeared to be in some discomfort, but he politely stood there for several more minutes talking about the new challenges he will be facing this year.
Then the 35-year-old Williams was off to see a doctor even as his teammates were getting ready for batting practice. And several hours later, Williams underwent an emergency appendectomy at St. Joseph's Hospital that could force him to miss the beginning of the regular season.
On a day when the Yankees found out that Williams will miss at least three weeks, the club also released the injured third baseman Aaron Boone, a move that will save the Yankees all but $917,553 of Boone's $5.75 million salary for 2004. But it was Williams's sudden operation that threw the Yankees off stride just days into the start of spring training.
''Obviously, it would be a long shot I think for him to start the season,'' Yankees Manager Joe Torre said of Williams. ''Only because it wouldn't be fair to try to rush him at-bats. If he happens to be ready for the season, then we'll look at that. But I think it would be unfair to put that kind of pressure on him.''
After a decade as the Yankees' regular center fielder, Williams was expected to face a challenge this spring from the fleet Kenny Lofton, who was acquired as a free agent in the off-season. Williams missed 42 games last year because of left knee surgery and has had an assortment of shoulder and arm ailments that have limited his defensive effectiveness in recent years.
There had been speculation that Williams would play a good deal of games this year as the Yankees' designated hitter, although Torre had also made it clear that he felt loyal to Williams and might not be inclined to make him a backup center fielder.
Before he went to receive medical attention Thursday, Williams acknowledged that he returned from the knee surgery too soon last season -- he came back on Aug. 9 -- and that his performance suffered until the postseason.
''I think my emotions got the best of me,'' he said. ''In my mind I felt I was ready to go. But I think mentally I was a little hesitant to go out and play the way I'm capable of.''
Torre said Thursday that once Lofton was acquired, Williams intensified his off-season work, showing up at Yankee Stadium three times a week in preparation for his 14th season with the Yankees.
''I almost threw all winter and also hit in the cage, things I really hadn't done in the last few years,'' Williams said. ''I've been able to come in with a lot more confidence than I had last year at this time.''
But Williams then paused when asked if this was the best he had felt physically in a long time. ''I feel in good shape,'' he said finally. ''But right now I've got a stomach problem.''
Just how much of a problem soon found out. When Williams does return to action, Torre will have to find a way to get playing time for him, Lofton, first baseman Jason Giambi and Giambi's new backup, Travis Lee. Essentially, Torre has four players for three positions -- center field, first base and designated hitter -- but it now appears the juggling will wait until after the regular season begins on March 30.
In contrast to the news on Williams, the release of Boone -- for violating the terms of his guaranteed contract by playing in a pickup basketball game in mid-January near his California home -- had been expected. Boone tore up his knee and figures to be out for much of the 2004 season. And the money the Yankees save on Boone's contract helps pay for the cost of the 2004 salary of Alex Rodriguez, the Yankees' prized new acquisition and the man who will play third instead of Boone.
''Aaron knew this was a possibility before they fell into the A-Rod lottery,'' Boone's agent, Adam Katz, said by telephone. ''It seemed we had somewhat of a better possibility of working something out before that happened.''
But Katz said nobody should feel sorry for Boone, whom he believes, at 30, will play in the major leagues again. He said Boone had initially been upset by the turn of events, but that he had ''turned the corner, like all great people do.
''He's doing his best to move on,'' Katz said.
''He's got an extraordinary work ethic and he's notorious for being a quick healer,'' Katz added. ''There are going to be people who have a lot of interest in Aaron.''
The Yankees might be among those teams, General Manager Brian Cashman said. Katz likewise didn't want to close the door on the Yankees. ''We have a real strong relationship with the Yankees,'' he said. ''They think the world of Aaron and he likes them a lot. I wouldn't rule anything out.''
BASEBALL
