MIKE TYSON, a riverboat gambler's mustache intruding on the Maori tattoo circling his left eye and cheek, peered meekly at Judge John W. Carter as he slid into the third row of pews in Room 308 of the Criminal Courts building in Brooklyn.
''Excuse me for being late, your honor,'' Tyson said softly.
He had arrived 12 minutes late, but Judge Carter appeared to be too involved to notice Tyson, the 37-year-old former heavyweight champion, who had emerged yesterday from virtual invisibility. Tyson would accept six months of psychiatric counseling and 100 hours of community service to Brooklyn youngsters in an admission of guilt to a disorderly conduct charge in a June 21 predawn brawl with two Philadelphia-area men at the nearby Brooklyn Marriott.
But this wasn't so much a court appearance by Tyson as it was a sighting of the only familiar face in what's left of the heavyweight division. And during a recess, the once self-described ''baddest man on the planet'' talked about what's left of his career.
''I'm going to fight in June in Mexico; I have to earn a living somehow to keep from starving to death,'' he said, alluding perhaps to his recent declaration of bankruptcy despite having earned an estimated $400 million. ''I'm just looking to pay my bills.''
Tyson, dressed neatly in a white open-collared shirt with a gray jacket and navy blue slacks, didn't (or couldn't) mention a possible opponent, but he kept talking about Mexico because he doubted that any boxing commission in the United States would license him. He spoke softly and politely, almost gently, as he usually does when he's not snarling.
''I'm just going to grab $1 million, $2 million, $5 million fights now, no more marquee fights,'' he said. ''I'm just barnstorming now.''
He has been barnstorming for more than three years. Since October 2000, Tyson has had only three fights, answering the bell for a total of 16 rounds -- a seventh-round knockout of Brian Nielsen, his eighth-round knockout by Lennox Lewis, and a 49-second knockout of Clifford Etienne.
Although Shelly Finkel, his former manager, was in the courtroom, Tyson insisted that he no longer had a manager because ''the ones I had didn't do a good job.'' As for Showtime, his cable-television promoter in the past, Tyson insisted that he didn't owe it any fights.
Tyson pushed into a crowded elevator and the door closed. He had resumed his virtual invisibility, which reflected the virtual invisibility of the heavyweight division now that Lewis has retired and taken his stature as the people's heavyweight champion with him.
Once upon a time, the casual sports follower knew the names of all the heavyweight contenders, not merely the champions like Muhammad Ali and Tyson. But without an obvious champion now, or even an obvious challenger, only devoted boxing buffs know the names.
Who is Vitali Klitschko? Who is Wladimir Klitschko? Or are they really one and the same? No, they're brothers from Germany by way of Ukraine, each with a Ph.D. in sports science and philosophy.
You may not have noticed that Vitali Klitschko, the elder brother, was outpointing Lewis last June until a bloody eyebrow gash persuaded the ring doctor to stop the fight in Lewis's favor. Klitschko (33-2 with 32 knockouts) and Corrie Sanders, a South African southpaw (39-2 with 29 knockouts), will meet April 24 for the World Boxing Council title that Lewis vacated.
Wladimir Klitschko is scheduled to go against Lamon Brewster on April 10 for the lesser-known World Boxing Organization title. The younger Klitschko is 42-2 with 39 knockouts. Brewster, out of Philadelphia, is 29-2 with 26 knockouts.
Then there's Chris Byrd. Does that name ring a bell? Maybe not, even though he's the International Boxing Federation champion. But among other boxers, Byrd's name rings an alarm: stay away from this southpaw, who is so crafty he can make you look bad. Which is how he made Evander Holyfield and so many others look on his way to a 37-2 record with only 20 knockouts.
Byrd is expected to defend the I.B.F. title against a challenger to be named later on an April 17 card, possibly at Madison Square Garden, which will include John Ruiz (39-5-1 with 27 knockouts) defending the World Boxing Association heavyweight title against Fres Oquendo (24-2 with 15 knockouts).
You may be wondering how Ruiz is the W.B.A. champion. Didn't he lose that title to Roy Jones Jr.? Yes, he did, but when Jones returned to the light-heavyweight division, the W.B.A. knighted Ruiz again. Only in boxing can you lose the title, then regain it when the guy you lost to apparently decides that the immobile Ruiz is the only heavyweight champion he can beat.
That's what passes for the heavyweight division now. Too many alphabet-soup ruling bodies. Too many boxers nobody knows.
One name everybody knows, George Foreman, supposedly has a $20 million offer from the promoter Don King for a one-shot comeback title fight. But what other heavyweight name would justify being the opponent for such a pay-per-view bonanza for Foreman, the 55-year-old grill and muffler salesman?
Sadly for boxing, until a respected heavyweight champion emerges, Mike Tyson is really the only familiar name out there. If he ever gets serious about boxing again. Or if he's ever sighted again.
Sports of The Times
