In state after state, fierce battles have broken out this week in the legislative aisles, as conservative lawmakers push for much more than the federal constitutional amendment banning gay marriage that President Bush has endorsed.
It does not go far enough, they say, and they do not want to wait years for an amendment to pass. Not even laws already banning same-sex marriage in three-fourths of the states go far enough, the legislators say, invoking the events in San Francisco and Massachusetts that are driving their debates.
To shore up existing laws, these lawmakers want individual amendments, which can take as little as a year to be enacted. Only four states have enacted amendments concerning same-sex marriage, but nearly two dozen are now considering enshrining prohibitions in state constitutions, according to the Human Rights Campaign, a gay rights group that tracks such legislation.
In Michigan, Georgia and several other states, voters might even see the amendments on their ballots as early as this November. Embossed with the voters' stamp of approval, statewide constitutional changes are more likely to withstand legal challenges than mere legislation.
''The Georgia law is clear on banning gay marriage,'' said Mike Crotts, a Republican state senator who has sponsored an amendment in Georgia. ''My bill is focused on activist judges who don't rule from the bench based on the law, but based on their personal views or opinions. We're seeing more and more of that throughout the country.''
And so the more marriages San Francisco grants, the more intense the fights become between Republicans and Democrats across the country.
In Indiana, Republicans in the Legislature walked out several times this week when their efforts were stymied. ''The public is watching the Legislature very closely on this issue,'' said Brian Bosma, a Republican, who is the House minority leader. ''This is the most important thing that faces us at the moment.''
In Oklahoma, where Democrats have bottled up a constitutional amendment in committee, dueling protests last week led to the arrest of a man who was carrying a fake gun and yelling antigay slurs.
In Georgia, some Democrats have tried to rebuff the constitutional efforts by suggesting an amendment that includes a ban on adultery.
Critics argue that the state amendments are redundant, discriminatory and mainly intended to energize social conservatives in an election year. ''The other side is doing this to make political hay,'' said Wally Paynter, chairman of Hoosier Families for the Preservation of the Constitution, a group fighting an amendment in Indiana. ''I think this issue does mobilize the Republican base.''
The new push for constitutional barriers against gay marriage has clearly been motivated by recent rulings from Massachusetts's highest court, which declared that denying marriage licenses to gay and lesbian couples violated the state constitution, and by the granting of marriage licenses to thousands of same-sex couples in San Francisco.
Democrats as well as Republicans credit the galvanized conservative base with successfully getting President Bush to endorse a federal constitutional amendment on Tuesday. But amending the United States Constitution is difficult and can take years, requiring the approval of Congress and 38 state legislatures.
Here in Maryland, where conservatives have introduced a constitutional amendment to ban gay marriage, gay rights advocates are pushing for legislation that would grant certain health care rights to same-sex partners, including hospital visitation rights and the power to make decisions for a partner concerning medical care, autopsies and burials.
''These are among the most human and emotional issues to same-sex couples because we are denied marriage rights,'' said Dan Furmansky, executive director of Equality Maryland, a gay rights group.
Proponents of banning gay marriage contend that the Maryland fight shows the bipartisan, multicultural nature of their movement: one of the most outspoken proponents of a constitutional amendment is a black Baptist minister from Baltimore who is a Democratic state delegate.
''The overwhelming majority of people don't agree with gay marriage,'' said the delegate, Emmett C. Burns Jr. ''But the gay and lesbian lobby has scared the heck out of the Democrats.''
Seeking to counter the swell of activity, gay rights activists are mobilizing, imploring their Congressional representatives and local lawmakers to seize the spotlight. Legislatures in at least six states, including New York and Arizona, are considering bills that would grant same-sex couples many, in some cases most, of the state rights married couples have. However, none of those bills are expected to pass.
In Massachusetts, where a constitutional convention will reconvene on March 11, legislative leaders have coalesced behind an amendment that would both ban gay marriage and authorize civil unions, which confer state but not federal marriage rights to same-sex couples.
Only Vermont currently grants all the state benefits and responsibilities of marriage -- including matters relating to taxes, health care, inheritance and insurance -- to same-sex couples. California, Hawaii and New Jersey give partial benefits.
The emotional quality of the debates within statehouses across the country has been reminiscent of the abortion fights of the 1990's, marked by impassioned hearings, dueling rallies and aggressive lobbying campaigns that have often drowned out discussion of other matters.
''This is the last thing on people's minds,'' said Cheryl Jacques, president of the Human Rights Campaign, arguing that gay-marriage fights are diverting attention from more pressing matters, like budget deficits.
Such arguments have not discouraged the combatants, and their positions are expected to resonate for months and months through the election season.
In New Hampshire, a hearing last week on a law defining marriage as strictly between a man and a woman drew more than 450 witnesses, including Bishop V. Gene Robinson, the openly gay leader of the state's Episcopal Diocese.
Fights over gay marriage, like earlier fights over abortion, have trickled down into smaller battles over the fine print of other laws.
In Kentucky, for instance, the Legislature is considering a measure that would prohibit same-sex couples from adopting children. In Virginia, conservatives proposed a measure to prevent gay couples from receiving subsidized home mortgages. (The measure failed last week.)
And in several states, conservatives are pushing bills intended to close every conceivable loophole that might allow a same-sex couple to gain legal recognition of a union granted in another state or country.
Alabama, for example, is considering a constitutional amendment that would prohibit state courts from ever interpreting the definition of marriage in state law.
An array of national conservative groups is helping the state efforts. Focus on the Family has used its nationwide newsletter and radio network to advocate state bans on gay marriage. The Family Research Council paid for a full-page advertisement in an Indiana newspaper blasting Democrats for blocking a gay marriage amendment. And the Alliance for Marriage has provided advice to local groups that are organizing to support a federal constitutional amendment.
Glenn Stanton, the senior analyst for marriage at Focus on the Family, said social conservatives had been particularly energized by the spectacle of San Francisco officials granting marriage licenses to gay couples.
''It reminds one of the looting that went on in Los Angeles a decade ago,'' he said. ''It's an administrative free-for-all and no one is stepping in to establish the rule of law.''
But proponents of gay rights say that they have also been energized by the developments in Massachusetts and San Francisco, and that they feel their movement could be on the cusp of a historic breakthrough.
''Without a doubt, the Massachusetts ruling has made this more real on both sides of the issue,'' said Richard S. Madaleno Jr., an openly gay member of the Maryland House of Delegates. ''While there is a push to pass these discriminatory bills, there is also a very active effort to stop them. It has activated both sides of the fight.''
