The just-the-facts documentary ''Risk/Reward,'' which opens in Manhattan today, buries its lead a bit. This initially shapeless film, directed by Elizabeth Holder and Xan Parker, follows a group of women through their grueling schedules in the financial realm.
By the time the movie burrows more specifically into the lives of its four subjects -- the New York Stock Exchange floor broker Louise Jones, the equity research analyst Carol Warner Wilke, the foreign-exchange sales trader Kimberley Euston and the Wharton School business student Umber Ahmad -- it is far more watchable, especially as the investment world shudders from the impact of Sept. 11.
Perhaps it is understandable that the directors want to establish a context for the demands of Wall Street, an environment with an atmosphere as dense and troublesome as the gravity of Jupiter. Early on ''Risk/Reward'' is peppered with standard clips of powerful businesswomen commenting on their experience.
''Clearly, what has to happen is that women have to realize that information is power,'' says Janet Tiebout Hanson, president and chief executive of Milestone Capital Management and, more intriguingly, founder of a networking group for women in finance called 85 Broads.
But the film springs to life when it deals with the tensions of the investment world in terms of human costs. The burdens the subjects place on themselves while trying to juggle personal and work lives are brutal, and their recounting is more informative than the tutorial that serves as prologue.
Their withering compromises come from self-generated stress, especially given that discrimination is not as overt as it used to be on Wall Street, though the number of women in finance is still small. (Ms. Jones's mentor tells a funny story about the creation of a women's restroom at the exchange.)
One of Ms. Ahmad's school friends marvels about a woman who had a baby and was back at work four days later.
The subject of that story could have been Ms. Warner Wilke. We see her on the phone with the office for a conference call a few days after the birth of her second child. Ms. Warner Wilke also tells stories about trying to work during a previous labor. (Her home phone inexplicably goes dead at a crucial juncture, something that never happens in those home-office television ads for telephone companies.)
The flux in the subjects' lives, and the determination that put them in their unlikely positions, is what gives ''Risk/Reward'' some needed roughage. Much of the film takes place in the summer; Ms. Warner Wilke's husband jokes that they are glad their children were born in July or August, when things are slower, but, as we learn, not much slower. She is striving to be included in a magazine's forthcoming ranking, which would publicize her team's success.
The directors catch Ms. Jones on her annual return to the Upper West Side location where she was abandoned when she was 2 days old. She is in the midst of merging her business with a larger one as well as contemplating motherhood.
There appears to be a different future for Ms. Ahmad, working on an internship and looking forward to a bidding war for her services after she earns her master of business administration degree. If she doesn't receive several offers, she will consider herself a failure. Because the directors do not concoct artificial drama, the small stories gather momentum naturally. With Ms. Euston's segment, the filmmakers shift direction, showing her leaving home at dawn and missing her sleeping 14-month-old twin boys, whom she barely sees. We then learn that she has been offered a bigger job that will consume even more of her time.
The moderately arresting ''Risk/Reward'' suffers from a lack of resources and is writ small, suggesting that it may play better on television. A detail of an anecdote from Ms. Jones about her childhood is lost when her adoptive father coughs during the telling, and there may not have been enough of a budget to fix it. But then there is an adroit bit of editing of Ms. Warner Wilke appearing on CNNfn, and Ms. Jones watching the episode from home as she starts a new chapter in her own life.
It is almost poetic that a story about seismic shifts in the investment realm had to be related on a shoestring; it means we are not watching ''Risk/Reward'' strictly for the cash up there on the screen.
RISK/REWARD
Produced and directed by Elizabeth Holder and Xan Parker; director of photography, Cynthia Wade; edited by Rachel Kittner; music by MJ Mynarski; released by Roland Park Pictures/Organic Pictures. At the Two Boots Pioneer Theater, 155 East Third Street, at Avenue A, East Village. Running time: 87 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Louise Jones, Carol Warner Wilke, Kimberley Euston, Umber Ahmad and Janet Tiebout Hanson.
FILM REVIEW
