An American proposal for the world's wealthiest nations to press for economic, political and cultural changes in the Middle East has drawn harsh criticism from Arab leaders and European officials, who say the Bush administration did not consult the countries it seeks to transform.
In addition, a Bush administration official said Thursday that some European officials had suggested they might block the initiative if there was no progress toward peace between Israel and the Palestinians.
The administration, seeking to overcome anti-Western and anti-American sentiments in the Arab world, is circulating a draft of what it calls a ''Greater Middle East initiative.'' It hopes the idea will be adopted at the summit meeting of the eight leading industrial nations in June.
The draft has not been officially released, but after a copy was published earlier this month in Al Hayat, a London-based Arabic newspaper, and an English-language version was posted on its Web site, President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Crown Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia criticized it as an attempt to dictate change.
''Whoever imagines that it is possible to impose solutions or reform from abroad on any society or region is delusional,'' Mr. Mubarak said on Wednesday. ''All peoples by their nature reject whoever tries to impose ideas on them.''
Egypt's three semiofficial dailies -- Al Ahram, Al Akhbar and Al Gumhuriya -- all reported Mr. Mubarak's remarks, including another pointed statement that the Bush administration was behaving ''as if the region and its states do not exist, as if they have no people or societies, as if they have no sovereignty over their land, no ownership.''
White House officials said it was unfortunate that the document was published before everyone could be consulted, but they believed they would secure Arab and European cooperation.
The Washington Post and other newspapers had reported earlier this month that the administration was preparing such a plan, but its details had not been spelled out.
Among the changes advocated by the draft paper are the establishment of business and trade zones in the Middle East, more financing for small businesses and more help conducting elections.
In addition, the paper calls for efforts to strengthen ties between the West and nongovernmental groups that promote democracy in Arab countries. It also urges support for new education initiatives in the region, especially for women.
The summit meeting, the paper says, should try to ''forge a long-term partnership with the Greater Middle East's reform leaders and launch a coordinated response to promote political, economic and social reform in the region.''
Leaders from the United States, Canada, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and Russia will be at the meeting, scheduled to take place in June at Sea Island, Ga.
Conspicuous by its absence in the draft is any significant increase in financial aid to the region, which might be used as leverage for effecting such changes. The centerpiece of the administration's aid program to the region, the Middle East Partnership Initiative, is providing $120 million in financial assistance this year to encourage democratic reforms. American foreign aid totals nearly $18 billion annually.
The administration devised its new initiative to conplement similar European efforts. The European Union announced its own program to push for democratic reforms in the region last year, much of which is similar to the American proposals.
The idea of putting the two efforts together is not sitting especially well in Europe. Some officials there fear that their program might be tainted by association with Washington, which is widely criticized in the region because of the war in Iraq and its perceived bias toward Israel.
One European diplomat said the American approach, which used strong language about change and did not reflect any consultation with local governments, was likely to be seen as ''a clash of civilizations'' between the Western and Arab worlds.
American officials say that they have no intention of absorbing the European initiative. ''This is not an either-or situation,'' said an administration official. ''It's really a coordinating mechanism to make sure that together we make best use of our resources. I don't see a lot of turf battles going on.''
But administration officials appear to have been surprised by the amount of criticism the draft provoked. On Tuesday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was asked about the criticism by Egypt and Saudi Arabia on Al Hurra, the American-sponsored, Arabic-language satellite television station. He denied that the administration had ignored the governments in the region and promised that they would be consulted before the plan was presented at the Georgia summit meeting.
''We would never suggest a reform plan that should come from outside,'' Mr. Powell said, adding that the initiative ''must be something that is acceptable to the parties in the region'' and that the United States would consult all parties concerned.
''These are sovereign nations,'' he said. ''They have their own interests to protect. They have their own people, their own culture, their own identity, their own history. What we are trying to do is help each of them, in the way that they choose, to move forward down a path that I think is in their interests to move down.''
An Arab diplomat in Washington said he told administration officials that he did not disagree with any of the initiative's elements, but that ''it's very important how it is to be packaged.'' Further, the diplomat said, the United States is tarnished by its failure to ease the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians.
''It's not the message, it's the messenger,'' he said. ''But I don't think the administration will be affected by the criticism. I don't think they regard such opinions very highly. They're going to forge ahead.''
