Ever since the 2000 campaign, when he began pushing the idea of shifting some Social Security taxes to private personal investment accounts, President Bush has danced around the question of whether more painful steps would also be necessary to put the retirement system on sound financial footing.
So when Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said on Wednesday that prudent long-term fiscal policy in the face of federal deficits would require cuts in benefits, Mr. Bush, who is headed into what looks like another close election, instantly distanced himself.
He restated his longstanding position that people in retirement or near retirement age should not see any change in their expected benefits and added that younger workers should be able to count on a combined benefit, from Social Security and the proposed investment accounts, at least equal to what they are promised now.
His own economists, though, are more explicit about what his approach to Social Security would require.
In the latest Economic Report of the President, sent under Mr. Bush's signature this month to Congress, the White House Council of Economic Advisers recommended some reduction in the benefits promised under the current system as part of a broader overhaul that would add benefits from the personal accounts.
''Reform should include moderation of the growth of benefits that are unfunded and can therefore be paid only by assessing taxes in the future,'' the report said.
Mr. Bush's reluctance to say out loud what nearly every economist who has studied the issue says -- that there is no pain-free way to assure that Social Security remains solvent as it pays benefits to a population that is aging and living longer -- is by no means limited to the White House.
Both parties have spent years emphasizing that the failure to address the impending imbalances in Social Security and Medicare will imperil the government's financial condition, the economy and retirees' security.
With a few exceptions, neither Democrats nor Republicans have been willing to propose detailed steps to balance the retirement system's income and long-term obligations.
Even steps like altering cost-of-living adjustments benefits are judged by leaders in both parties to be politically poisonous, even if accompanied by the promise of income from the proposed investment accounts.
Republicans have ruled out tax increases as a solution.
As a political matter, the spotlight is on Mr. Bush, who put the overhaul of Social Security on the national agenda and often says he did not take office to pass problems to future generations.
He made the creation of personal investment accounts a major plank in his 2000 platform.
Administration officials have said that they believe that the proposal was a winner for them in the last campaign and that they expect it to play well this year, especially with younger voters who are comfortable with investing.
''I think there has to be presidential leadership on this,'' said Representative Jim Kolbe, the Arizona Republican who has been a co-sponsor of a detailed plan to cut benefits and create personal accounts. ''The president should be ready to take the debate to the next level in the campaign.''
Yet when a commission that the president appointed in 2001 reported recommendations that included cuts to the guaranteed benefit and suggested that the government would need to borrow trillions of dollars to pay for the personal accounts, Mr. Bush abandoned plans to push ahead on the issue. His response to Mr. Greenspan suggests that he again wants to avoid difficult details in this campaign year.
Mr. Greenspan's testimony to the House Budget Committee also gave Democrats a potentially powerful new line of attack against Mr. Bush, that the deficits under this administration have grown so large and are highly likely to continue for so long that they could eat away at Social Security, the pillar of the social welfare system.
Democrats have long campaigned as the protector of Social Security, and they contend that the issue remains a powerful club for them. At a retreat several weeks ago, former President Bill Clinton urged House Democrats to link the budget deficit to the fate of Social Security as a way of hammering home to voters the costs of Mr. Bush's tax cuts.
''President Clinton at our retreat said it was a major issue we need to develop,'' Representative Robert T. Matsui, Democrat of California, said. ''In some respects, Greenspan put it on the table for us by linking it to the deficit.''
Some members of Congress said Mr. Greenspan appeared to have deliberately raised the issue to ensure that it would be part of the election year debate. The small band of politicians who advocate moving rapidly to address the problem say his statement will intensify pressure on the Republican leadership in Congress to act.
''What Greenspan may have done is helped us realize that we don't have a choice of not doing anything,'' said Representative Jim DeMint, the South Carolina Republican who has proposed a personal account plan that would cost $444 billion in its first 10 years but would, he said, save taxpayers money in the long run.
''The president,'' Mr. DeMint said, ''has shown as much leadership on the issue as could be expected. But the people responsible for writing the bills are running from it.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: SOCIAL SECURITY
