Popular music is commonly supposed to be about something: protest, love, gang warfare. But classical music is generally thought of as abstract. And even before it became relatively marginalized vis-à-vis pop, so-called classical composers struggled with the question of music and meaning.
The 19th century saw the proliferation of orchestral works purporting to tell stories, from Romeo and Juliet to Don Juan. And Gustav Mahler, when composing his mammoth Third Symphony, included all kinds of programmatic directives, indicating nothing less than a portrait of the entire world in an hour and a half.
Mahler, however, eventually abandoned his symphony's program altogether, feeling that it gave too much room for misinterpretations. So the Third is, officially, abstract. But the way Christoph Eschenbach and the Philadelphia Orchestra played it on Monday night at Carnegie Hall, there was no question that it meant something.
Mr. Eschenbach is not the subtlest of conductors, but the music was so palpably important to him that the performance became in ways more engaging than it might have been from a more sophisticated reader. There's a camp element in Mahler, with his changes of mood, sound effects (bird calls), and collage-like juxtapositions of swatches of very different kinds of music: a march worthy of Sousa; a song; an offstage fluegelhorn solo; the sugary music of the second movement, like a precursor to big bands.
The conductor milked it all, but without false exaggeration, wringing every drop he could out of the orchestra, which sounded as if it enjoyed the exercise.
If the whole thing smacked of a movie soundtrack, that's partly because Mr. Eschenbach led with such clear feeling, and partly because film is today's main standard of comparison for a dramatic work extending over 90 minutes. This soundtrack, however, achieved part of its drama by layering one element upon another.
In the fourth movement, the composer adds a single human voice. Lorraine Hunt Lieberson delivered some beautiful singing, oddly delicate in this context, marred only by Mr. Eschenbach's excessively slow tempo. In the fifth, the voice is reinforced with a chorus of women and boys, a Disneyesque version of heaven.
And the sixth trumps the human element in an apotheosis of abstraction, its beautiful warm theme shining in the warm strings of the Philadelphians, and its towering climax, extended almost beyond endurance over the bulls-eye strikes of the bass drum, a fittingly monumental -- and meaningful -- conclusion.
MUSIC REVIEW
