Dink and crud are syllables that can mar a name and invite derision. If you were a young actor burdened with a homely name and free to rechristen yourself -- to go by Cary Grant, say, or Vin Diesel -- wouldn't you liberate yourself from the world's playground predators and drop your name's most teasable elements?
Maybe. But today that might make you a coward.
Peter Dinklage has worn Dinklage proudly, and under that name he was nominated by the Screen Actors Guild for a best-actor award for his performance in ''The Station Agent.'' Billy Crudup, who starred in ''Big Fish,'' has managed to make crud enthralling. And on Sunday, Shohreh Aghdashloo will take her free-verse name to the Academy Awards; she is nominated for best supporting actress for her role in ''House of Sand and Fog.'' (She is up against Renée Zellweger of ''Cold Mountain,'' the Texan who continues to derive star power from sounds zell and weg.)
Increasingly, actors are refusing to renounce just the kind of dissonant phonemes that Louis B. Mayer used to send packing in the days of Judy Garland (Frances Gumm), Hal Linden (Harold Lipshitz) and Hugh O'Brian (Hugh Krampe). Like Mr. Dinklage, Mr. Crudup and Ms. Aghdashloo, Leelee Sobieski, Rya Kihlstedt, Mili Avital and Zeljko Ivanek -- rising actors all -- have defied the tyranny of consonant anxiety and Anglo prosody.
In this spirit Mr. Ivanek, from ''24'' and ''The West Wing,'' flaunts his formidable Slovenian name (pronounced ZHEL-ko EE-van-ek) with its devastating L-J-K sequence. Though Jack Lemmon is said to have complained that he could memorize a whole script before he could pronounce Mr. Ivanek's name, Mr. Ivanek has insisted that it stay. ''Change my name?'' he asks. ''Why? I like my name.''
According to Estelle Lasher, who manages actors like Alan Arkin and Michael Rispoli at the LMRK firm, ''The newer, younger generation says: 'I'm going to be true to me. I'm not going to end up playing that game.' '' Scott Cooke, a publicist at Laforce &amp; Stevens in New York, agreed, saying: ''People are more inclined to keep their names. They like more unique names now, like Beyoncé and Ashanti.''
This trend seems to imply progress, the end of name shame and the start of full-blown ethnic pride. Perhaps it is. But show business has its own politics and its own demands, and an actor's priority is still to build a bankable brand, whether it comes across as ordinary or exotic.
Kenneth Slotnick, an agent at William Morris, explained that the pressure to get a new name has not let up. It has just changed. ''There is a strong push for diversity in certain areas of television,'' he said. ''An ethnic name can be an advantage.'' Mindful of this, aspiring actors have been known to rummage through their lineage -- and that of their spouses -- for a name that sounds anything but English. Mr. Cooke said: ''Latino names, especially, are helpful because of Jennifer Lopez. It gives people a bit of an edge.''
Changing one's name continues to arouse suspicion, however, though it is not entirely clear why. ''People who change their names seem like they might be criminals, trying to deceive,'' suggested David Thomson, the author of the forthcoming book ''The Whole Equation: The History of Hollywood.'' ''There's a funny way that we feel we have to live up to the names our parents gave us.''
It may be stoic to keep a vexing name, but that does not mean that all name-changers are fearful assimilators and conformists. Rather, the reasons for changing a name have always varied widely. A cast-off birth name might be commonplace, like Bo Derek's (Mary Collins); cumbersome, like Alan Alda's (Alphonso D'Abruzzo); or a howler like Diana Dors's (Diana Fluck). It might set expectations too high (Barrymore). Or it might be too strongly associated with someone else (Monroe).
For actors a treasured name may already be in use; the Screen Actors Guild prohibits more than one actor from performing under a single name. In 1981 the actor and director Jace Alexander was required to relinquish Jason Alexander, the name he was born with, when he learned that the name had already been registered by the actor who would later star in ''Seinfeld.'' Just six months earlier, it turned out, that other Jason Alexander had changed his own name from Jay Greenspan. ''I got my name robbed,'' says Jace Alexander now. ''I was really heartbroken, and I still have a big chip on my shoulder about that guy.''
Throughout most of the 20th century the actors' names most clearly designated for alteration were names unfamiliar to speakers of American English: Latin, Eastern European, Scandinavian, German and, above all, Jewish. The list of Jewish actors who have dropped their original names is, of course, staggering. Douglas Ulman became Douglas Fairbanks; Meshilem Weisenfreund became Paul Muni; Issur Danielovitch Demsky became Kirk Douglas. And on and on. Several illustrious Jewish studio heads, including Sam Goldwyn (Schmuel Gelbfisz) and Louis B. Mayer (Ezemiel Lazar Mayer), urged name-changing on Jewish actors after they had already changed their own names.
''The studio heads were afraid of having their own ethnicity pinned on them,'' Mr. Thomson, the author, said. He added: ''And the studios really owned people then. In taking someone on for a long-term contract, they would frequently do surgery on you. You'd be sent to elocution teachers. A whole range of things would be done that would seem pretty intrusive today.'' New names, along with nose jobs, were considered part of the deal, property improvements.
Thus, Marion Morrison was reborn John Wayne when the William Fox studio thought Marion was too effeminate. Anna Maria Louise Italiano seemed somehow too Italian, so she became Anne Bancroft. And Michael Dumble-Smith became Michael Crawford. His real name was just too dumbley.
But those days are behind us, and now even clunky or goofball names are badges of honor and ethnic pride. Some Hollywood agents even believe that weird names command power, citing Arnold Schwarzenegger, who arguably made fans swallow his name as part of his California dominion.
If you're not Mr. Schwarzenegger, however, tongue-twisting your fans may not seem like the way to their hearts. Actors' sentimental attachment to their heritage, or to sounds like crud or ljk, seems to fade if it begins to cost them parts. ''People want to keep their roots as long as they can,'' Ms. Lasher observed. ''And then they hit a brick wall, and then they want something to blame. They're Spanish. They're Latino. That's all they're ever going to play. They want to be able to play Midwesterners.''
Even among today's post-post-studio actors, certain strings of letters are apparently believed to preclude Duluth and Omaha roles. Tom Mapother became Cruise, Winona Horowitz turned into Ryder and Demetria Guynes is our Demi Moore.
''I envy people who changed their names,'' said Ilana Levine, the actress who starred in ''You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown'' on Broadway. ''Sometimes I wish I had changed my name because it's obviously Jewish. Unlike Italian names, it doesn't have a coolness attached to it. People say that the Jewish executives want the opportunity to cast their high school girlfriend fantasy, the shiksa goddess, now that they can have her.'' Though Ms. Levine holds onto her name in deference to a family she admires, she still imagines the possibilities that might come with changing it. ''I just married a man named Dominic Fumusa,'' she said. ''Ilana Fumusa is a little crazy, a stripper name. But would I be able to get on 'The Sopranos'?''
Perhaps in America the only indigenous name is a changed one. In inventing names, Hollywood actors of the last century emphasized that they had broken with family history as well as theatrical traditions. ''What they were producing was a universal American,'' Mr. Thomson said. ''I think to a degree they succeeded.''
This universal American is not so much American as pure Hollywood (no Miles Standishes or Cotton Mathers appear on marquees). Movie names have hallmarks. First, they often have a first name in place of a family one, as if every name were elective (Allen, Benny, John, Leigh) or, alternately, the names simply have little or no precedent as names (Astaire, Bacall, Charisse, Palance). In contrast to European names, this nomenclature reveals nothing about provenance; rather it serves to announce an ambition.
Newly visible names like Kaczmarek and Weisz, which may look like actors' gambits, sound powerful, cool, wise when spoken, like Hollywood names of old. Actors who soldier on with hard names like these turn adversity to moral advantage, showing up more established celebrities like Tom Cruise, whose superhero name now seems dated and contrived. But as Ms. Lasher and other starmakers believe, names should be, above all, catchy and pragmatic, in the American way of naming.
When asked to spell her own name, Ms. Lasher laughed. ''Estelle Lasher -- that's my married name. I was Schmulowitz, and there you go. If I was Schmulowitz Management, that wouldn't have worked.''
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
