ON a recent Friday afternoon, five women checked into a two-bedroom suite at the Lowell Hotel on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, roughly a 90-minute drive from their homes in suburban Connecticut. Stashing their furs in the closet, popping open a bottle of Lanson Brut that had been sent up by the hotel management, and lighting the wood that had been artfully stacked in the room's fireplace, the women sat down at a square table covered with a green cloth and started playing their first hand of bridge.
Among them, the women -- four in their mid-40's and one just past 50 -- had five husbands and 15 children back in Darien and Greenwich, not to mention aging parents and S.U.V.'s in need of oil changes, but the talk around the card table this day was of trumps, tricks and doubletons, not domesticity.
For the second year in a row, the women -- Laura Said, Susan Dragone, Kathy Markby, Fern Lindsay and Jessie Jamar, each taking turns sitting out hands -- were indulging in a midwinter, all-night bridge bacchanal. It was a marathon fueled by bottles of vintage wine brought from home and platters of fruit, cheese and smoked salmon ordered from room service, a brief weekend getaway that cost each participant about $450. That included the $50-an-hour fee they were paying Steve Becker, a top-tier instructor and a syndicated bridge columnist, to help them work out the kinks in their game. Throughout the evening, Mr. Becker, wearing a subdued jacket and tie, hovered nearby, gently offering guidance. For the next 24 hours, nothing was going to come between them and their cards, not even sleep, if they could manage it.
Watching them make their opening bids or speak the ritualistic dialect understood by fellow bridge players -- ''heart,'' ''no trump,'' ''double'' -- was to witness yet another generation of players embracing a social activity that sometimes is dismissed as a curious artifact of a simpler, slower age.
There was a time when bridge was a cultural phenomenon: interest boomed in the 1930's, books on bridge made the best-seller lists, a hotly contested match was analyzed on the front pages of newspapers. But those days eventually faded as bridge retreated to the dens of genteel suburban America. Now, though, bridge is going through something of a renaissance, with younger players joining the game (and swapping bridge mix for Atkins-approved snacks), supporters organizing a movement to get bridge recognized as an Olympic sport and even -- in a sure sign of its modernity -- a top player becoming embroiled in a doping scandal.
Reversing a decline in numbers that hit bottom in the 1960's, membership in the American Contract Bridge League increased by 2,000 in the last year, to 165,000. Those numbers suggest a significant demographic shift in the bridge-playing public. Five years ago the average age of members was 68, said Linda Granell, the bridge league's marketing director. Now, she said, a quarter of its members are younger than 45, and 62 percent are younger than 54. Many of those new players may have been introduced to the game through the Internet: more than 20,000 people have downloaded the league's free learn-to-play-bridge software since last March, Ms. Granell said.
Some of the new interest in bridge can be traced to a study published in The New England Journal of Medicine in June 2003. It suggested that mentally challenging activities, including bridge, could slow the onset of Alzheimer's disease. ''A surprising number of people who contact me as a teacher mention having read about this research,'' said Mr. Becker, whose father, B. Jay Becker, was also a widely known player and columnist.
The game's devotees are a disparate bunch. Last year, 110 people signed up to compete in the annual tournament of the International Association of Gay and Lesbian Bridge Clubs, held in Palm Springs, Calif. There are bridge clubs for nudists (in California, naturally), for Ivy League graduates, for Orthodox Jews, for Macedonian immigrants, for people who want to combine bridge playing with cruises to places like Alaska and the Caribbean, and increasingly for people who need nothing more than a computer screen and high-speed Internet access to indulge their passion.
The digital age is fomenting a revolution in bridge. Okbridge.com was the first Web site to offer online duplicate bridge, in 1992, and now has 18,000 members in 90 countries around the world paying $99 a year to play bridge with each other day and night. Other Web sites, like E-bridge at acbl.com and swangames.com, also report heavy traffic.
Sue Stokes of Thousand Oaks, Calif., taught herself bridge three years ago and now plays online 15 hours a week, with regular partners from the United States, Canada, Sweden, England, Bulgaria and Croatia. ''I wouldn't say that online bridge is more interesting than face-to-face bridge, just a different avenue that fits my life at this time,'' said Ms. Stokes, 40. ''I have two school-age children that I don't like to leave for three hours unsupervised while I go to a club game. But I am a bridge addict, and addictions must be fed, so online is the easiest way for me to enjoy the game.''
Scott Davis of St. Louis agreed that bridge had an almost physical hold on its devoted players. ''It's incredibly addictive,'' said Mr. Davis, who is in his late 50's. ''I used to run marathons, and now when I play 10 or 11 hours a day in a tournament, I get that same feeling I used to get at the end of 26 miles. It really gets the endorphins running.''
Bridge has a language all its own. At minimum, it takes four players -- two pairs of partners -- to play. Play begins by dealing out a 52-card deck, 13 cards to each player. The players evaluate their hands, and the auction then begins, with each player making a series of bids, which are estimates of how many four-card tricks their partnership can take. Points are then awarded based on their success or failure.
The initiated often portray bridge as a lover that continues to seduce you, even into old age, and is never boring. ''It's almost like a cult,'' said Chris Willenken, 28, a professional player who lives in New York. ''Bridge players will say, 'You can't understand, because you don't play.' It sucks you in. I can play for days and completely lose track of time. It's the most absorbing experience I've ever had.''
Mr. Willenken began playing when he was 16. It has since become a career. He and four other pros are paid what he says is a good salary -- ''but not a full living'' -- by a wealthy sponsor to play in four weeklong bridge tournaments a year. (The sponsor plays as well.) Few top bridge pros earn above six figures a year, Mr. Willenken said, because there is little prize money in tournaments. He said he supplemented his income playing poker online.
One sign of bridge's re-emergence is the World Bridge Federation's push to make it an official sport in the Winter Olympics. While it's doubtful that there will be Olympic-class bridge clubs with retractable roofs to let natural light onto the card tables, the International Olympic Committee has officially recognized the bridge federation, which is the first (of many) steps in the formidable process of making any sport an Olympic event.
One wrinkle might be that doping controversy. A top player, Disa Eythorsdottir, was denied her silver medal in the 2002 world championships in Montreal after she refused to take a drug test. She said that she had recently taken diet pills and feared they would lead to a false positive in the test for a variety of performance-enhancing drugs. Since drug tests were introduced to World Bridge Federation tournaments in 2000, two players have failed, though no medals were involved in those cases.
BACK at the Lowell Hotel, it was around 11 a.m. on Saturday, and the card play -- having been halted about midnight, when exhaustion set in, and then resumed shortly before 8 -- was in full swing again. The women were on their own (Mr. Becker had left around 10:30 p.m.), eager to get in as much bridge as possible before they had to check out at 1.
Until now, there had been almost no talk of home, of parental responsibilities, of husbands left on their own to cope with whatever domestic crisis might arise. But then someone mentioned a squash tournament that her children would play in, and another listed a series of school activities that needed to be attended. ''No talking,'' ordered Ms. Dragone, only half-jokingly, clearly frustrated by the prospect of soon being bridgeless.
Another hand was played. And another. The fire was dead. The bags were packed. Checkout, children and husbands loomed. But the game went on to the very end. Finally, the bridge players shut the door and left their Manhattan fantasy, heading back to the suburbs, where bridge is just a sometimes thing. Though no one said it, one thought was clearly in the air: Wait till next year.
RITUALS
