Rod Stewart's career unfolded in reverse. By the time he turned 25, in 1970, he was already a rock 'n' roll veteran with an elegant, battered voice. He was recording with both the Jeff Beck Group and the Small Faces, later known as the Faces, and as a solo act; his style, which drew from folk and the blues, seemed old-fashioned right from the start.
In the 1970's he became a mainstream rock star, but by the 1980's he seemed more like a callow young singer casting about in search of his own style. And on Wednesday night, when Mr. Stewart played the first of two sold-out concerts at Madison Square Garden, it was clear that the anti-aging process was complete. Bouncing across the stage in garish sneakers and spectacularly constrictive jeans, he played the part of a 59-year-old teen-pop star.
Decades from now, when scientists scrutinize Mr. Stewart for clues about this mysterious anti-aging process, they may notice something his fans have known for years: he was born without the gene for shame. Wednesday's concert was full of moments that would have made a lesser (or, for that matter, greater) performer cringe: goofy pantomime, half-hearted stripteases, clumsy balletic leaps. But shamelessness may be precisely what makes him seem so young. Like all teen-pop stars, he is willing to embarrass himself to entertain his fans.
The first half of the show was a cheerful cavalcade of Mr. Stewart's hits. When it came time for ''First Cut Is the Deepest,'' by the artist formerly known as Cat Stevens, Mr. Stewart blithely noted that the songwriter had since ''turned to the cloth, shall we say,'' a reference to his conversion to Islam. A few moments later, as rainbows and hearts filled the screen behind him, Mr. Stewart made a fist and dragged it across his chest; he was acting out the title.
Between verses, Mr. Stewart often played a game of his own invention: concert soccer. An assistant would toss him a ball, and he'd kick it (or, occasionally, head it) into the crowd. And at 9:16 p.m., near the end of the first set, a fan in the audience repaid the favor by throwing an item of underwear onstage.
For the last few years, Mr. Stewart has been concentrating on standards; his most recent album, ''As Time Goes By: The Great American Songbook, Volume II'' (J Records), was released in October. For the concert's second half, he emerged in a tuxedo, descending the steps of a golden bandstand while crooning ''Someone to Watch Over Me.''
Mr. Stewart's mellow, raspy voice seems well suited to songs like these, but his interpretations aren't terribly interesting. His basic approach is to undersing and overact. There's something slightly deflating about watching him sing these classics: he makes them all sound like silly love songs.
But maybe that's the idea. Mr. Stewart is an aging star who feels young enough to sing old songs irreverently, and it was fun to watch him leap, uncringing, across styles and eras. One minute he was mincing his way through ''These Foolish Things,'' and a few minutes later he was reviving his disco hit ''Do Ya Think I'm Sexy?'' while the players in the string section did their best to avoid flying bras.
POP REVIEW
