The Islanders entered their final meeting of the season with the Rangers looking for a fight and for their first victory in the season series. They got the fight, but the Rangers left Nassau Coliseum with another victory Thursday night to complete a 6-0 series sweep.
In Tom Renney's debut as interim coach a day after Glen Sather stepped down, the Rangers scored the first six goals of the game and went on to a 6-3 victory. For the series, the Rangers outscored the Islanders by 27-13.
''We were talking about it before the game,'' said Rangers right wing Jaromir Jagr, who had two goals and an assist. ''We came here to get 2 points, not to fight.''
But even though the Rangers swept all 12 points from the Islanders this season, they still trail the Islanders by 12 points for the Eastern Conference's eighth and final playoff spot.
The Rangers have 19 games remaining, and if they were all against the Islanders, maybe the Rangers would not be looking at their seventh consecutive season without a postseason. And perhaps they would not be looking to trade defenseman Brian Leetch before the March 9 league deadline.
Leetch, who broke into the N.H.L. with the Rangers after the 1988 Winter Olympics, might not have realized he was auditioning Thursday night, but he certainly played like it. With the Philadelphia Flyers' assistant general manager, Paul Holmgren, in attendance with the Philadelphia scout Ron Hextall, Leetch had a goal and two assists.
Dallas's top professional scout, Doug Overton, was also on hand, presumably scouting Leetch, who turns 36 next Wednesday.
The Rangers and their struggling goaltender, Mike Dunham, extended the longest unbeaten streaks in the 32-year history of the series. Since obtaining Dunham from Nashville on Dec. 12, 2002, the Rangers are 8-0-2-0 against the Islanders, with Dunham in goal each time.
With a 23-29-7-4 record, the Rangers are 6-0-0-0 against the Islanders and 12 games under .500 against the other 28 teams in the league.
At 29-23-9-2, the Islanders are 12 games above .500 against the rest of the league. Dunham, 6-0 versus the Islanders, is 9-22-6 otherwise.
Besides falling behind by 3-0 in the first period, the Islanders also lost their captain, Michael Peca. After being hit with a slap shot by Rangers defenseman Tom Poti, Peca left with what the Islanders later said was a laceration on his lower leg. The Islanders said he would not play in Buffalo on Friday.
Before the game, mindful of the fight-filled final minutes of the Rangers' 6-2 victory over the Islanders at Madison Square Garden last Thursday, Colin Campbell, the league vice president in charge of discipline, met with both coaching staffs.
It hardly prevented mayhem from starting 9 minutes 13 seconds into the game, when a scrum broke out along the sideboards opposite the Rangers' bench. By the time it was over, 43 penalty minutes had been assessed, 27 to Eric Cairns, who was looking to get defenseman Dale Purinton from last week's game.
Purinton, who earlier in the period had declined Cairns's invitation to fight, covered himself up as Cairns punched him from behind. Cairns got a game misconduct, a 10-minute misconduct, 5 minutes for fighting and 2 minutes for roughing.
Renney said he had spoken to Purinton at the morning skate about the proper time and place to fight Cairns. ''Tom and I talked about it,'' Purinton said. ''You have to stick up for your own guys. But to go and fight a guy that big is not the smart thing to do, unless he takes liberties on your players.''
Cairns disagreed. ''I lost a lot of respect for him,'' Cairns said. ''I thought he would be a man and stand up after doing what he did last week. For whatever reason, he decided to go into a turtle position instead. It worked out for them. It cost my team seven minutes in penalties.''
Purinton said: ''It doesn't matter what people think of me. We just need points.''
Sure enough, with Cairns gone, Bobby Holik scored on the ensuing two-man advantage and the Rangers were on their way.
Although the Islanders never found an answer to the Rangers' domination, their discouraged fans had one by game's end. To the taunts of ''You can't beat us'' from the Rangers fans, the Islanders fans shouted back, ''Make the playoffs.''
SLAP SHOTS
JANNE NIINIMAA, MARIUSZ CZERKAWSKI and SVEN BUTENSCHON scored for the Islanders. . . . JAROMIR JAGR extended his streak of consecutive games with a point to eight games (8 goals, 7 assists, 15 points). . . . Rangers defenseman VLADIMIR MALAKHOV played for the first time since Jan. 24. He had missed 13 games with a wrist injury. . . . The Islanders pulled goaltender GARTH SNOW at 4 minutes 35 seconds of the first period after Snow allowed two goals on four shots. The Islanders then pulled goaltender RICK DIPIETRO at 2:11 of the second period, when CHRIS SIMON scored into an empty net after DiPietro had vacated his crease to play the puck. DiPietro allowed three goals on seven shots. Snow played the remainder of the game.
HOCKEY
