Senator John Kerry, who is not the son of a mill worker, is borrowing heavily from the message and manner of Senator John Edwards, who is.
Mr. Kerry is talking nonstop about job losses, about the ''haves and have-nots,'' about hardship and heartache in the industrial heartland. He is even surrounding himself with mill workers to prove his point -- and retelling their stories about as often as Mr. Edwards mentions that he grew up in a textile town and saw the broken spirits of those whom global trade left behind.
Mr. Kerry's transformation into an empathetic candidate with a decidedly blue collar on his navy pinstriped suit began months ago as he struggled to connect with audiences put off by his patrician manner and emotional distance.
It has taken on new significance, however, since the Democratic race narrowed to Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, whose affability, speaking style and up-from-the-bootstraps biography stand in contrast to Mr. Kerry's Boston Brahmin image and background. And it will be even more vital, Democratic strategists say, should Mr. Kerry win the nomination and take on a president whose popularity is based largely on his regular-guy, emotionally direct appeal.
Tony Coelho, who served as Al Gore's campaign chairman in the early part of his 2000 campaign, said Mr. Kerry seemed to have left his cerebral policy wonkishness in Iowa, where at the low point of his campaign he had nothing to lose by loosening up. ''He had a lot of Gore in him,'' Mr. Coelho said.
If Mr. Kerry's transformation lasts, Mr. Coelho said, ''this is going to help him out tremendously against Bush, because that's what Bush has.''
''If Kerry, who everybody agrees has intellectual curiosity, has inner peace, he'll go against Bush, who has that, but no intellectual curiosity,'' he said.
Mr. Coelho described that inner peace as ''being able to reach out to people, hug them, and touch them -- as opposed to being the brightest kid in class.''
''The danger is,'' he added, ''if it's not real, it will come out.''
To bolster his credibility with the working class, Mr. Kerry is trying everything: touring deserted mills and still-bustling ones, talking about the plight of struggling mill and factory workers, campaigning with them at his side, exchanging hugs with tearful laborers, and assuring the countless union members whose bosses are now backing him that he will fight to keep their jobs from disappearing overseas. On Thursday he campaigned at the side of striking California grocery workers.
The day after Mr. Edwards's strong showing in the Feb. 17 Wisconsin primary, Mr. Kerry walked past a vacant lot where an auto-parts factory once stood in Dayton, Ohio, then walked a block to a crowded forum at a United Auto Workers local. He sat between two mill workers and listened as they described their plight.
''I'm hanging on by a thread,'' said Vicki Johnson, an electrician who is raising a daughter.
Lucy Hopkins, a millwright at another factory with three daughters of her own, said she had the ''job of a lifetime'' until she was laid off Nov. 30.
''It was like a slap in the face, like having the rug pulled out from under you,'' she said. ''I don't know what the future holds.''
In Jamaica, Queens, on Monday, Mr. Kerry listened to Chris Gleason, a single father and plumbers' union official, complain that the Bush administration was trying to roll back labor protections like overtime pay.
''We're not living the life of Riley, but what we want is a fair cut,'' Mr. Gleason said. ''We're not asking for everything. When we work over 40 hours, we're entitled to our overtime pay, because right now they're taking my time away from my daughter.''
Mr. Kerry listened intently as Mr. Gleason said he had had to leave New York to find work.
''Chris,'' he said, ''What did you do for child care?'' Mr. Gleason said he relied on his daughter's grandmothers.
Mr. Kerry's moments with such workers at times seem forced, and almost always clearly delineated. Typically he steps out of his dress shoes and into duck boots, throws a barn coat over his suit, and slips into a kind of dialect heavy on ''Hey, man'' and accompanied by shoulder-clasps.
Outside Youngstown, Ohio, on Wednesday, he tramped through a rusting, long-abandoned steel mill with a few members of the steelworkers' union who said they had been locked out of work at a titanium plant since last October.
Randy Velk, 50, said he had diabetes and was finding it difficult to pay his $500-a-month prescription drug bills. ''I only work sporadically,'' he said. ''It's really tough.''
Mr. Kerry said, ''That's tough, man.''
The shut-down steel mill was mainly a photo opportunity, but many of these encounters give Mr. Kerry fodder for the kind of anecdotes he likes to use on the stump. In Iowa in October, he met a 50-year-old man named Bob Anderson, who was out of work with a sick wife and no health insurance. Mr. Anderson popped up in a speech as recently as Wednesday night in St. Paul, Minn.
And in Toledo on Wednesday, Mr. Kerry recycled the story of Ms. Hopkins, the millwright from Dayton.
''You know, they didn't just ship her job to China, they took things a step further,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''They literally unbolted the equipment and shipped the equipment out piece-by-piece and reassembled it in another country, in China.''
Kathleen Hall Jamieson, an expert on political messages and dean of the Annenberg School for Communication at the University of Pennsylvania, said Mr. Kerry was taking a sensible route in responding to Mr. Edwards.
''The only message the very wealthy Edwards has to differentiate himself is that, 'Because of my experience as a son of a mill worker, seeing unemployed mill workers my whole life, I understand what it means to not have a job','' she said. ''If Kerry demonstrates he listens and understands, he's neutralized Edwards's message.''
Ms. Jamieson said another part of Mr. Edwards's message was that he had translated his life experience of ''understanding pain'' into advocacy for the unfortunate.
''But Kerry can say, 'So did I -- and it's more unusual, because given my background, you wouldn't expect me to,' '' she said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR  Correction:  February 28, 2004, Saturday  An article yesterday about Senator John Kerry's attempts to soften his image gave an outdated title for Kathleen Hall Jamieson, who said he was taking a sensible route in trying to appeal to working-class voters. She is director of the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania, no longer dean of the Annenberg School for Communication.
