Directed by Jay Chandrasekhar  R, 105 minutes
From Broken Lizard, the comedy troupe that delivered the low-budget sleeper ''Super Troopers'' in 2001, ''Club Dread'' is a disappointingly routine horror movie spoof that follows the well-worn path of the ''Scream'' and ''Scary Movie'' franchises.
Directed by Jay Chandrasekhar and written collectively by the troupe, ''Club Dread,'' which opens today nationwide, draws on a popular subgenre of the 1950's and early 60's: the monster in paradise, in which various unconvincing beings invade tropical resorts full of scantily clad women and the men who love them. (The hilarious 1964 ''Monster at Camp Sunshine'' upped the ante by being set in a nudist camp.)
The tropical paradise here is Pleasure Island, a booze-soaked, low-rent resort owned and operated by a terminally laid-back rock star named Coconut Pete (Bill Paxton). Pete's happy-go-lucky manner and repertory of painfully whimsical drinking songs may remind you of Jimmy Buffet, though as Pete huffily points out, his big hit, ''Piña Colada Burg,'' predated Mr. Buffet's ''Margaritaville'' by several years.
When a new group of party animals arrives at the island, things seem to be going well enough; the amusements include nonstop drinking and a live-action Pac-Man game, with staff members dressed as fruit running through a maze. But then members of the staff begin turning up dead in various grisly ways (quite grisly, in fact, for a comedy).
Who's responsible? Is it Machete Phil, a legendary phantom stalking the jungle, or one of the staff members themselves, like the wiry aerobics instructor Jenny (Brittany Daniel), the mysterious new masseur with the magic pleasure touch (Kevin Heffernan) or the dreadlocked tennis instructor (Mr. Chandrasekhar), whose British accent is even less convincing than Madonna's?
No one really cares, of course, and the film lays out its standard wares with the weariness of an overworked street vendor: a topless female here, a scatological gag there, a hip movie reference somewhere else.
Mr. Chandrasekhar's direction is casual to the point of carelessness, but he does give the movie a friendly, convivial atmosphere that contradicts and sometimes overcomes its frequently cruel humor. In short, this is another film that looks as if it was more fun to make than it is to sit through.
''Broken Lizard's Club Dread'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has some pin-up nudity, strong language, drug use and explicit violence.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
