Senators John Kerry and John Edwards clashed over the death penalty and tussled with questions about gay marriage on Thursday in a lively debate that took place as the candidates headed toward the biggest day of primary voting in the Democratic nomination battle.
For 90 minutes, seated elbow to elbow at a table in a nationally televised debate, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, the two leading contenders in the Democratic race, argued over their positions on health care and trade, the influence of lobbyists on their campaigns and their relative strengths as a general election candidate.
At one point, Mr. Edwards expressed doubt that Mr. Kerry could defeat Mr. Bush in a series of swing states that could decide the election next fall because of some of the votes he has cast over the years. Mr. Edwards asserted that he was the candidate with a proven ability to win independent votes.
''I would concede that Senator Kerry may have an advantage in New Hampshire,'' said Mr. Edwards, who represents North Carolina. ''I would not believe he has an advantage over me any place else. I think I have the advantage in these other places.''
Under persistent questioning from a panel from CNN and The Los Angeles Times, the debate's sponsors, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry expressed their opposition both to gay marriage and to President Bush's call this week for a Constitutional amendment to bar it. They struggled to deal with the divisive issue Mr. Bush has confronted them with in the midst of the Democratic primary campaign.
''What's happening here is this president is talking about, first, amending the United States Constitution for a problem that does not exist,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''The law today does not require one state to recognize the marriage of another state.''
Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, attacked Mr. Bush for raising the issue in the first place.
''He's trying to polarize the nation,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''He's trying to divide America. You know, this is a president who always tries to create a cultural war and seek the lowest common denominator of American politics, because he can't come to America and talk about jobs.''
But with the issue now at center stage, Mr. Kerry found himself in the position of defending his vote in 1996 against the Defense of Marriage Act, a law that bars federal recognition of same-sex marriages and allows each state to ignore such marriages performed in other states. He sought to reconcile his vote then with his statement this week that states should not be forced to recognize gay marriages conducted in other states.
Mr. Kerry said he had considered the Senate debate on the legislation an instance of gay-bashing. But he said he was mistaken in 1996 when he asserted that the Defense of Marriage Act was unconstitutional. He suggested, vaguely, that he would vote against it were it to appear before Congress again. Mr. Edwards pounced on that.
''I would not support the Defense of Marriage Act today, if there were a vote today, which is the question you just asked Senator Kerry,'' he said. ''I'm not sure what he said about that. But I would not vote for it.''
The debate also included Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio and the Rev. Al Sharpton. It fell short of being what might be called a tough exchange of views, but it was far more testy than any debate in weeks.
After a year in which the candidates have been inundated with debates and forums, the liveliness of this one reflected the pressure on Mr. Edwards to try to cut into what many Democrats see as Mr. Kerry powerful lead, as well as the fact that a group of nine candidates has now shrunk to four.
On Tuesday, voters in 10 states will take part in Democratic contests.
At the debate, which took place at the University of Southern California, Mr. Kerry faced the most direct challenges on a position that Democrats had long feared could cause him a problem in a general election: his opposition to the death penalty, except in the case of convicted terrorists.
One of the panelists, Larry King, in a question reminiscent of one another CNN questioner asked Michael S. Dukakis in the 1988 presidential campaign, asked Mr. Kerry if ''a person who kills a 5-year-old should live?'' Mr. Dukakis, the former governor of Massachusetts, was asked at his debate about the hypothetical rape and murder of his wife, and appeared unemotional.
Mr. Kerry responded in a way that showed that he -- as have other Democrats who oppose the death penalty and remember that earlier debate -- had learned how to deal with that kind of question.
''My instinct is to want to strangle that person with my own hands,'' he said. ''I understand the instincts, I really do.'' He added: ''I prosecuted people. I know what the feeling of the families is and everybody else.
''But we have 111 people who have been now released from death row -- death row, let alone the rest of the prison system -- because of DNA evidence that showed they didn't commit the crime of which they were convicted.''
A moment later, Mr. Edwards said he, too, was concerned about the risk of killing innocent people. But he expressed strong support for executions.
''Because, I think there are some crimes -- those men who dragged James Byrd behind that truck in Texas -- they deserve the death penalty,'' Mr. Edwards said, referring to James Byrd Jr., a black man killed in a hate crime 1997. ''And I think there are some crimes that deserve the ultimate punishment.''
Moments later, Mr. Sharpton seized on Mr. Edwards's statement that there were problems with how the death penalty is put into effect.
''Senator Edwards,'' he asked, ''are you saying, since you agree that there's a lot of problems in the death penalty -- and no one has mentioned the racial disparity about those on death row -- that therefore, you would suspend your support of capital punishment until we dealt with those problems?''
As the candidates answered repeated questions on issues like the death penalty and abortion, Mr. Kerry tried to change the topic, asserting that voters this fall would be more concerned about the economy and health care.
''This is not the biggest issue in front of the country, that we were just talking about,'' he said of gay marriage. ''It's not even the biggest story. The biggest story today, Larry, are 43 million Americans who have no health care.''
But Mr. Edwards said the Democratic candidate's position on social issues would clearly affect their electability in November.
''People are going to consider these other things,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''And for us to assume that that's not true is just a fantasy. It's not true. We need a candidate at the top of this ticket who can connect with voters everywhere in America. And if we don't have that, we're going to be in trouble.''
Mr. Edwards, a trial lawyer who has served in the Senate for five years, also sought repeatedly to present himself as a Washington outsider, drawing a contrast with Mr. Kerry, a four-term senator. Mr. Kerry sought to make his years in office into an asset, noting that he had more experience in government than his opponent.
Mr. Edwards also sought to portray Mr. Kerry as beholden to lobbyists. Mr. Edwards noted that he had refused to take contributions from lobbyists or political action committee.
''I think these Washington lobbyists have entirely too much influence on what happens every day,'' he said. ''It's wrong.''
Mr. Kerry sought to turn that back on Mr. Edwards by noting the North Carolina senator's reliance on campaign contributions from fellow trial lawyers, blithely suggesting that Mr. Edwards was looking to make the most out of whatever distinctions he could find.
''And I don't think there fundamentally is a difference,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I mean, John has raised almost 50 percent of his money from one group of people in the United States of America. Now I don't suggest ever suggest that he is beholden to them.''
''He said, ''There's not really a difference in this race between us in our commitment to get the lobbying out.''
On trade, Mr. Kerry was asked to square his support for inexpensive clothes and goods from overseas for consumers with his support for labor unions seeking better wages and job protections.
''Some jobs we can't compete with,'' he said. ''I understand that. But most jobs we can.'' Mr. Edwards sought to draw a sharp a contrast on the issue by noting different votes the two men have cast on trade pacts over the years.
Near the debate's end, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards were asked to contemplate the idea of running together this fall
''An Edwards-Kerry ticket would be powerful,'' Mr. Edwards said.
Mr. Kerry thanked Mr. Edwards ''for the consideration,'' but did not reciprocate.
Mr. Kerry was then asked to name a quality of Mr. Edwards's that he wished he had himself, but appeared not to entirely grasp the question.
''I think he's a great communicator,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''He's a charming guy.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: DEBATE
