When Colin Campbell coached the Rangers in the mid-1990's, he occasionally invoked the ''manly'' code of hockey fistfighters. An old-fashioned hockey man who played a rugged style as a defenseman, Campbell expected tough guys to obey the unwritten but widely understood etiquette of their specialty.
Fight fair, goes the code. Don't back down. Be a manly man. Drop the gloves and ''have a scrap'' when challenged by a fellow tough guy your size, especially when he has a grudge to settle.
But Campbell, now the executive vice president and director of hockey operations for the National Hockey League, played the role of sheriff Thursday night at Nassau Coliseum, where the Rangers beat the Islanders, 6-3.
Accompanied by two deputies, Claude Loiselle and Kris King, Campbell was there to watch because of last week's alleged violation of the tough-guy code in a fight between Eric Cairns of the Islanders and Dale Purinton of the Rangers.
Cairns was angry, claiming that Purinton had sucker punched him to start a fight. Afterward, Cairns called Purinton gutless and noted that the teams had one more game to play and that he would look forward to it.
Their chance to fight came early in Thursday night's game. During a multiple-player scrum, Cairns challenged Purinton. Instead of accepting the invitation, Purinton refused and turtled, a technique in which a bashful participant hides his head with his arms and covers up while being punched.
So the referees gave Cairns 27 penalty minutes (about three per punch) and put him out of the game. Purinton was not penalized. The Rangers scored a power-play goal and went on to win for the sixth time in six games this season against the Islanders.
This moment of burlesque, this insignificant victory and this series sweep of the Islanders were shallow triumphs for the Rangers near the end of another wretched season, likely to be their seventh in succession out of the playoffs. Perhaps, in their 2003-4 highlight film they can run a clip of Purinton-Cairns II to show their fans how their tough guy outfoxed that Islanders bully by playing the conscientious objector.
For the audio, they could run a tape of Glen Sather's remarks Thursday to a Vancouver radio station, the morning after Sather stepped down as Rangers coach but remained as president and general manager. Sather seemed to feel hurt by criticism in New York of his four years of failure.
Perhaps Sather felt comfortable addressing Western Canada, where people still revere him for the five Stanley Cup championships he won with Edmonton in another era.
''You'd think I'd assassinated the prime minister of Canada for all the things that are being said around here,'' Sather said in an interview with radio station TEAM-1040. ''They really give it to you when things aren't going the way you planned.''
Sather went on to complain of ''the personal character assassination that goes on here.''
''In a lot of cases, it's uncalled for,'' he said. ''The people in the media world really lay it on people like me.''
This was a curious complaint. Most of the criticism of Sather has been about his poor trades and poor free-agent signings as a general manager.
When he coached the Rangers over the last two seasons, some of the criticism he received concerned his listless practices, his personnel decisions behind the bench and his refusal to sit out players who seemed to deserve it. But little of the criticism has been personal. By the standards of Canada, Sather has gotten off easy.
As the worst of three hockey teams in the fourth-most popular team sport in the metropolitan area, Sather's Rangers are generally ignored by New York's television and radio commentators as well as by general sports columnists in daily newspapers. Despite a league-high payroll of more than $80 million, Sather has been relatively unnoticed through four years of underachievement.
His continual failure in New York is one of the reasons his sport -- in what league officials call a period of crisis -- is ignored in the largest media market, where executives of television and advertising work and reside. Now, it appears Sather will get to finish the three years on his contract.
With the trade deadline of March 9, Sather said ''everybody is available,'' including Mark Messier and Brian Leetch. He also named in particular Aleksei Kovalev, calling him ''one guy who's been a mystery to me.'' He suggested that Kovalev's skills might thrive in a different environment.
But Sather remains in this environment, critiqued only by members of the dwindling hockey cult, his job security a mystery to many people but not James L. Dolan, who runs Madison Square Garden. Imagine if Sather ran a high-profile team like the Giants or the Jets, the Yankees or the Mets, or the Knicks or even the Nets. What would the critics say? It might be enough to turtle.
Hockey Analysis  Correction:  February 28, 2004, Saturday  A sports picture caption yesterday with a hockey article about the New York Rangers' defeat of the Islanders misidentified the Ranger who fought with Eric Cairns of the Islanders. The Ranger was Dale Purinton, not Greg de Vries.
