Reacting to the possible dissemination of steroids in clubhouses, Commissioner Bud Selig reminded teams yesterday to keep out people who do not belong there and other areas.
As restricted areas, Selig listed clubhouses, dugouts, playing fields, managers' offices, showers, and trainers' and doctors' rooms. He told the clubs that the only groups allowed full or partial access are players, managers, coaches, trainers, doctors, union and commissioner's office representatives, members of the news media and designated club personnel.
Barred from clubhouses and other areas are friends, associates, agents, lawyers and personal trainers.
Barry Bonds's personal trainer, Greg Anderson, was one of four men indicted by a federal grand jury in San Francisco earlier this month on charges of distributing illegal performance-enhancing drugs. Bonds has been noted for often having personal trainers in the Giants clubhouse.
''Credentials that would permit access to those restricted areas may not be issued to such prohibited persons,'' Selig said in a statement.
''Security at all of our major league ballparks continues to be a top priority for Major League Baseball,'' he said. ''We strongly believe that a uniform enforcement of the security standards is crucial to maintaining a safe working environment for players, on-field and front office personnel and accredited media. There will be absolutely no exceptions to these regulations and major league clubs will be held responsible if they are not enforced.''
Before the 2002 season, Selig issued a directive limiting access to clubhouses and other areas. Peter Ueberroth, then the commissioner, barred the same categories of people from those areas in 1986.
Another Fight in Boston
The former Yankees reliever Jeff Nelson said yesterday that he would contest a lawsuit filed by a groundskeeper stemming from the bullpen brawl in Fenway Park during last year's playoffs.
''It's ridiculous,'' Nelson said. ''I'm not guilty at all, so why should I give in to something that I didn't do?''
The groundskeeper, Paul Williams Jr., sued Nelson, now with the Texas Rangers, and the former Yankees outfielder Karim Garcia, now with the Mets, for more than $33,000 for medical bills and lost wages.
Williams contended that the fight during Game 3 of the American League Championship Series had left him with a deviated septum and he had lost his sense of smell, according to the civil suit filed Feb. 17 in Suffolk Superior Court in Massachusetts. He also said he had sustained broken teeth, an injured neck and cleat marks on his body.
Nelson said Williams had tried to take a swing at him and he was defending himself. Nelson, Garcia and Williams have pleaded not guilty to assault and battery charges. (AP)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
