Stepping Out For Purim
The Jewish holiday Purim honors the ingenuity of Queen Esther, a Persian Jew who subverted the plot of Haman, her husband's evil minister, to destroy her people. On Sunday the 92nd Street Y will celebrate the holiday (March 7) with the ingenuity of another woman, the choreographer Carolyn Dorfman. Although Ms. Dorfman's dances were not created with Purim in mind, they emphasize similar values: the enduring vitality of the Jews and their ability to find joy even at times of adversity.
The villain in Ms. Dorfman's art is not Haman but Hitler. But although she is the child of Holocaust survivors, she prefers to recall her parents' strength rather than their suffering. ''There's so much commemoration of the pain,'' she said. ''I wanted to make work that really honored the life -- Jewish values, Jewish gestures, Jewish humor.''
Audiences will see examples at the Y, when Ms. Dorfman's troupe presents ''Purim Reflections,'' excerpts from her past work that will culminate an afternoon of festivities including music, magic, clowning, games and children's theater.
Ms. Dorfman will narrate her hourlong concert, performed to music by Greg Wall. The first dance, an excerpt from ''Echad'' (Hebrew for one), illustrates the striving for balance between the needs of the community and the needs of the individual. ''You don't travel this world alone,'' she said. ''The circles go out from you and your family to other people.'' The dance itself uses a circle: an enormous wheel that the performers carry, climb on and ride.
The second half will be excerpts from ''The Klezmer Sketch,'' part of the longer dance ''Mayne Mentshn'' (''My People''). In one section, ''The Arrangement,'' the dancers wear masks of their faces on the backs of their heads. The masks, evoking the mystery of an arranged marriage, also recall Purim, which is celebrated with masquerades and revelry.
The concert will end the way weddings usually do: with an invitation for everyone to dance.
Family Purim Carnival, Sunday from 11:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m., and ''Purim Reflections,'' 3 p.m., at the 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, (212) 415-5500. Tickets: carnival, $15; concert, $10; combined, $20.
Glass Slippers, Toeshoes
Cinderella rose from hardship and obscurity to comfort and acclaim. Although the same isn't true of her prince, it is for the young man who will occupy his shoes this weekend and next. Steven Melendez, 17, who will dance in the New York Theater Ballet's ''Cinderella,'' was discovered nine years ago in a Bronx homeless shelter by the company's artistic director, Diana Byer. He is now in American Ballet Theater's Studio Company associate program.
Choreographed by Donald Mahler to Prokofiev's music, this hourlong ''Cinderella'' is lighthearted and whimsical, with two stepsisters who are more buffoonish than cruel. While other performers glide about in toeshoes, these (Justin Boccitto and Joey Stocks, in drag) wear heels for a series of vaudevillian moves, including a clodding tap dance.
The production has no pumpkin or mice, but it does feature a clock that looks like a cross between a timepiece and a minotaur. Designed by Gillian Bradshaw-Smith, it has a bull's head, a clock-face belly and four legs, provided by two dancers. One dancer's arm is the hour hand, expressively pointing warnings.
This Cinderella (Danielle Genest) is a charitable soul who embraces her mean relatives. The company is asking audiences to be charitable, too: after the 3:30 performance on Sunday, it will hold a fund-raising Cinderella Ball. (Tickets, which include the show, are $150; $100 for children.) Families attending can learn ballroom dancing and practice with Cinderella, the prince and the other stars. The proceeds will benefit the ballet's LIFT program, which provides dance scholarships for children like Mr. Melendez and opportunities for real-life Cinderella stories.
''Cinderella,'' Saturdays and Sundays through March 7 at 11 a.m. and 1 and 3:30 p.m. at Gould Hall, 55 East 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 355-6160. Tickets (except this Sunday's benefit): $25; 12 and under, $20.
Oz, the Real Wizard
The Great Oz of Emerald City didn't turn out to be much of a magician. The same cannot be said of a much younger Oz now performing in Chelsea. Oz Pearlman, only 21, has no need to hide behind a curtain. He is so confident of his skills that during one trick he asks the small theater's entire audience to gather around, arming two members with fly swatters to whack his hands if he so much as touches the packs of cards he has given to two volunteers. No one detects any funny business, but miraculously, strange things happen.
This episode is typical: one or more audience members are called on for most of the tricks in ''WatchMagic,'' his 90-minute show. Of course the biggest ham is Mr. Pearlman. At one point he dresses up a bit like Johnny Depp in ''Pirates of the Caribbean,'' skewering cards on his table with a dagger, trying to find the one a volunteer has signed. When it turns up folded behind his eye patch, even skeptical viewers are won over.
Mr. Pearlman's repertory also includes rope tricks and making audience members' possessions, from rings to cash, disappear and then reappear in bizarre places. Ever charming, he also seems to read minds. (If he ever tires of magic, perhaps he can try politics.)
''WatchMagic,'' Saturdays at 5 p.m. through March 27 at the Joyous Life Theater, 119 West 23rd Street, seventh floor, Chelsea, (212) 352-3101 or WatchMagic.com. Tickets: $35.
Family Fare
