We Didn't Even Get To Cambodia
Yes, yes, the Academy Awards are this weekend, but we at Boldface are made of serious stuff and can take only so much of that piffle.
Thus, when we heard that the Asia Society was holding its annual dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria on Wednesday night, and that ROBERT ZOELLICK, the United States trade representative, and RUPERT MURDOCH, the chairman and chief executive officer of News Corporation, were to speak, we were there.
Waiters circulated with finger food and strong cocktails. Mr. Murdoch arrived early.
Our young and underpaid Boldface correspondent, attuned to what might interest a titan, asked Mr. Murdoch what his thoughts might be on the legal problems of CONRAD BLACK, formerly chief executive officer of the newspaper company Hollinger International.
A major shareholder has accused the board of allowing Lord Black and some Hollinger executives to ''line their pockets at shareholder expense.''
''Absolutely no comment,'' Mr. Murdoch said, turning away from our correspondent and into a conversation with DAVID ROCKEFELLER (a convergence of wealth, our correspondent realized, in which the worth, including his own, amounted to about $7,800,000,114.00).
Our Boldface correspondent stood in the scrum of tuxedos, listening to OZ ELLIOTT's oft-told story about meeting his second wife, INGER McCABE ELLIOTT.
(''I was attending an Asia Society meeting in Indonesia and Inger was in the area buying batik on the north coast of Java.'')
When an opening presented itself, our correspondent, flush with success over his conversation with Mr. Murdoch, asked HENRY KISSINGER about Lord Black.
''I am not going to talk about this,'' Mr. Kissinger said. ''I'm on the board of directors.'' Has Mr. Kissinger, who had removed himself as head of the 9/11 commission awhile back, been following news of its findings?
He muttered something about ''you people'' and turned away.
It was then our correspondent spotted I.M. PEI, who appears to be in the last stages of a physical transformation into GEORGE BURNS.
What were Mr. Pei's thoughts on the current design for ground zero?
''Oh, don't ask me that!'' he said. ''Ask me about the Asia Society.''
We Decry the Loss Of Piffle in This Country
We ran into ALEC BALDWIN at the British Academy Awards simulcast. He's been nominated for Best Supporting Actor in ''The Cooler.''
''What a miracle, huh?'' he said, as we congratulated him. ''Any time I get nominated for an Academy Award, that's a miracle. Trust me.''
And will he hit all the parties?
''I'm going to go to some. I think my brother BILLY is going to be my date.''
You're not taking your girlfriend, NICOLE SEIDEL?
''Well, the reason is, I think my daughter's going to go with me. And I've got to have my daughter with me with someone who can take her home early and then come back.''
When You're Tired of Piffle, You're Tired of Life
One of the highpoints of our Boldface life last year was seeing LIZ SMITH and ANN RICHARDS perform at the Women's Health Initiative of the Actors Fund benefit, though we might not have made that as clear as we could have.
The phrase ''can neither sing nor dance'' -- now that we think about it -- may have muddied the water.
So let us once and for all set things straight.
Ms. Smith and Ms. Richards wore Gumbyesque cowboy outfits with chaps and hats with spectacular élan, and nobody threw flan.
They delivered ''I'm an Old Cowhand (From the Rio Grande),'' a song rarely performed in these parts, with humor and spirit.
The audience loved them.
So we were shocked to hear that the Women's Health Initiative has not offered Ms. Smith a place on the stage at their fund-raising event this Monday.
We encourage our readers to call the Women's Health Initiative and tell them to bring back Liz and Ann.
If you cannot remember their names, just say ''the two old dames.''
You might also ask them where our tickets are.
with Campbell Robertson and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
