This 30-second commercial for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina is running in Ohio, Georgia and upstate New York.
PRODUCER -- Penczner Media.
ON THE SCREEN -- The spot opens with a tightly focused shot of Mr. Edwards, wearing a suit and tie, set against a white backdrop that fills with words and, then, competing images, as he speaks. The screen first reads, ''Senator John Edwards on 2 Americas.'' Then, ''2 Health Care Systems.'' The words make way for a shot of a hospital bed and a nurse who is holding a medical chart, which is replaced by the heading, ''2 Public School Systems.'' The writing makes way for an image of schoolchildren sitting in front of workbooks at a long table. The next heading, ''2 Tax Systems,'' makes way for a shot of hands -- judging by the neat cuffs, apparently those of corporate accountants -- shuffling papers on a desk and then one of a married couple sitting in their home office holding papers and looking worried. After the heading ''2 Governments,'' the screen shows the White House and then a couple preparing their young children for a family outing. It ends by sending viewers to Mr. Edwards's campaign Web site to obtain a copy of ''The Edwards Plan.''
THE SCRIPT -- Mr. Edwards says: ''It seems today we have two Americas, with two health care systems, one for the privileged, another rationed by insurance companies. Two public school systems, one for the haves and one for everybody else. Two tax systems, where the wealthy and corporations pay less, working families pay more. Two governments, one for powerful interests and lobbyists, the other for the rest of us. I'm John Edwards, and I approved this message because together you and I can change America and make it work for all of us.''
ACCURACY -- It is safe to say that the very rich can afford lifesaving health care that poor people cannot. But the ranks of H.M.O. subscribers come from all walks of life. It is by now well established that public schools in poor communities underperform those in rich ones. As for the tax system, Mr. Edwards is basing his assertion that the wealthy and corporations pay less in taxes than working families, an oranges-to-apples comparison. He is contrasting a 15 cents-to-the-dollar tax rate on capital gains and dividends with the higher income and payroll tax rates for shop workers or assistant principals, whose income-tax rates are, of course, lower than those of higher earners.
SCORECARD -- This spot is the crystallized version of Mr. Edwards's stump speech, and it has been a standard part of his advertising rotation since January. Mr. Edwards has won praise for sticking so doggedly to his standard theme of two Americas divided by class, and that has seemed to have helped him greatly in states that have suffered heavy job losses like his birthplace, South Carolina. It may resonate just as strongly with Democratic voters in places like Ohio and upstate New York. Polls show Mr. Edwards trailing in those states, and he probably needs more than a solid television advertisement to achieve victories.
JIM RUTENBERG
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
