The physical traces were laid neatly on tables  one day of shattering horror filtered through the numbered and ordered prism of police-work minutiae. From the macabre to the mundane, each item had its place: a computer screen with a hole in its center, a lost shoe, a glass display case full of pipe bombs.
Nearly five years after the killings at Columbine High School, and an equally long period of suspicion among some victims' families that the police should have been able to prevent the crime, investigators on Thursday threw open their evidence vault to the public.
In two huge rooms at the Jefferson County Fairgrounds here, just north of Littleton, near where the shootings took place, thousands of pieces from the crime scene -- almost everything that was found in the school and in the homes and cars of the killers -- were on display in clear plastic evidence bags.
Among the documents released was a report by the state attorney general's office examining the two years leading up to the attacks. The report said that the Jefferson County police had 15 moments of ''contact'' with one or both killers -- most of them based on complaints from a neighbor of Eric Harris, one of the attackers, who was 18.
More than a year before the massacre, the report said, a search warrant was proposed for the Harris home because of a complaint that Mr. Harris had made threats on the Internet. But investigators concluded at the time that the evidence was insufficient to proceed.
''In retrospect there are things that definitely should have been done differently,'' said Ken Salazar, the attorney general. ''In retrospect, yes, there should have been a search warrant that should have been executed on the Harris home.''
Mr. Salazar said, however, that he found no evidence of a cover-up by the sheriff's office to hide evidence of police negligence, as some relatives of victims have charged.
Mr. Salazar described the unusual two-day event -- in which the families of the victims were invited for a private tour on Wednesday, while the general public and news reporters came on Thursday -- as a ''courageous'' effort by the Jefferson County sheriff's office to build better communications with the public.
''It is being opened up, complete, for one simple reason -- so that you, the world, can see,'' Mr. Salazar told reporters. ''I think that the underlying purpose for doing that is to make sure that everybody knows that the truth is being told about Columbine.''
Fifteen people died at Columbine High on April 20, 1999, including 12 students, a teacher and the two student gunmen, Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, who plotted the attack for months and took their own lives.
The display, which included the guns the killers used and detailed outlines of the elaborate massacre they contemplated -- one whole display case, for example, contains the ''diversionary bombs,'' meant to distract the police and school officials while the killing went on -- focuses on what happened. Where the bodies were found and where each shotgun shell and 9-millimeter cartridge fell to the ground are itemized, room by room, from the cafeteria to the library, where a majority of the students died.
Many of the people who filed past the cordoned-off tables were overwhelmed. Tissue boxes were placed on table ends for those in tears.
''This brings you to the life of it -- the reality,'' said Chris Eckhardt, a resident of nearby Aurora who came partly because of his own sons, who are 4 and 19. He wants to keep them safe, he said, and he hoped that the Columbine evidence would give him clues about how to do that.
''It gives you a hollow feeling inside,'' Mr. Eckhardt said, glancing about the room.
But the other nagging story about Columbine -- what might have been if those killings could somehow have been headed off -- was also very much a part of the day's news.
One of the parents of a Columbine victim who came on Thursday said that her main interest was getting the truth about what happened and why, and that the sheriff's display was therefore a positive step.
''If this is what it takes, then let's just get it all out,'' said Dawn Anna, who lost her daughter, Lauren Dawn Townsend. ''Is it hard to see? Yes. Will there be people who want to just look for curiosity's sake? Yes. Does it give all the answers? No.''
Ms. Anna said her daughter, who was 18, was a big fan of the television program ''The X-Files,'' in which a line was often repeated that although conspiracies abound, ''the truth is out there.'' Ms. Anna wore a button with Lauren's picture and those words printed beneath.
Some in attendance were afraid of what they might see, but said they were determined to come anyway.
Erin Walton, 20, was a 15-year-old sophomore at Columbine in 1999, sitting in science class when her teacher, Dave Sanders, was shot. Some students in the class made a sign that they posted in the science room window seeking help from the police and medical workers outside: ''1 Bleeding to Death,'' it read in blue marker. The sign was displayed on the table marked ''Math Science.''
Ms. Walton, who works as a mortgage loan specialist and still lives in Littleton, only a few blocks from her old school, said she was wearing her mother's sweatshirt from Florida State University that day. She took it off in an attempt to stop the bleeding from Mr. Sanders' neck wound and never saw it again.
''I'm hoping I don't see it,'' Ms. Walton said of the shirt.
Mr. Sanders died later that day of his wounds. His daughter, Cindy Thirouin, came over and hugged Ms. Walton by the Math Science table.
''The lesson here is to live every day to the fullest,'' Ms. Thirouin said when the hug ended.
