The National Transportation Safety Board called on Thursday for major change in the way airplane maintenance is supervised, after uncovering a chain of lapses that led to the crash of a twin-engine commuter plane in Charlotte, N.C., 13 months ago, killing all 21 aboard.
Citing mistakes by maintenance contractors, the airline and the Federal Aviation Administration, the safety board's chairwoman, Ellen Engleman-Connors, said, ''The entire system here was in a breakdown situation.''
Staff members described how a mechanic who had never done the job before was assigned to adjust the tail controls on the Beech 1900D, and botched the job so that the movable horizontal surfaces, which control the airplane's horizontal pitch, lost half their ability to push the nose down. The mechanic was supposedly receiving on-the-job training, but the trainer was simultaneously supposed to be teaching another mechanic who was working on the engines. The trainer was also supposed to be conducting independent quality inspections of the repair work, something that the board said he could not do if the work had been done under his supervision.
The vice chairman of the board, Mark V. Rosenker, called the setup sloppy.
The Air Midwest flight, operating as US Airways Express, was overloaded, and too much of the weight was too far back. After the crash, on Jan. 8, 2003, the F.A.A. told the airlines to change their calculations of plane loads, increasing the weight assumed for each passenger and bag. But the board's staff said that the system that Air Midwest used now still underestimated total weight and the amount of weight in the back of the plane, where the baggage hold is situated. That is crucial for balance calculations.
The board ruled that the probable cause of the crash was incorrect rigging of the cables that control the tail, compounded by the aircraft's aft center of gravity. But it also said the aircraft maintenance system had had little supervision or government regulation.
One of the five members of the board, John Goglia, an aircraft mechanic by profession, said that after the crash of a ValuJet Airlines jet in May 1996 he had not expected to see another major crash caused by maintenance error. But in the Charlotte crash, as in the ValuJet case, the board found that the crash was caused by errors by an independent maintenance shop doing work under contract for an airline, but not properly supervised by the airline -- and neither of them properly overseen by the aviation agency.
The problem was not that the airline contracted out its maintenance, according to board officials, but that the contractor was not supervised.
Board officials said the Federal Aviation Administration knew before the crash that Air Midwest had had problems with its maintenance program and had considered refusing to allow the airline to expand until it fixed its problems. But the regulators decided to do nothing because they believed the airline was making progress, the board said.
Les Dorr, a spokesman for the F.A.A., said that the airline had been in compliance with the rules and that the changes his agency sought had been voluntary improvements.
The text of the board's report has not been released, but in discussions at the meeting at which it was approved, staff members said the records showed other problems. One is that the mechanic was certified to work on tail assemblies that night by a supervisor who was not even at work that night. The mechanic was also certified to work on rudders and ailerons, for which he had apparently not been trained.
The problems went unnoticed because there was no requirement that mechanics test the systems when finished with the work, the board said.
The board also complained that mechanics had improvised and failed to follow the manufacturer's instructions. According to the manufacturer, Raytheon Aircraft, if the mechanics decided that the cables needed adjustment, they should have rerigged the entire system.
Mr. Goglia complained that there were no standards for on-the-job training, which he called ''learning somebody else's bad habits.''
Jonathan Ornstein, chairman and chief executive of Mesa Airlines, which owns Air Midwest, said he had not read the report and had no comment. Peter Goelz, a spokesman for Raytheon Aerospace also had no comment.
