Everyone with hometown memories carries around a double vision of the place of origin: the way it used to be when it seemed endless and eternal, and the smaller, transitory way it seems later. Despite logical evidence, that eternal home often looms as a place more glowing and alive way back then than it is now.
When popular culture barges into our memories of places, the picture becomes more complex. Sometimes a place we think we know is really only the memory of a scene in a movie, book or play that has crystallized into a certainty of what it must have looked and felt like.
An imaginative new series, ''Waterfront: A Journey Around Manhattan in 18 Films,'' presented by the Museum of Modern Art at the Gramercy Theater, celebrates the complex interaction of memory, history and popular mythology in New York, a city whose famous locations, from Greenwich Village to the Empire State Building to Times Square to Central Park, are often tangles of private memories and dramatic images in the minds of New Yorkers.
The series is inspired by Phillip Lopate's wonderfully observant, elegiac and far-reaching historical meditation, ''Waterfront: A Journey Around Manhattan'' (Crown, 2004), which examines the mystiques of the Manhattan waterfront in light of today's physical realities in language that is at once precise and poetically evocative. Though factually based, the book, by a native New Yorker, is also deeply but un-self-consciously lyrical. Or, as the opening line of William Wyler's 1937 movie ''Dead End'' (which has its first screening tomorrow at 1 p.m.) puts it, ''Every street in New York ends in a river.''
The series -- an astutely chosen assortment of Hollywood classics, documentaries, avant-garde reflections and rarities like a seldom seen 1930 German-language adaptation of Eugene O'Neill's play ''Anna Christie,'' starring Greta Garbo (to be screened Monday at 6 p.m.) -- begins this evening and continues through March 11. Each selection has two screenings.
The series takes pains to transcend the usual equation of waterfront life and brute reality. Yes, 50's classics like ''On the Waterfront,'' with its brawling machismo and McCarthy-era paranoia and a voluminous Oscar-winning performance by Marlon Brando, are included, even though most of the exteriors were filmed in Hoboken, N.J., with the grim, cloudy skyline looming in the background. So is the racially conscious 1957 film ''Edge of the City,'' set on the docks of Manhattan and starring an incandescent Sidney Poitier as a fearless stevedore who risks his life to protect an army deserter (John Cassavetes).
But there is also a gentler side to the series. Peter Hutton's ''Time and Tide'' is an entrancing 35-minute meditation on the rhythms, moods and changing landscape and light of the Hudson River (shown tonight at 6:30 p.m.). Mark Street's short film ''Fulton Fish Market'' (tomorrow at 5 p.m.) blends scenes of the legendary waterfront market filmed in the early hours of the morning, with hand-painted, emulsion-scratched abstractions turning the place into something beautiful and mysterious.
Melodrama still leads the list of genres. ''Time and Tide'' is the curtain raiser for Josef von Sternberg's 1928 silent film (with piano accompaniment) ''The Docks of New York,'' shown tonight at 6:30, about a ship's stoker who stages a fake marriage to a prostitute he saves from drowning. Crucial scenes from Samuel Fuller's bitter 1953 espionage drama, ''Pickup on South Street'' (tonight at 8:30 p.m.), which stars Richard Widmark, Thelma Ritter and Jean Peters, were filmed on a South Street pier. The oldest movie in the series, Raoul Walsh's ''Regeneration,'' dates from 1915 and has been called Hollywood's first feature-length gangster melodrama.
Lastly, there is Sidney Lumet's film adaptation (with a screenplay by Norman Rosten) of Arthur Miller's waterfront tragedy, ''A View From the Bridge'' (with Raf Vallone, Maureen Stapleton and Carol Lawrence), which will be shown this Tuesday at 8 p.m. It has all of the raw-boned themes we associate with the word ''waterfront,'' even today when the term is associated with scenic, upscale urban development. Masculine conflict, simmering ethnic tension and uncontrollable passions ignite a drama that seems, if anything, starker today than in 1962 when the film was released.
''Waterfront: A Journey Around Manhattan in 18 Films'' runs through March 11 at the Museum of Modern Art at the Gramercy Theater, 127 East 23rd Street, Manhattan, (212) 777-4900. Tickets: $6; free for members and children under 16 accompanied by an adult.
Critic's Choice
