It's the time of year when accolades like the Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild Awards are promoted and scrutinized as if they will accurately predict the outcome of the Oscar races. It would make about as much sense for the Weather Channel to base its forecasts on bunions instead of radar equipment.
Though the cutthroat competition for attention is often entertaining (the very title of the People's Choice Awards implies that voters in the other contests aren't people), the ceremonies and final results are often forgettable. So are the Oscars, but that's another story.
There is one awards presentation, however, that does have meaning beyond the trophies: the Independent Spirit Awards. These awards, which will be made tomorrow, are given by the Independent Feature Project, a nonprofit organization created in Los Angeles to help American filmmakers produce movies outside the studio system. Over the years some of those independent features have been nominees for Spirits and Oscars. (This year ''Monster'' was one.) But the significance of the Spirit Awards is not in their ability to predict winners of the Academy Awards, but in their ability to hint at the future of film. (In the last few years many indie scripts received best-original-screenplay nominations at the Oscars.)
The proof is in the nominations. In 1986, the first year of the Spirits, ''Blood Simple,'' the debut effort of Joel and Ethan Coen, received five nominations. (Joel Coen shared the best-director prize with Martin Scorsese, who won for ''After Hours.'') Neither the Coens nor Mr. Scorsese were nominated for Oscars that year, but just as the indie world was blossoming in earnest, the Spirits provided some valuable signposts for moviemakers to keep an eye on. (One prize is actually called the Someone to Watch Award.)
This year the Spirit Awards are to be distributed under a huge white tent in Santa Monica, Calif., the day before the Academy Awards ceremony, just to remind film aficionados that there is another world out there. The presentation will be televised live on IFC Films in the afternoon and rebroadcast in the evening on Bravo. It has the amiable atmosphere of a relaxed high school assembly and, as at these gatherings, all the cool kids go outside to grab a smoke. The wry toastmaster is John Waters, whose filmmaking career probably strikes most indie aspirants as the ideal: someone steadfast in his determination to remain outside the mainstream and in his loyalty to Comme des Garçons. He has been the event's host for the last five years, proving that there is room for tradition everywhere.
The Independent Spirit Awards were born not simply to catch the back draft of the Academy Awards but to encourage those interested in movies that studios wouldn't make. With offerings from the boutique arms of the major studios -- Fox Searchlight, Miramax, Sony Pictures Classics -- now taking up more and more space on the Spirit Awards stage, that distinction may appear to have been lost. The 1999 nominees included a major studio film, ''Election,'' and this year purists are bemoaning the inclusion of ''Lost in Translation'' and ''In America'' among the competitors.
But their presence should not be seen as an indication that the awards have gone astray; it is, rather, an indication of the influence of indie films on the larger world, a world in which indie lines and studio lines now often intersect. The answer to such complications involves looking past the details of a given movie's distribution and honoring instead those movies that reflect a filmmaker's personal vision -- a pretty good definition of independent spirit. In addition, budgets must be considered. To be eligible for the Spirits, movies must have cost less than $12 million. That is a low budget by Hollywood standards, but it's not pocket change. To level the playing field a bit, the I.F.P., a national organization with about 9,000 members, has created a category for movies costing $500,000 or less: the John Cassavetes Award, named for the hard-working 1960's renegade who cobbled together pictures using whatever dough he could raise.
Nominees for all categories are winnowed from many submissions -- 190 this year -- by a committee of actors, directors, cinematographers and other movie professionals. (Full disclosure: critics are also part of the selection process, and in a previous job I was on the committee; Times critics never participate.) In addition to naming winners in predictable categories like best director, best screenplay and best documentary, the Spirit Awards also pay tribute to notable debuts: best first screenplay, best debut performance and best first feature. Nominees in this last category have included Spike Lee, Allison Anders, Donald Petrie, Whit Stillman, Todd Haynes, Todd Field, Quentin Tarantino, Terry Zwigoff and Richard Linklater.
So yes, the Spirit Awards nominees can be looked upon as a triple-A farm team for the majors. And the nominations are now so meaningful that studios have been known to make a lot of noise when their candidates are spurned. That could be a sign that the Spirits are resisting co-option by the studios' art-house wings. But it also means that the awards can draw audiences to movies that otherwise would have escaped their notice. When Derek Luke won last year's best actor award for ''Antwone Fisher,'' he informed the crowd that a few years before he had been one of the waiters at the event.
It was a fitting moment, another indication of how, 18 years after their creation, the Spirit Awards have become the shabby-chic alternative in the movie business.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
