The legislative committee that will decide whether to recommend impeaching Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut issued its first batch of subpoenas on Thursday and hired a new investigator to assist in fact-finding.
The first four subpoenas seek documents from Mr. Rowland; his wife, Patricia Rowland; the governor's office and the State Ethics Commission. An additional 40 to 50 subpoenas would be issued within a day, legislators said, but they declined to identify the recipients until late on Friday, saying some of them might try to evade the subpoenas.
''This is the beginning of our attempt to gather information so that we can investigate these issues,'' said Representative John Wayne Fox, the Democratic co-chairman of the committee.
The four subpoenas issued on Thursday seek a wide range of information and are similar in scope to those issued by federal investigators over the past year. A central issue in both requests is the governor's private cottage in Litchfield. The House impeachment inquiry began after Mr. Rowland admitted in December that he had lied about receiving free gifts and renovations at the cottage from people employed by or doing business with the state, some of whom were already subjects of the federal investigation. Other topics include gifts or favors received by the governor, state contracts, business deals Mr. Rowland has been involved in and a broad array of personal and financial records.
Ross H. Garber, the governor's legal counsel, said he had not yet seen the subpoenas but expected the governor's office to comply with them.
The subpoena of the State Ethics Commission touches on an issue that has led to contention in recent weeks. The commission issued a ruling on Tuesday stating that it is illegal for public officials to accept gifts worth more than $100 because of the office they hold. The ruling, which relates to the scandal over Mr. Rowland's acceptance of free gifts and favors, was delayed earlier this month after lawyers for Mr. Rowland objected.
On Wednesday, a legislative committee ventured onto similar terrain by unanimously approving measures to strengthen the state's ethics laws. The proposed changes would increase fines to a maximum of $10,000 per incident, from the current maximum of $2,000. They would also increase the statute of limitations on investigations into ethical violations to five years from three years.
During its meeting Thursday morning, the committee also voted unanimously to hire James B. Mintz as an investigator. The previous investigator, hired last week, resigned after discovering a potential conflict of interest through his former firm.
Mr. Mintz has been an investigator for 24 years and is president of the James Mintz Group, a New York-based investigative firm. Mr. Mintz told the committee that his billing rate is $330 an hour, and he will have two assistants, Andrew Melnick and Martin C. Lippe, who charge $330 and $250 an hour respectively.
