President Bush continued his assault on Senator John Kerry on Thursday as he took his new speech to Kentucky, where he also collected hundreds of checks for a campaign that has raised more than $150 million.
Later, Mr. Bush canceled two stops in Charlotte, N.C., because a snowstorm closed schools and government offices, and the mayor and police chief asked him to stay away.
''They felt it was important not to have two large issues to deal with, so they asked that the president not come,'' Scott Stanzel, a spokesman for Mr. Bush's 2004 campaign, said. ''So we agreed with that assessment and returned to Washington.''
Mr. Bush's half-day jaunt here was his most overtly political trip since becoming president and the first in which he directly presented himself as a candidate for the office he now holds.
''We're ready to go here in Kentucky, we've got a great organization,'' Mr. Bush said to 1,000 cheering supporters who paid $2,000 each at a fund-raising lunch at the Galt House in Louisville.
Officials of the Bush-Cheney campaign said the event raised more than $1.2 million.
Mr. Bush repeated his attack on Mr. Kerry that he started on Monday in Washington with a tough new speech that signaled that he was no longer content to be a sideshow.
Without directly using Mr. Kerry's name, Mr. Bush said the Democrats were ''an interesting group, with a lot of strong differences of opinion.''
''They're for tax cuts and against them,'' the president said. ''For Nafta and against Nafta. For the Patriot Act, against the Patriot Act. In favor of liberating Iraq and opposed to it. And that's just one senator from Massachusetts.''
Mr. Bush also implicitly said the nation would be more vulnerable to terrorist attacks under a Democratic administration.
His opponents, Mr. Bush said, ''view terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved with law enforcement and indictments.''
''Our nation followed that approach after the World Trade Center was bombed in 1993,'' he added. ''The matter was handled in the courts and thought by some to be settled.''
But after Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Bush said, ''it is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers.''
If the United States shows weakness over the next decade, Mr. Bush warned, ''the world will drift toward tragedy.''
''This will not happen on my watch,'' he said.
Mr. Bush began his day in Louisville at ISCO Industries, a manufacturer of plastic water and sewer pipes, by moderating a ''conversation'' on the state of the economy with five participants chosen by the White House. All of them said the president's tax cuts had improved their lives. One said that the extra money let him buy glasses for his daughter and that she could now see the blackboard at school.
Despite the good news on stage, the unemployment rate in Kentucky has increased, to 5.4 percent from 4.9 percent, since Mr. Bush took office, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The state's workforce has contracted in that period by 50,000 jobs, to 1.77 million.
In his remarks on the economy, the president also appeared to acknowledge for the first time that he was unlikely to persuade Congress to make all his tax cuts permanent this year. He said he would push for extending cuts like the children's tax credit that expire on Dec. 31.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
