GOLF
Defending Champion Leads in Tucson
Frank Lickliter II, the defending Chrysler Classic of Tucson champion, had four straight birdies late in the first round yesterday and finished with a nine-under-par 63 to begin his title defense with a two-shot lead.
Lickliter nearly had company at the top. Per-Ulrik Johansson had an eagle, eight birdies and a bogey through 17 holes. Then he pushed a 3-wood off the tee into the water on the right of the last hole. After a drop and his approach, Johansson three-putted from 36 feet for a double-bogey 6 that left him two strokes behind.
John Daly and Mark Calcavecchia headed a group of 11 players at 67. (AP)
TENNIS
Venus Williams Loses in Dubai
Venus Williams was beaten, 6-2, 6-3, in the Dubai Open quarterfinals yesterday by the unseeded Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova, who is ranked 28th in the world. The second-seeded Williams was playing in her first tournament in three weeks after a right leg injury. She returned to the WTA circuit at last month's Australian Open after a six-month layoff.
''I'm just out of practice,'' Williams said after a match in which she served poorly and made numerous unforced errors. Top-ranked Justine Henin-Hardenne reached the semifinals, routing eighth-seeded Conchita Martínez, 6-1, 6-0. (AP)
DAVIS CUP PLAY IN FLORIDA -- The Delray Beach Stadium and Tennis Center in Florida will be the site of the Davis Cup quarterfinal tie between the United States and Sweden from April 9 to 11, the United States Tennis Association said yesterday. The United States last played a Davis Cup tie in Florida in 1995, beating France, 4-1, in St. Petersburg. (Reuters)
COLLEGE ATHLETICS
Selmon Resigns as Athletic Director
Lee Roy Selmon resigned yesterday as South Florida's athletic director, citing health problems that he would not disclose. He had held the post since 2001.
Selmon, a member of the college and pro football Halls of Fame, said he would remain with the university as its chief athletic fund-raiser. (AP)
BROADCASTING
Giants Broadcaster Named to Hall
Lon Simmons, one of the original voices of the San Francisco Giants, was selected yesterday to receive the Ford C. Frick award on July 25. Simmons, who called games for San Francisco and Oakland for 41 years before retiring after the 2002 season, will be the 29th broadcaster inducted into the broadcast wing of the Hall of Fame. (AP)
SQUASH
Englishman Retains Title
Top-seeded Peter Nicol of England retained his title last night by beating John White of Scotland, 15-10, 17-15, 15-12, in the Bear Stearns Tournament of Champions in Vanderbilt Hall at Grand Central Terminal.
In a grueling match that covered 65 minutes, Nicol needed a tie breaker to win the second game, then blew a 12-5 lead in the third game as the second-seeded White forged a 12-12 tie before three untimely errors led to Nicol's victory. It was Nicol's third title in the last four years.
