Auto safety regulators said on Thursday that Bridgestone/Firestone North America had begun the first tire recall since the government started using a new early warning system created in the wake of the rollover problems of Ford Explorers equipped with Firestone tires in the late 1990's.
The latest recall again involves both Firestone and the Ford Motor company. About 290,000 Firestone tires will be replaced on Ford Excursion sport utility vehicles; the move comes after accidents that have been linked to five deaths. A Ford official said the tires, which were made at a plant in Joliette, Quebec, were used on about 80,000 Ford Excursions, including 2000, 2001, 2002 and some early 2003 models. The tires are Steeltex Radial A/T tires in size LT265/75R16, Load Range D.
While the size of the recall is small in comparison with the millions of Wilderness tires recalled by Ford and Firestone in 2000 and 2001, it raised fresh questions about Bridgestone/Firestone North America, a Nashville-based division of the Bridgestone Corporation of Japan.
Three years ago, Ford ended its nearly century-long relationship with Firestone after tread separations and failures of Wilderness tires led to 271 deaths in rollovers. Since then, questions have been raised about the 41 million Steeltex tires Firestone produced, which were used on the Excursion, Ford's largest sport utility vehicle, as well as 15-passenger vans, motor homes and ambulances.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ended an inquiry into the Steeltex tires in 2002, concluding they did not perform appreciably worse than a competitor's tires. Later that year, a personal injury lawyer, Joseph Lisoni, pressed the traffic safety agency to reopen its investigation, but his petition was denied last year.
Mr. Lisoni, who represents several plaintiffs who were injured or whose family members were injured or killed in accidents involving Steeltex tires, is seeking to have class-action status granted for all people who bought vehicles with Steeltex tires.
The recall of just one type of Steeltex tire on Thursday, which Firestone referred to as a ''voluntary safety campaign,'' was prompted by the new early warning system, which requires manufacturers to submit a variety of data each quarter to the government. The first data came in December and disclosed three recent accidents that led to five deaths and four other accidents that led to injuries.
''They submit information about warranty claims, crashes, injuries, fatalities, lawsuits and so on,'' said Rae Tyson, a spokesman for the traffic safety agency. ''And all of that together suggested there might be an issue there worth closer examination.''
He added that the agency had been prepared to open a formal investigation before the company took its own action.
''They asked us if we could sit down and review the data and discuss it before we opened the investigation,'' Mr. Tyson said. ''They came in on the 17th of February and, at that point, indicated a willingness to conduct a replacement campaign.''
He said the agency had reviewed data on other Steeltex tires and did not find any indication of a problem.
Chris Karbowiak, a spokeswoman for Firestone, said: ''I'm not sure I want to characterize it as a problem. What we're doing is taking an action based on trend data to avoid a problem in the future.''
She said the issue with one Steeltex tire type had no bearing on others.
''Steeltex is a brand name that covers over 103 different lines of tires -- different applications, different purposes, different vehicles,'' she said.
Mr. Lisoni, the lawyer, said: ''This is a design defect, not a manufacturing defect. The Steeltex is just the big brother of the Wilderness. The Wilderness went on the Explorer, smaller cars and trucks. The Steeltex goes on your bigger trucks, 15-passenger vans, Ford Club Wagons.''
Joan Claybrook, the president of the consumer group Public Citizen and the former head of the traffic safety agency, said the action showed the new system worked, but she added that it raised questions about why the problem was not disclosed by Firestone until it had to turn data over to the government.
Ms. Karbowiak said: ''We had been reviewing the data since the end of last year, beginning of this year, and were in a position to present to them the information that we had. It was clear they were comfortable we were moving this in the right direction.''
Mr. Lisoni says he has three former Firestone workers who are willing to describe the company's practices or have already done so in court. One of them, a Firestone employee for nearly 30 years named George Rios, said in an interview on Thursday that he had worked as a lab technician, a production supervisor and a quality inspector at a plant near Nashville.
He said a drive to reduce costs led the company to cut back on quality technicians and engineers qualified to inspect the tires and compromised the quality of the tires. He also said rubber used in tires was sometimes not tested before being shipped out.
''I had complained to them that the test procedures they used were inadequate,'' he said. ''These issues I was trying to bring up, nobody paid attention to.''
Dan MacDonald, a company spokesman, said Firestone's cost-cutting was ''aimed at productivity improvement, efficiency improvements and quality improvements.''
''Everything that was done was subjected to rigorous testing,'' he said. ''If they didn't have the same or better quality than what we were already using, then we didn't use it.''
