President Hamid Karzai said Thursday that the Taliban had been defeated and that exiled former members of the leadership were appealing daily to his government to be allowed to return to Afghanistan.
Mr. Karzai made his comments at a news conference after meeting with Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld at the presidential palace in Kabul. They came shortly after suspected terrorists shot dead five staff members of an Afghan nonprofit organization, and wounded three more in an area east of Kabul. It was one of the worst attacks in months.
Mr. Rumsfeld was on a one-day visit to Afghanistan, part of a five-country tour, amid speculation that United States forces are preparing a spring offensive to pursue and capture leaders of the Taliban and Al Qaeda in the tribal areas that straddle the Afghan-Pakistani border.
Pakistan mounted a counterterrorist operation against Qaeda militants in the tribal areas this week, detaining 20 suspects, including Arabs and Uzbeks, local newspapers reported. American and Afghan forces have recently deployed to the south and southeast of Afghanistan, apparently in a coordinated operation to try to stem the infiltration of militants from Pakistan.
Neither Mr. Rumsfeld nor Mr. Karzai would comment on impending military operations or the possible capture of Osama bin Laden.
''It will happen when it happens, and I don't believe it's closer or farther at any given moment,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, referring to the possible capture of the leader of Al Qaeda. He refused to say if special forces were being brought from Iraq to aid in the hunt for Mr. bin Laden.
Although Al Qaeda remains a preoccupation, both Mr. Karzai and Mr. Rumsfeld played down the threat from the former Taliban regime, which once harbored the terrorist group and has continued a violent insurgency against the Afghan government for the last year.
''As far as terrorism is concerned, as far as the Taliban is concerned, we strongly believe, with evidence, that they are defeated,'' Mr. Karzai said. ''They are gone.''
''You would be surprised if I disclosed to you how many approaches from the Taliban we have on a daily basis,'' he said, referring to appeals from former supporters. ''Individuals, groups, coming to talk to us to let them back into the country.''
''All those Taliban who are not involved with Al Qaeda or terrorism, or who have not committed terrorism in Afghanistan or elsewhere in the world, are free to return to their country and live a normal life,'' Mr. Karzai said.
He quoted the governor of Uruzgan province, one of the most unstable parts of the country, as saying there was not a Taliban threat there anymore.
Mr. Karzai ascribed much of the reported violence around the country to banditry and armed robbery.
The Afghan foreign minister, Dr. Abdullah, said after the news briefing, that threats from the Taliban of a spring offensive to seize control of border districts and disrupt elections were just ''rhetoric.''
Yet nine aid workers have been slain in the last 11 days, by gunmen apparently opposed to the government and its American backers.
In the latest attack, which occurred Wednesday evening, members of the Afghan nongovernmental organization, the Sanai Development Foundation, were lined up, questioned and then shot.
Five were killed and three escaped. The government has described it as a terrorist attack.
