The one constant about George Foreman as a boxing commentator for HBO Sports -- a job from which he is stepping away after tomorrow night's card -- has been his unpredictability.
Sometimes he contradicts himself. Sometimes he refutes his partners, Jim Lampley and Larry Merchant. His analyses have been savvy, conspiratorial and funny. Last September, he surmised, without proof, that the judges who had awarded Sugar Shane Mosley a unanimous decision over Oscar De La Hoya in a superwelterweight title fight were ''trying to send a message'' to De La Hoya's promoter, Bob Arum.
When Merchant challenged what he felt was Foreman's implication that the judging had been dishonest and asked why the judges would punish De La Hoya, a major moneymaker for boxing, Foreman snapped: ''You don't know boxing. You just speak boxing.''
Merchant held his fire, saying he believed that the ''logic of my position was unassailable.'' But when the telecast ended, Merchant recalled yesterday by telephone, he angrily asked Foreman, ''What don't I know that you do?''
''He refused to say,'' Merchant said, ''and then he said, 'You just don't get it.' I said: 'I don't think you know anything. I'm an old dog, tell me,' but he didn't say anything.''
A week later, during rehearsal for another HBO card, Foreman slipped Merchant a note of apology. ''I wrote back, 'We can agree to disagree, but it shouldn't be personal,' '' Merchant recalled. ''He nodded his head.''
The card tomorrow in Las Vegas features a superfeatherweight title fight between Erik Morales and Jesus Chavez. Foreman made this his final telecast for HBO to honor a commitment to a man who had won a charity auction to be ringside with him during a fight.
''It gives us a chance to give him a proper send-off,'' said Ross Greenburg, president of HBO Sports. The program will include a video tribute to Foreman.
Greenburg said that he had given Foreman, a two-time heavyweight champion, leeway to be himself because of his star power and popularity.
''We thrive on unpredictability and electricity,'' Greenburg said. ''We don't like the bland vanilla telecast. We like our announcers to be candid, funny, direct and to stir it up. George can stir it up. He's a gifted, candid broadcaster who made sparks fly. In that regard, he's irreplaceable.''
It isn't astonishing to learn that people who have worked with Foreman, feel ''continuous wonder about the transformation of his personality,'' as Merchant said, but also see cracks in the jocularity. If he wasn't the thuggish Foreman of his first boxing incarnation, he could be difficult and mercurial.
Merchant said that during a meeting with Floyd Mayweather Jr. before a bout in Grand Rapids, Mich., he questioned the fighter about an injured hand. ''I'd heard he'd been to a hand doctor in Los Angeles the Monday before, and I started to question him,'' Merchant said. ''Floyd was trying to duck the question and the seriousness of a hand injury. George, who believes all fighters have hand problems, and he may be right, sensed that Mayweather didn't want to answer, and said to me, 'Why don't you ask other questions?'
''I said, 'George, don't tell me how to ask a question,' '' Merchant said. ''Then, early in the fight the next night, Mayweather injured his hand so badly he went to the canvas. When that happened, George tapped me on the shoulder as if to say, 'You're right.' But he never came to another fighter's meeting.''
Merchant and Lampley could easily be blindsided by Foreman's views, both during and after a fight. But Merchant said he came to understand that the disagreements he had with Foreman, which generated amusing and puzzling television, were part of each telecast's gestalt. Their divergent views were products of different professional backgrounds: Merchant a career journalist, Foreman a fighter.
''They arose organically, were never planned or something we sought out,'' Merchant said. But, he added: ''On occasion, he would try to use his George Foremanness, his giant presence and his athlete's will to win an argument, to say: 'I'm an athlete, you weren't. I got it, you don't.' ''
Among the candidates to replace Foreman are Emanuel Steward, the trainer and part-time analyst, and Roy Jones Jr., whose stints for HBO have showcased his knowledge but also revealed his unpolished communication skills. Given Jones's stardom, he probably has the edge.
''You look for a certain star appeal,'' said Greenburg, who has no deadline for a decision, ''but we want someone with good instincts, with a fresh point of view.''
Steward will essentially be Foreman's interim replacement, and he could be ringside at a final bout being planned by the 55-year-old Foreman, if he trims down to 225 pounds. If Foreman is bluffing, and if his recent announcement is really intended to publicize his new spring line of clothes for Casual Male Big and Tall, he might instead be seen as the mother hen to a house full of boxers in a reality show being pitched by Lampley.
''The concept does not envision or preclude George Foreman fighting,'' Lampley said.
TV SPORTS
