When Slovenia, an almost idyllic place of just under two million people, nestled cozily between Austria and Italy, enters the European Union in May, it will do so with one of the highest standards of living of any of the 10 new members.
But anticipation of European Union membership is adding a new layer to the debates about the identity of this still-young country and fanning fears of the kind of narrow nationalism that Slovene politicians are usually anxious to deride as typical of the rest of the old Yugoslavia.
This month, members of Ljubljana's city council submitted a petition signed by more than 12,000 people protesting a decision to allow construction of a mosque and Islamic cultural center on the outskirts of the capital. The center would provide the country's 47,000 Muslims with their first mosque.
According to Mihael Jerc, a city councilor and one of the petition's organizers, the building is ''too big'' and the minarets are ''too high.'' They would, he said, mar the baroque architecture and church spires that dominate the skyline of Ljubljana, the capital of this mostly Roman Catholic country. The petition may lead to a citywide referendum.
As if to underline the new fears about identity in Slovenia, which won independence for the first time after a brief war in 1991 against the Yugoslav Army, the national Parliament is debating another possible referendum -- this one on the fate of former Yugoslav citizens, mostly from Bosnia and Serbia.
Officials estimate that more than 18,000 of these people -- known locally as the ''erased'' -- failed to extend their residency rights shortly after Slovenia declared independence in June, 1991.
The country's constitutional court ruled in 2000 that these former citizens should have those rights restored, and reinforced the point last April with a ruling that backdated the rights to February 26, 1992, when they were first removed.
Opposition parties, which have long sought to make a dent on the center-left government that has governed Slovenia since independence, seized on the issue, questioning the loyalty to the state of the country's 18,000 Yugoslavs.
At least one party in the governing coalition has also taken up the battle cry, arguing that these ex-Yugoslavs opposed Slovenia's independence.
''Why should those who hoped for the Yugoslav Army to return be given certain privileges?'' said Andrej Umek, a senior member of the Slovene People's Party, which is part of the governing coalition.
Both projected referendumsappear to be designed by politicians ''to raise hatred and intolerance,'' Matjaz Hanzek, Slovenia's human rights ombudsman, said in an interview.
There is some tentative evidence that the message may be striking a chord on the eve of Slovenia's entry into the European Union, which in May will become a 25-nation entity, far bigger than the old Yugoslav federation that Slovenes often complained rode roughshod over their interests.
The opposition Slovenian Democratic party, which is leading the campaign to prevent the ''erased'' from getting any financial compensation, has apparently gained some support, analysts at Ljubljana University said.
One poll taken by the university in December showed that close to 50 percent of Slovenes believed foreigners should not enjoy the same rights as they did.
Mr. Hanzek said that in a span of a few months Slovenia had shattered its reputation for tolerance. ''The same politicians'' that liked to distance themselves from the troubles affecting other former Yugoslav states, he said, ''are acting like other politicians in the Balkans.''
Supporters of both referendums, on the other hand, stress the need to preserve Slovenian identity. ''We are a very young country,'' said Mr. Jerc. ''Slovenes are very sensitive about something that might change that balance.''
Musafer Djokic, a leader of the Islamic community in Slovenia, said the debate revealed traits that existed in Slovenia long before European Union membership was an issue.
''There is a prejudice in general against all people from other parts of former Yugoslavia,'' he said. ''They think they are more advanced, blue-blooded, and European. It's pure racial bigotry.''
Slovenia's Muslims come mostly from Bosnia, from where they were recruited to work in Slovenian factories.
Miso Alkalaj, a prominent Slovenian mathematician and political commentator, said the opposition was unlikely to let the debate die down soon. With membership of the European Union foremost on people's minds, he argued, politicians had until recently carefully avoided nationalist causes.
But now that membership was guaranteed, political leaders could show their true colors, he said. ''We are not more tolerant than any other Balkan nations,'' he said. ''We have just had less opportunity to show it.''
