After a proceeding with some of the contentiousness of his political career but far lower stakes, former Senator Robert G. Torricelli was found guilty on Thursday of leaving the scene of a crime when a car he was riding in hit another car in a minimart shopping center in August.
The judge in the case, Richard P. Cushing, fined Mr. Torricelli $200, the minimum, but agreed to stay a mandatory six-month suspension of his driver's license pending an appeal of his decision in municipal court here.
Mr. Torricelli had insisted throughout the trial, which began in December, that it was his former wife, Susan Holloway, and not he who was driving his Jeep Cherokee when it struck a parked car in August.
Moreover, the two said on the witness stand that the other car had received no damage.
The judge, however, criticized Mr. Torricelli and Ms. Holloway for not trying to look for the car's owner or to leave a note, as the law requires, and hinted that Mr. Torricelli thought the law did not apply to him.
''Mr. Torricelli, for whatever reason, said: 'Oh, it's an old car. I'm not going to stop. I'm out of here,''' the judge said.
After the hearing, Mr. Torricelli talked briefly to reporters on his way out of the courtroom.
''I'm very disappointed,'' he said. ''This continues New Jersey's longest examination of a fender bender in a supermarket parking lot accident in which there was no reason to believe there was any damage.''
He said that when the police came to his house after a witness identified his car, he offered to pay any damages immediately. His insurance company eventually paid $700 in damages.
''Susan Holloway admitted immediately that she was the driver of the automobile and it was simply a mistake,'' he said. ''It was the kind of thing that happens to people in supermarket parking lots every day. Two cars simply bumped and there was a minimum of damage. There was no reason to believe there was any damage.''
The incident was indeed minor and the stuff that thousands of drivers deal with every day, with little fanfare or court time.
Mr. Torricelli's case, in contrast, attracted such a throng of reporters that the prosecution decided to move the proceedings from Lambertville to a larger courthouse in nearby West Amwell.
Mr. Torricelli, a Bergen County Democrat, was one of the state's most visible political figures before a letter of admonishment from the Senate Ethics Committee doomed his re-election bid in October 2002.
This case might have been dispensed with much more quickly if Mr. Torricelli had agreed to plea bargain to a lesser charge of failure to report, as many drivers do.
But Mr. Torricelli would agree to that only if the prosecutor, Philip J. Faherty III, would say that it was Ms. Holloway who was driving.
Mr. Faherty refused, so the case went to trial.
Mr. Torricelli and Ms. Holloway had spent the morning together, going from his home in nearby Rosemont to a coffee shop in Lambertville. Then they stopped at the market.
While Mr. Torricelli and Ms. Holloway said it was she who drove out of the lot, a witness, Kenneth Nanni, a general contractor who was remodeling a porch adjacent to the parking lot, said that he saw Mr. Torricelli at the wheel when the Jeep backed into the car. He testified that he jotted down the license plate number as Mr. Torricelli drove off.
The judge said he had no reason to disbelieve Mr. Nanni, who was not even aware that the driver was Mr. Torricelli until later and seemed to have nothing to gain or lose by reporting what he knew.
He also said he believed the store owner, Edward O'Leary, whose car was the one hit. Mr. O'Leary, who was working in the store, also said he saw a male driver in the car.
That left only Mr. Torricelli, who the judge said had a good driving record, and Ms. Holloway, his ex-wife who also works as a political consultant and fund-raiser.
''Would she take a hit for Senator Torricelli?'' the judge asked. ''I don't know. They are very close. She is his former wife. They were together in the morning.''
He mentioned that the two had worked together on political campaigns in the past and seemed very united, although admitting to being the driver meant that Ms. Holloway risked being charged with leaving the scene of the accident herself.
''The answer is that there could be an incentive for her to wish to help him out, although the sacrifice she was making was considerable,'' the judge said. ''All things considered, in this case my conclusion is that Senator Torricelli was in fact the driver of the car. He is guilty.''
