The other day I found myself in a cab driving up the F.D.R. Drive in Manhattan. To my right, wintry and wind-swept in the middle of the East River, appeared the southern tip of Roosevelt Island. I remembered back to July, when I found myself on that same island, its southern end then green and summery. I had been at the starting point for the British director Deborah Warner's ''Angel Project,'' part of the Lincoln Center Festival. Audience members were sent off by themselves on staggered rounds, following directions from place to place, at each of which they were greeted by intimations of angels.
At the time, I was fascinated by Ms. Warner's piece of metropolitan installation art but not moved by it. Some bits were really clever, like finding container after container of tattered Christian books inside an abandoned Peep-o-Rama on 42nd Street, or a spectacular room full of white angel-feathers, or the final vista from an upper floor of the Chrysler Building of the city below, with actors playing angels sitting in the windows, poised wearily for flight, and with the distant view of the southern tip of Roosevelt Island to the east. Oddly, I missed the solitary missionary-lady-angel standing on the island in the middle of Times Square, though I saw her later and wondered who she was. Other intimations seemed to me too subtle or too obvious.
Yet as I whizzed along the F.D.R. Drive I realized how much Ms. Warner's imagery had stuck with me, how much resonance it had. And then I began to think of the ever-presence of angels now among us, and how they might best be manifested -- short of literally -- in our secular modern age.
No point in making a comprehensive list of modern-day angelic manifestations; anyone could add more. But just for example, there was of course ''Angels in America,'' which enjoyed a new life this season on HBO. One thought back to Wim Wenders's film ''Wings of Desire,'' with Bruno Ganz as a sad-eyed angel in the modern world. ''Charlie's Angels'' brings another, perhaps less austerely religious, twist to the idea. More literally, ''Touched by an Angel,'' about angels in modern dress doing good deeds, was a popular television show in the 90's.
Olivier Messiaen's opera ''St. François d'Assise,'' with its high-lying soprano angel (Dawn Upshaw in Salzburg, Laura Aikin in San Francisco), has been performed with ever-increasing frequency on stages around the world. Gerard Mortier's Ruhr Triennale festival last summer in Germany had angels as a recurrent theme, topped by the American video artist Bill Viola's amazing installation in a gigantic decommissioned natural-gas tank called ''Five Angels for the Millennium.'' And then we have the television show ''Angel,'' a ''Buffy the Vampire Slayer'' spinoff with David Boreanaz as a vampire with a heart.
By now we've come a long way from feathery apparitions full of light and goodness, protecting their charges (guardian angels) or making apocalyptic prophecies: Tony Kushner's angel has plenty of imposing biblical precedents extended into art by the likes of Dante and Milton. Read up on angels and you discover a whole cosmology of creatures: levels and inner and outer circles and cast-out (''dark'') angels, headed by Satan himself, with Mr. Boreanaz as a foot soldier. Roman Catholic and Orthodox angels. Jewish and Muslim angels. By and large, mainstream American Protestantism has been less concerned with angelic iconography, although Mr. Kushner's Mormon angel proved that they still have life in the heartland.
Let's stick with luminosity, of the kind celebrated by Ms. Warner and Messiaen, and extending beyond angels proper to all kinds of supernatural apparitions. One explanation for their current omnipresence, Messiaen himself might have hoped, would be a return of spiritual fervor, in direct challenge to what I called above our secular modern age. Certainly the rise of religious extremism all over the world might explains angels' new-found ubiquity.
Another explanation, both for renewed religious extremism and for the mostly benign angels in our serious and popular art, might be the sheer scary confusion in which we live. Mr. Kushner, when he first wrote ''Angels in America,'' had the AIDS epidemic to worry about, and it hasn't gone away. Now we have terrorism and economic crises and avian flu and SARS and God knows what else.
John Simon, in a typical rant, denounced Ms. Warner's ''Angel Project'' as an artsified capitulation to the worst instincts of what he called ''a society adrift,'' referring to television shows and movies ''featuring angels in the hokiest, trashiest patent-medicine-mongering way: snake oil for the mindless mind.'' As usual, I take a rather more forgiving view of things than Mr. Simon does. As a card-carrying secular humanist, I still find feathery angel imagery comforting or disturbing or thrilling, in the right hands. But whose hands are the right ones?
The best answer, I think, is artists who practice indirection. Perhaps not so indirect as Ms. Warner's sometimes cryptic allusions, but nowhere near so obvious as the latest computer-manipulated filmic wizardry. We respond to the miraculous when it's edified by art. As with Jupiter and Semele, or Lohengrin and Elsa, maybe a direct experience of the divine is too overwhelming. Or maybe it's just that over-literal art looks cheesy. To see Emma Thompson in the television ''Angels in America'' flailing about melodramatically, abetted by all those special effects, was less overwhelming than Ellen McLaughlin crashing through the ceiling on Broadway, hovering in mid-air and dazzling with light. To see an image of Christ on the cross in a Gothic cathedral may be more moving than Mel Gibson's hyper-real Hollywood actor in ''The Passion of the Christ,'' lashed and scourged.
Ms. McLaughlin's impact was augmented by a kind of technology refined for the modern age but harking back to the birth of theater: the actor suspended by a wire or a rope. Her rig had been upgraded from, say, Mary Martin's as Peter Pan, by a harness that allowed her to spin in mid-air. Since then, choreographers have best exploited that technology, usually provided by Flying by Foy. There was Trisha Brown's suspended dancer in the Prologue of her production of Monteverdi's opera ''Orfeo'' five years ago at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, an angel in all but name. And just recently there have been Martha Clarke's elegantly flying Fairies in her staging of Shakespeare's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' at the American Repertory Theater at Harvard. Again, not angels per se, more Willis out of the ballet ''Giselle,'' but dazzling in their airborne delicacy and grace.
Seeing Ms. Clarke's dancers, twisting and turning in the air, taking impossibly long balletic leaps, landing on a dime in whatever position they wanted, all the while manipulated by very visible technicians hauling on ropes in the wings, was pretty darn close to miraculous. It was as if Ms. McLaughlin's angel had been at last freed from all earthly constraints. And it took the mysterious alchemy of the theater, not the legerdemain of modern-day film technology, to make me, at least, almost believe.
REVERBERATIONS
