A few old friends dropped in on an old friend for dinner the other night, after a long absence. This sort of thing happens in New York all the time. New experiences come calling. We lose track, and then catching up is hard. It's awkward.
Particularly in the case of Zoë, the once rollicking ''new American'' restaurant that Thalia and Stephen Loffredo opened in 1992, when the economy was accelerating back up from the crash of '87, and SoHo was still only on the cusp of becoming a mall. Back then, Zoë's open kitchen and wood-fired oven were something new for Manhattan, something amazing and Californian and cool. Back then, when Zoë had both those and an impudent, brave, all-American wine list, the restaurant was on the knife's edge of hip. Really.
Now, of course, there are a lot of bag-toting tourists eating fried calamari at lunch and half-full desolation in the dining room at dinner, and even if the food isn't ever bad, it does not often play well in the mouth. There's still that staggeringly expensive, though very good, wine list. That wood oven is still there, still delightful and warm and inviting after more than a decade. But the restaurant is like a Broadway actor performing in summer-stock Sondheim. It needs an infusion of verve, and audiences that know what they're seeing.
An example. Why are the lunchtime pizzas -- once Puckish in design, crisped and delightful and thin -- served so woefully underdone now? Is it because they're easier to fold that way, and eat in the manner of something from a Ray's on the street corner?
Or is it because they're made by rote, by clock punchers eager for the end of the shift? Either way it's depressing. Zoë can do much better, and does.
There is on the dinner menu a perfectly excellent rendition of slow-roasted duck. It has crispy skin and meltingly tender meat and is served above a pretty and flavorful stir fry of Chinese long beans (very good), lotus root (bad idea), shiitakes (well, a shiitake, to be precise) and shunkyo (it's a kind of radish). Absent the lotus root, and served alongside some delicious polenta fries, it's the sort of entree that could be a calling card: a steak frites for the new American bistro. But ask a waiter about it. ''It's O.K.,'' ours said before the meal, looking blank.
Ten minutes later a busboy brought the table a plate of fried calamari.
''Yours?'' he asked. We shook our heads, no.
Zoë, 90 Prince Street, between Broadway and Mercer Street, SoHo, (212) 966-6722. Entrees, $17.75 to $29.75.
Diner's Journal
