ON this stretch of beach at the ruffled edge of the Caribbean Sea, 80 miles south of Cancún, visitors speak a language all their own, the lingo of Iyengar, ashtanga and anusara yoga. They are comfortable with entreaties to ''leave your conditioned mind at the door'' or ''melt your boundaries.'' They can balance on one leg in the warrior three pose and do a headstand, and they aspire to a full lotus. When the bell rings for meditation, they sit upright for 20 minutes, intent on the sound of their breathing.
Always a counterculture haven, this six miles of rutted road, on the Yucatán Peninsula between the Maya ruins of Tulum and the 1.3 million-acre Sian Ka'an Biosphere Reserve, has lately become Yoga Central for tourists eager to limber their bodies and quiet their minds -- and maybe also surf the waves, sunbathe topless and sample tropical concoctions like tequila and tamarind juice.
The epicenter of this yoga zone is a 25-acre beachfront resort called Maya Tulum, which has made itself the destination of choice for high-profile yoga teachers and their students by building state-of-the-art studios, auditioning massage therapists from around the world and organizing ecotourist excursions.
And in the last 18 months, almost every hotel in the area -- there are about 20 -- has taken note of Maya Tulum's success by building yoga halls, putting massage tables under coconut palms, hiring a Maya shaman to preside at a weekly sweat lodge or offering treatments with names like Mayan Clay Body Mask With Ocean Lagoon Watsu. At any one time, there are probably more than 300 people in the yoga zone, with scores of them doing things like trying to lift themselves cross-legged from the floor with just their hands in the scale pose.
At Maya Tulum and its imitators, visiting yoga students sleep in thatched-roof cabanas, without telephones or electricity and with plumbing so delicate it can't even handle toilet paper. There is no CNN or Weather Channel. The news on any given day is whether the mangoes are sweet and the fish running. The forecast comes from the color of the sky, the crest of the waves and the wind in the palm fronds.
The land for the resort was bought two decades ago by Pauline Clegg, a San Diego real estate developer and yoga fan who had decided to cash out in California and reinvent herself as a hotelier in the Yucatán. To continue her yoga practice, she needed to import teachers.
So Ms. Clegg invited some she knew to visit, soon hired a full-time staff to run classes for her guests and eventually filled at least half of her 44 rooms with students on weeklong retreats. More casual yoga fans can drop in on classes with the permission of visiting teachers or choose one of several classes open to the public each day.
Many of the students who keep this mellow resort running at close to capacity from December to April are jet-setters who could easily afford the lavish hotels and noisy night life of Cancún and its environs, virgin territory 30 years ago and now a Maya theme park. Others are middle-aged hippies who still live off the grid.
Then there is the larger group in between, baby boomers who once slept in unkempt vans and got stoned under the stars. Now they are successful professionals, most of them women, with grown children, aging parents and intimations of mortality. Some practice yoga seriously. Others are newer to the discipline that has blown across America, from right-brain California to left-brain New York during the last half-dozen years.
On the bulletin board of their yoga studios in Denver, Boston or Washington are announcements of retreats in the tropics with their favorite teachers, here or in Belize or in Hawaii. At Maya Tulum, they have paid $1,300 to $2,000 a week, meals and classes included, to study with well-known teachers. They include Baron Baptiste, the Massachusetts inventor of power yoga boot camps; Tim Miller, a Californian who was one of the first ashtanga teachers in the United States; Jonny Kest, an ashtanga disciple from Michigan; and Jenni Fox and Paul Gould, teachers of the new anusara method who were among the first to come to Maya Tulum. Guests can also choose five-day packages or shorter à la carte stays, at nightly rates of $75 to $180 depending on season and accommodations.
Its growing yoga business has made Maya Tulum the envy of other places in the area, from the rudimentary clusters of four cabanas with no power and smelly septic systems to the newly built palapa palaces with private staircases to the beach and deep bathtubs carved from Maya hardwood (but still with rudimentary plumbing and no electricity). About the only holdout is Dan McGettigan, for 18 years the owner of Zamas, a hotel and restaurant next to Maya Tulum. ''I'm tempted to put up a sign saying, 'No Yoga; No Spa,' '' Mr. McGettigan said.
But even he concedes that Ms. Clegg has found a way to keep guests coming in the months from June to October, when the 90-degree temperatures and 90 percent humidity usually drive everyone but a few intrepid Italian tourists away. Her solution: book Mr. Baptiste, a rock star among teachers, with as many as 80 students packed shoulder to shoulder in the studio. Mr. Baptiste's sessions are full, even in the stifling summer months. But average occupancy in low season is 60 percent, despite Ms. Clegg's pitch that summer yoga here is much like the popular Bikram technique, taught in studios heated to 105 degrees.
FOR serious students, like Ginna Fleming, 72, of Mill Valley Calif.; Bee Elmore, 60, of Carbondale, Colo.; and Stephanie Carlson, 59, of Vancouver, British Columbia, mornings in the yoga zone began with sunrise walks on the beach. Then there is a two-and-a-half-hour prebreakfast workout, followed by more yoga in the afternoons.
Each visiting teacher, whether at the hotel for a single week each year or for several, has a loyal following. On a recent retreat led by Ms. Fox and Mr. Gould, the three women, who met here several years ago, spent the morning sessions working on their form in one of the thatched-roofed yoga studios stocked with sticky mats, blocks, straps and blankets. Were their feet rooted? Their shoulder blades down? Their thighs rotating inward and their tailbones tucked? Then it's on to more challenging poses that seem impossible to a reluctant first-timer like Mary Ann Benson from Hermosa Beach, Calif., who was dragged here by a group of childhood friends. By week's end, even Ms. Benson was hoisting herself into a wheel, a backbend that starts on the floor, or begging her hips to open in the screaming pigeon position.
Late-afternoon sessions are for winding down in restorative poses like deep backbends supported by bolsters or blankets, a headstand against the wall, or a reclining posture with legs up the wall to experience being upside down. Darkness falls and candles flicker beside a single hibiscus blossom on the makeshift altar. The class tends to thin before the lengthy meditation, when Type A personalities struggle for stillness in a cross-legged seated position, trying to ignore an itchy nose or a chattering mind.
Retreats are not for everyone, and a good number of long-weekenders, drawn to Tulum by quick direct flights from the United States and cheap beachfront accommodations, only dip into the yoga zone. Jana Kolpen, a writer and illustrator from the Upper West Side, stayed at Maya Tulum for a few days recently, steps from the Caribbean in a cabana, where she woke each morning to the rising sun. While the students at Ms. Fox and Mr. Gould's retreat were in the yoga hall for five hours a day, Ms. Kolpen took what she described as a pleasant yoga class each morning. Then she got a massage, read on the beach or visited the ruins.
Guests staying up and down the beach can sample classes and treatments wherever they chose. Some of the newer yoga hotels have been aggressive. Cabañas Copal, for one, has been adding classes and treatments quickly and even started offering a free class to undercut other hotels that charge $10 to drop in.
If yoga is about quieting down, there is seemingly no better area to do it. Ms. Fox and Mr. Gould, for instance, tell students to ''learn to be with the wind, rooted but flexible.'' If a sudden noise interrupts evening meditation, it is likely to be a coconut hitting the roof of the yoga hall. And who needs Ambien at night when the waves are a lullaby?
BUT even here, change seems inevitable, as development spreads down the coast from Cancún, which many locals characterize as an ecological disaster foisted on Mexico by its government. Longtime visitors to the region recall when the only commerce was a single souvenir stand outside the Maya ruins in Tulum. Now parts of that ancient city, surrounded by curio and snack shops, are closed to tourists because foot traffic has taken its toll.
Tulum has become a bustling tourist spot where every store seems to sell the same sombreros, turquoise jewelry, peasant blouses and bars of Mexican chocolate. Until two years ago, there was no bank. Last spring, the first supermarket and traffic light arrived. Now sidewalks are being poured and utility poles, as yet unstrung with wire, march southward toward the hotels that now get by with generators or solar power.
New hotels are racing to build two-story cabanas or stucco buildings in the Spanish Colonial style, completely legal, of course, but out of context. Older hotels with more property have put small lots on the market, potentially crowding the beachfront. Each day brings gossip of zoning inspectors turning a blind eye to owners who bribe them. And unnamed movie stars are said to be buying land in the few pockets of the biosphere not under United Nations protection.
Maya Tulum has evolved as well, adding amenities each year: private bathrooms instead of a shared bathhouse; a generator that keeps the lights on and ceiling fans spinning until midnight; beds, instead of hammocks, draped in diaphanous mosquito netting; tiled floors where there was once sand.
Ms. Fox and Mr. Gould have watched the incremental changes and assume bigger ones are coming. ''The old-timers have fought it,'' Ms. Fox said. ''But how long can they fight? If someone offered Pauline $10 million for this place, she'd take it in a heartbeat.''
For her part, Ms. Clegg isn't willing to speculate about offers she might not be able to refuse. And living in the present, a common goal of yogis, keeps her from wringing her hands about the encroachments of commercialization. But she says her days here are surely numbered. ''You can't say anything is permanent down here,'' Ms. Clegg said. ''We're in a window of grace. We have this place in this moment. To fight it doesn't feel good. Isn't that what yoga is all about?''
JOURNEYS
