In a stinging setback for the Oracle Corporation, the Justice Department and seven states on Thursday filed a lawsuit to block Oracle's $9.4 billion hostile takeover of PeopleSoft Inc. The Justice Department said the deal would violate federal antitrust laws, reduce competition and lead to higher prices for customers.
''We took this action because it's the right thing to do to protect competition in an important market,'' said R. Hewitt Pate, assistant attorney general of antitrust, in a conference call after the decision was announced. The civil lawsuit was filed in the Federal District Court in San Francisco.
Oracle, based in Redwood Shores, Calif., and PeopleSoft, based in Pleasanton, Calif., are direct competitors in selling software used by businesses to manage their payroll, human resources and accounting operations.
The two companies, along with the market leader, SAP of Germany, are the only ones that currently sell the highly integrated complex programs used by the largest enterprises, Mr. Pate said.
A merger of Oracle and PeopleSoft, the Justice Department said, would reduce the market to only two competitors, leading to higher prices and fewer choices.
The announcement of the decision, which had been expected by next Tuesday, was made before the close of the market. Oracle's shares rose 9 cents, to close at $13.28 on the Nasdaq. PeopleSoft's shares fell 35 cents, to close at $21.78 in heavy trading.
Because PeopleSoft announced on Feb. 11 that Justice Department staff attorneys were recommending that Mr. Pate block the deal, analysts said that expectation of the move was already reflected in the price of PeopleSoft's shares.
The agency was joined in the suit by the attorneys general of Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New York, North Dakota and Texas. They contend the merger would damage competition in their states.
State governments are big buyers of products from both Oracle and PeopleSoft, with investments in both product lines amounting to hundreds of millions of dollars in some cases. A consolidation of the two vendors was seen as potentially threatening the investments in software made by users of PeopleSoft products.
Eliot Spitzer, New York's attorney general, said in a statement that his state joined the lawsuit because, ''Without PeopleSoft in the market, Oracle would lose the incentive to offer lower prices, better services and more innovative products.''
Lawrence J. Ellison, chief executive of Oracle, has consistently argued that the market for business enterprise software is highly competitive, with hundreds of companies taking part. He has repeatedly pointed to the prospect of the Microsoft Corporation's entering the market as evidence that there is plenty of room for competitors.
Mr. Pate, however, said the agency's lawyers did not consider the possibility of future competitors in making their decision.
Oracle said that it planned to ''vigorously'' challenge the Justice Department's lawsuit and that the agency's claim that there were only three vendors competing in the market was inaccurate. ''We believe that the government's case is without basis in fact or in law, and we look forward to proving this in court,'' said Jim Finn, an Oracle spokesman.
The company said on Thursday that it was ending its proxy fight to control the PeopleSoft board by withdrawing its slate of nominees to the board because the litigation would extend beyond the PeopleSoft stockholders' meeting on March 25. It also extended its $26-a-share tender offer for PeopleSoft stock to June 25.
Craig A. Conway, chief executive of PeopleSoft, urged Oracle executives to withdraw the takeover bid. ''Now that the antitrust day of reckoning has arrived and the Justice Department has announced its decision to sue to block the transaction, it is time for Oracle to abandon its efforts to acquire the company,'' Mr. Conway said.
He said in an interview that substantial evidence gathered during the Justice Department's eight-month investigation supported the antitrust claims that PeopleSoft had raised. If Oracle pursues its bid, Mr. Conway said, ''I think it would confirm what we've said all along that their intent all along has been to harm PeopleSoft.''
The European Commission is reviewing the merger as well and is expected to issue its decision by May 11.
The Justice Department has challenged large mergers before, as in the merger of the First Data Corporation, an electronic payment company, with Concord EFS in April 2003. But in that case, First Data altered its business practices and the deal proceeded and was completed yesterday.
Mr. Pate said the agency never discussed a settlement deal with Oracle, one that might, for example, require the company to shed part of its business. ''At no time was any settlement proposal brought forth by Oracle,'' Mr. Pate said.
The prospects of a settlement's being reached were unlikely anyway, antitrust experts say, because there are no companies large enough to compete effectively with the remaining two.
Besides, the value to customers lies in their current ability to buy integrated ''suites'' of software from either of the three big vendors, said Thomas Brislin, an antitrust attorney with Coudert Brothers in New York.
Oracle started its takeover bid last June, offering $16 a share. The offer was made just four days after PeopleSoft announced that it would acquire J.D. Edwards, a smaller business software company. Since then, Oracle has raised its offer twice, most recently to $26 a share.
Charles DiBona, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, said Oracle should not fight the lawsuit because it would be a tremendous distraction for Oracle's executives, taking away time and energy that would be better spent focused on the business. ''A federal court case is going to be expensive, and it's going to be time-consuming,'' Mr. DiBona said. ''It's going to involve management, and those are the people who should be pursuing a strategy for Oracle, not pursuing PeopleSoft.''
''Could they win? Maybe,'' he said. ''Should they try? From a business point of view, probably not.''
