The federal judge overseeing the trial of Martha Stewart did not drop one of the most serious charges against her, securities fraud, from the proposed instructions to the jury that she shared with lawyers last night, according to a person briefed on the draft document.
Lawyers for Ms. Stewart have asked Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan to acquit their client on all charges. But they specifically took aim at the securities fraud charge, which rests on a relatively novel application of federal securities laws.
The final version of the juror instructions will be the subject of a closed meeting of the judge with prosecutors and defense lawyers this morning.
Ms. Stewart and her former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, have both been charged with conspiring to hinder a government investigation into a stock sale by Ms. Stewart in December 2001.
Prosecutors have argued that Ms. Stewart received a tip from Mr. Bacanovic that she should sell her shares in ImClone Systems, a company that was then headed by her friend, Dr. Samuel D. Waksal.
Prosecutors further contend that Ms. Stewart lied to investigators about the reasons she sold her 3,928 shares.
The securities fraud charge, which names only Ms. Stewart, is less straightforward, and several lawyers observing the case have predicted that it will be dropped. Ms. Stewart's defense team will probably ask again that the charge be dropped at today's meeting.
Several lawyers also noted that if the jury convicts Ms. Stewart of securities fraud, making her eligible for a prison sentence of up to 10 years, the judge could still decide to drop the charge even after the verdict.
Prosecutors are applying securities law in an unusual way, arguing that when Ms. Stewart asserted her innocence in public statements in the months after the stock sale, she committed fraud because she made false and misleading statements that she knew would be relied on by investors in her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
If the securities fraud charge survives, it may have some unintended effects, said Mark A. Kirsch, a securities lawyer at Clifford Chance in New York.
''When the government, with all its power, charges an individual, that individual should be able to shout his innocence from the rooftops without fear of incurring a further charge for doing so,'' Mr. Kirsch said. The law may support the charge, but if the charge is upheld, it may have a ''chilling effect'' on defendants who are executives in public companies, he added.
Lawyers representing Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic concluded their presentations to the jury earlier this week, and the judge said on Wednesday that after jury instructions were prepared today, closing arguments will be made on Monday and Tuesday.
She also said she would read the final version of the instructions to jurors next Wednesday, before they begin their deliberations.
