THIS is the quiet season at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in the financial district. Most of the time, the only visitor is a cold wind blowing from the East River.
Wait till the weather turns warm, workers in the neighborhood say; you'll see more visitors then. Some, they say, will lay flowers at the base of the memorial's wall, a long block of glass the color of an old-style Coke bottle. Etched into it are words reflecting the hope and the sadness of Americans who fought in that misbegotten conflict.
But now there is mainly the wind.
Men and women from adjoining buildings on Water Street take smoke breaks on the memorial plaza, but they do not go near the wall.
Maybe by now they have read the etched excerpts from letters and diaries a thousand times. Maybe they don't care. Maybe they do not even know what they are looking at. For a while, that was true of one young man who began working at 55 Water Street just before Thanksgiving. It was only a month ago, he said, that he learned what the pale-green wall is all about.
It is, he discovered, about Pfc. Daniel E. Bailey. Private Bailey wrote to his mother on Sept. 6, 1966, about the ''pitiful'' children he had seen in an orphanage. ''I may have killed some of their parents,'' he wrote, ''and it makes me feel sick to know they have to go on with nothing.''
It is about Pfc. Richard E. Marks. He wrote a ''Dear Mom'' letter on Dec. 18, 1965, two months before he was killed in action. ''If I am killed while carrying out this mission, I want no one to cry or mourn for me,'' he said. ''I want people to hold their heads high and be proud of me for the job I did.''
It is about Capt. Michael C. Rush. He wrote to someone named Joanie on May 15, 1970, confessing to being ''really confused about everything,'' and wondering ''where does man find the hatred to do the things he does.''
It is about Sgt. William Nelson. ''Dear Folks'' is how he began a letter on July 30, 1969. Sergeant Nelson had just arrived in Vietnam and seen some of the men he was replacing. ''They seem very sad even though they are going home,'' he wrote. ''I guess they saw a lot.''
Perhaps it was a foolish assumption, but the thought arose that the memorial might attract more people, even on a day unwarmed by a poor ghost of a sun.
We are, after all, only days from the Democratic presidential primary in New York. This is a campaign in which, at least for now, it seems to matter a great deal who did what in that distant war: who fought it and who didn't, who (if you absorb the harshest name-calling) was AWOL and who was a Ho Chi Minh dupe.
''Vietnam was such a defining time for those of us of that generation -- everybody was caught up in it,'' said Vincent McGowan, who serves on the mayor's Veterans Advisory Board and is the founding president of the Manhattan chapter of Vietnam Veterans of America. In the late 60's, he was a Marine staff sergeant.''I don't think we're going to get away from this,'' Mr. McGowan said, ''until we're all dead.''
SOMETHING else should be remembered, said John Rowan, a former Air Force sergeant and president of the New York State Council of the Vietnam veterans group. In John Kerry, Mr. Rowan said, ''we have the first war hero in a while'' who stands a good chance of becoming president.
There was, of course, the race run by Senator John McCain four years ago, but he did not get far. This time may be different, especially considering the quite different service records of Mr. Kerry and President Bush.
''The war,'' Mr. Rowan said, ''is going to be refought all over again.''
Mr. McGowan is uncomfortable with the ''what did you do in the war, Daddy'' skirmishing. But like Mr. Rowan, he says the Kerry candidacy provides an opportunity to focus attention on veterans' issues, especially health care. It is sad but true, he said, that ''the United States forgets its veterans so quickly.''
The soldiers fighting in Iraq may eventually find that out for themselves.
Someday, a memorial to their sacrifice may rise. Perhaps, like the Vietnam wall downtown, it will bear their reflections. Perhaps some will share the despair of Army Specialist Robert R. Riggan, who wrote to someone named Merle on Nov. 3, 1968, about ''the human loss and terror which can never be measured in pretty medals.'' ''Humans,'' he said, ''can be such damn fools.''
And perhaps, if an Iraq war memorial is built, a day in late February will come when we can see if anyone visits other than the cold wind.
NYC
