The Bush administration plans to announce that, in a step to lessen the dangers of land mines, it will end the use of long-lasting mines in warfare and instead concentrate on mines that go inert within hours or days, an administration official said Thursday.
The official said the policy would be announced on Friday, along with a doubling in American assistance to other countries to remove mines remaining from past conflicts. The increase will bring such aid to $70 million a year, the official said.
There will be limited exceptions in the switch to so-called inert land mines, but the official would not specify them.
The United States has had an extensive program to remove land mines in Afghanistan, Cambodia and the Balkans, where combatants sowed farmlands and fields with mines as a deterrent against invading forces in conflicts that have been over for years.
Despite the latest steps, the administration official said, there are no plans for the United States to sign the international treaty to ban land mines, which has been in effect since 1997. The International Campaign to Ban Landmines, which won the 1997 Nobel Peace Prize, was instrumental in getting the treaty signed.
The Clinton administration, yielding to concerns of the American military, decided against signing the treaty out of concern that in some limited cases, particularly South Korea, land mines have been a part of a policy of deterrence, in that case against thousands of North Korean troops near the border.
The Bush administration has said that a policy of using inert mines might ease the problem of clearing mines that pose a threat to civilians. Those that remain intact are known as persistent land mines.
''We are going to move ourselves to use, with possibly limited exceptions, land mines that go inert in a period of hours or days,'' the administration official said. ''We'll be the first ones to end the use of persistent land mines, both for antipersonnel and antivehicle land mines.''
The official said the United States would also make its mines detectable so they can be removed when a conflict is over. But he did not say what would prevent an enemy from detecting them during a conflict.
It was not clear where the United States continues to use mines, outside of South Korea, or specifically whether any were used in Iraq or Afghanistan.
Mines have been in use at least since the Civil War. In 1980, the United States signed a Convention on Conventional Weapons, regulating the use of certain land mines. Since the 1980's, the United States has also adopted a policy of helping nations find mines on their soil.
Among other actions taken by the United States in recent years was the removal of antipersonnel and antitank mines from the perimeter of its military base in Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, starting in 1996.
The United States has also announced the destruction of millions of mines, while saying that some needed to be retained for training, research and the defense of South Korea.
