O.K., your personal jury is still out on whether carbohydrates are good or bad, and whether high-fat diets are a road to slimness or coronaries. But one thing you still believe: protein is good.
So, what do you do? Eat steak and eggs and pray you are right? Or, hedge your bets and go for soy?
It is not hard to guess which choice the Solae Company, a big maker of soy additives based in St. Louis, wants you to make. The company, formed last year as a joint venture between DuPont and Bunge, is already racking up $1 billion in annual sales of Solae, its protein additive, to packaged foods companies, which use it to turn drinks and other products into high-protein foods.
Now Solae is taking its message directly to the eaters and drinkers, in hopes of making the phrase ''Solae inside'' as much of a selling point for foods as ''Intel inside'' has become for computers.
It is no easy task. ''We have to persuade people not only to look for the Solae mark on foods, but to think of it as meaning both great taste and a healthy source of protein,'' said John J. McNeil, creative director for the Solae account at Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, part of the WPP Group. ''And we have to do it in 15 seconds.''
How? Make them laugh, Ogilvy decided. Thus was born ''Protein in Unexpected Places,'' a series of four 15-second commercials that play off classic blind taste tests. In each, a white-toqued chef and dark-suited host waylay unsuspecting people, blindfold them and subject them to the Solae Protein Quiz, a taste test between a well-known protein source and a food item enriched with Solae.
In one spot, a 30-something fellow is fed a bite of suckling pig and a slurp of Snapple-a-Day beverage (containing Solae, naturally). Mirabile dictu -- he correctly identifies each but is surprised to learn both contain protein. His response: ''Cool!'' The tag line: ''Proof of protein,'' next to the Solae logo.
A similar scenario plays out with a black woman riding a bus, who gets to try a rack of lamb and V8 Splash Smoothies (protein in each? ''Hmmmm,'' she responds, the tone best described as skeptical interest); a somewhat ditzy career lady, interrupted while flirting with her boyfriend on the phone, who correctly identifies eggs Florentine and 8th Continent soy milk, yet is shocked to be told there's protein in the milk; and a gruff old codger, who recognizes poached salmon (''farm raised,'' no less) and a Solae-enhanced Gardenburger. Told that he can get protein in unexpected places, he responds, ''Tell me something I didn't know, Bradley.''
The ads are, frankly, absurd -- the effect Ogilvy is after. ''We're comparing these simple foods that can be popped open or zapped in a microwave against these incredibly overwrought fancy dishes served in absurd places like buses and offices,'' Mr. McNeil said. ''That not only reinforces the idea of 'protein in unexpected places,' but provides a sheer comic absurdity that can break through all the TV clutter.''
Comedy may be what is needed to put a fresh spin on an old idea. The concept of soy as a source of protein has been around for some time. According to Todd Sutton, Solae's global marketing director, consumers buy more than $3 billion worth of soy products a year.
But until recently, soy products were found primarily in health food stores, health food sections of supermarkets or places frequented by vegetarians or people with health conditions that force them to shy away from milk or meat. Now, soy milk and soy-enhanced products are showing up next to nonsoy versions of soft drinks, juices and such.
Indeed, Solae has reached ''critical mass'' -- about 40 products contain its soy additive, and ''many more are in the pipeline,'' Mr. Sutton said. ''There are finally enough products on grocery shelves with the Solae label so that we can feel comfortable that consumers who see our ads can indeed find our product,'' he added.
More important, a much wider cross-section of consumers have turned to soy. ''Soy products don't just sell to those 2 percent of people who are disciples anymore,'' Mr. Sutton said. ''They're shifting to the mainstream consumers, who connect food choices not just with health but with lifestyles and taste.''
That is why the ads depict tasters from widely divergent demographic groups, and why they highlight products like Snapple. ''We're saying, 'Hey, you already love these foods, and now the Solae mark serves as ''proof of protein,'' a sign you can buy them without compromising taste or health,''' Mr. McNeil said.
The push for Solae is particularly critical now to DuPont, which owns 72 percent of the Solae Company. DuPont is selling its $7 billion textile business, once its mainstay line. DuPont's agriculture and nutrition segment, about a $5.4 billion annual business, will be its biggest business, accounting for more than a quarter of its $20 billion in annual sales.
By advertising to consumers, and on widely watched TV programs, DuPont may be enhancing its stock price along with its sales of Solae.
''DuPont has always wanted to be considered in the same peer group as, say, 3M, a high-growth industrial business with a lot of consumer products,'' said Frank J. Mitsch, a managing director specializing in the chemical industry at Fulcrum Global Partners, an independent research firm. ''There are still a lot of investors who are most comfortable buying stock in companies whose products they know and can touch and identify, and it certainly can't hurt DuPont's image to be promoting a product that is known to have cholesterol-lowering properties.''
The commercials will eventually be shown on Oxygen, VH1, the Learning Channel and Bravo during shows like reruns of ''Friends,'' ''Trading Spaces,'' ''Paula Zahn Now'' and ''Oprah After the Show.'' Solae is introducing the $6 million campaign on E! Entertainment's pre-Academy Awards red carpet show on Sunday. It is, after all, a mainstream event. And it usually features actors and actresses with the kinds of faces and figures that make watchers resolve to push away those fat-and-carb-laden chips in favor of healthier fare.
''Watching all those beautiful people can certainly make you more interested in eating healthy,'' Mr. McNeil said.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
