Decked in green-and-gold Baylor garb, the man hustled over to Matt Sayman and shook his hand last Saturday in Waco, Tex., thanking him for the basketball team's effort in a 70-66 loss to Missouri that day.
''He told me how proud he was of us because of how hard we played,'' Sayman, a senior guard, said. ''He said it meant a lot to the community.''
Such moments have happened frequently in the six months since Scott Drew took over as coach of a program rife with scandal and uncertainty. The shooting death of Baylor forward Patrick Dennehy left one former Baylor player in jail charged with his murder and led to accusations of N.C.A.A. violations against the previous coach, Dave Bliss.
But with hard work and the energy and optimism of a camp counselor, Drew, 33, has turned Baylor's ugly summer into a feel-good story.
With seven scholarship players and a cast of walk-ons, the Bears have managed to win eight games, three in the rough-and-tumble Big 12 conference. Their 8-18 record comes after a summer in which many newspapers in Texas called on the Bears to leave the Big 12 Conference. Virtually everyone expected a winless conference record; instead, the Bears are 3-10 in the Big 12.
''He gave them hope,'' Oklahoma Coach Kelvin Sampson said of Drew. ''That's an important word for a program, the fans and the community. They have to have hope. I think that's what Scott has done.''
Drew is a son of Valparaiso Coach Homer Drew, the architect of one of the most memorable N.C.A.A. tournament upsets. Scott's brother, Bryce, now a guard for the New Orleans Hornets, made a 3-pointer to beat Mississippi in the first round of the 1998 tournament.
That made the Drew name recognizable and showcased the program that Homer took from Division I nonentity to a perennial N.C.A.A. tournament participant. Homer Drew handed Scott, his top assistant, the head coaching job last season, and the Crusaders went 20-11 and played in the National Invitation Tournament.
That challenge was nothing, however, compared to what Drew faced when he arrived at Baylor in August. Although there have been glimpses of on-court success, there is still an overhaul to complete.
''We're all young guys,'' Drew said of his staff. ''Basketball is our hobby. It's rare if there isn't someone here past 1:30 a.m. and before 7 a.m.''
Baylor's top three players from last season transferred. Point guard John Lucas, who went to Oklahoma State, and forward Lawrence Roberts, who went to Mississippi State, are candidates to win the player of the year awards in the Big 12 and the Southeastern Conference.
But with two victories over Texas A&amp;M, a victory over Iowa State and numerous hard-fought losses, Drew has established himself as a coach in the Big 12. Others have noticed the job he has done.
Drew said that 20 to 25 complimentary e-mail messages pour into the office each week and that he had received positive feedback at church and at restaurants. Baylor even received a standing ovation in a 79-57 loss at Texas last month.
Attendance has dipped to 4,757 a game this season from 6,768, and season ticket sales have dropped, though not drastically, university officials said.
''That's about as low a point as you can find for a basketball program,'' Kevin Weiberg, the Big 12 commissioner, said. ''He's done a remarkable job taking the pieces left over and walk-ons and finding a style of play that's allowed them to be competitive.''
The effects of last summer have not disappeared. The possibility of a criminal trial for Carlton Dotson, who is charged with murdering Dennehy, still looms.
The university, which imposed an N.C.A.A. tournament ban and two years' probation on itself, said yesterday that Bliss allowed major N.C.A.A. infractions to occur during his four years. (Bliss is now living in Colorado and recently told The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, ''I don't know if I'll ever talk about what happened.'')
On Wednesday, a Texas judge dismissed the final counts in a wrongful- death suit brought by Dennehy's father, Patrick Dennehy Sr., against Baylor, Bliss and others.
Drew has worked to change the culture of the program, down to a rule that requires a player or coach who curses during practice to drop and do five push-ups. (Drew admits he has done a few push-ups himself.)
To change the fate of the program, however, the key is recruiting. Drew's class for next season is rated among the top 15 nationally by one service and includes an Australian guard, a 6-foot-11 center from Senegal and a highly regarded junior college point guard. ''His recruiting has been beyond what we should be able to expect,'' Athletic Director Ian McCaw said.
Despite Drew's efforts, a stigma remains, about safety at the university and the outcry in the news media for the Big 12 to boot Baylor out.
''The perception always has been about Baylor that it's safe,'' said its baseball coach, Steve Smith. ''Fathers were never reluctant to send their daughters here. That whole perception got shattered a little bit by what happened. It's going to take a long time, if we ever do gain that back.''
But Drew knows only optimism, which is why the lights in the basketball offices at the Ferrell Center will shine for many late nights to come.
''If you win this conference, you can win a national championship,'' Drew said. ''There's no reason you can't do that here.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
