A 48-year-old Russian has been arrested in connection with the stabbing death of an air traffic controller, whom he reportedly held responsible for a midair collision in 2002 that took the lives of his wife and two children, the Swiss police said Thursday.
Russian television named the 48-year-old suspect as a Mr. Koloyev, who lost his wife, Svetlana, his daughter Diana and his son Konstantin in the crash.
Pascal Gossner, the Zurich magistrate investigating the case, told a news conference that police arrested the suspect in a hotel on Wednesday evening in Kloten, the Zurich surburb where the victim, Peter Nielsen, lived. A knife that police believe to be the murder weapon was found just outside the victim's house.
Mr. Gossner said the suspect was calm but clearly still overcome with grief over the loss of his wife and children 18 months ago. ''He denied committing the crime, but his behavior suggested that he has not come to terms with the tragic loss of his wife, his daughter and his son, and that he is still struggling to overcome this loss,'' he said.
Mr. Nielsen, the 36-year-old controller for a company called Skyguide, was alone on duty on the night of July 1, 2002, when a Russian Tupolev-154 jet, operated by Bashkirian Airlines, collided over southern Germany with a Boeing 757 cargo plane operated by DHL, the air courier service.
Preliminary accident reports said Mr. Nielsen told the passenger plane to descend, overruling its crash avoidance system. All 71 people on board, including 45 children from Bashkortostan, an autonomous Russian republic 1,000 miles east of Moscow, were killed.
Mr. Gossner said that the suspect had behaved ''strangely'' on several occasions, particularly at a commemoration ceremony last August in the German town of Üeberlingen, where fragments of the aircraft rained down after the crash, he said.
Mr. Gossner said Mr. Nielsen's wife and neighbors in the apartment block where the family lived provided a detailed description that led to the suspect's arrest.
The killer arrived at the victim's house early on Tuesday evening, and did something to draw attention to himself, a neighbor recounted Thursday. The traffic controller, a Dane who had lived in Switzerland for seven years with his wife and their three children, went outside to investigate and was attacked. He died before an ambulance arrived.
Skyguide reached an out-of-court settlement last year with families of crew members who died in the collision, but negotiations with victims' families have taken longer.
The Russian families have said they have been unable to reach a settlement because Skyguide has offered too little money and treated them like ''second-class'' victims compared with Western Europeans, their lawyer, Gerrit Williams, said. Skyguide denied unfair treatment and pledged to settle the matter as quickly as possible.
The Swiss Federal Office for the Investigation of Aviation Accidents is scheduled to issue a final report on the collision next month, detailing the role played by Skyguide and the pilots of each of the planes. The report is also expected to assess the extent to which Mr. Nielsen was responsible for the tragedy.
