Most personal letters today are probably the province of e-mail, and for a while before that they were apt to be pecked out on the typewriter. The spectacle of people penning them by hand now comes across as almost quaint.
Even so, the letter as a personal document goes back only to the 17th century. It first began to bloom in Holland with the fascinating realization that letters -- used up till then mainly for business or public affairs -- could also serve as vehicles for private sentiments.
Once the custom was established, it gripped the imagination of Dutch genre painters, who became the first to make the letter a central theme in scenes of everyday life. Vermeer's small output of some 40 canvases included no fewer than six on the subject, and it was a recurring motif in the work of other 17th-century Dutch genre-meisters like Pieter de Hooch, Gerard ter Borch, Gabriel Metsu, Adriaen van Ostade and Jan Steen.
Intimate epistolary exchange is the theme of ''Love Letters: Dutch Genre Paintings in the Age of Vermeer,'' a show of work by these artists and others at the Bruce Museum here. This exquisite exhibition, the most ambitious and expensive ever mounted by the Bruce, displays 38 paintings from private and museum collections in the United States and abroad. It was organized by Peter C. Sutton, the museum's executive director, in partnership with the National Gallery of Ireland in Dublin, where it was seen last fall.
A number of developments contributed to the sudden flowering of personal letter writing in Holland, Mr. Sutton points out in his catalog essay: the spread of literacy, the establishment of a reliable postal system, the rise of epistolary literature and the importation of letter-writing manuals, which pushed the notion that a letter should be a written conversation.
Eagerly carrying out her part of such a conversation, for example, is a comely young blonde, the solitary figure in ter Borch's painting ''Woman Writing a Letter'' (1655). Depicted in profile at a plain oak table, this elegantly dressed woman with a luscious pearl affixed to her ear by a pert blue bow animatedly pushes a quill pen over a sheet of paper.
And although we can't see what she's writing, it's evident from her tuned-in expression and attentive body language that her thoughts are fully occupied by the letter's addressee, in all probability a beau. The small work is actually the first surviving genre painting of a woman writing a letter, suggesting that ter Borch may have originated this influential theme.
Another high-born correspondent is depicted in Vermeer's ''Lady Writing a Letter With Her Maidservant'' (given by Vermeer's widow to her baker in 1676 as security for her considerable bill). A larger and more ambitious painting than the ter Borch, it is set in a sumptuous curtained room with a stained glass window, a black-and-white marble floor and a big, gloomy painting of the finding of Moses hanging on the wall behind the lady's writing table. She is seated at it, wearing a lace cap and a stylish house gown, industriously composing as she leans over the paper. Next to her stands a plainly dressed maid, arms crossed, looking out the window, presumably waiting to deliver the letter.
But nuances, nuances! An empty chair in front of the table suggests someone's recent departure, and a small clutter on the floor -- a bright red seal, a stick of sealing wax and something that may be a discarded first version of her letter or a manual on letter writing -- evokes a certain disquietude that violates the serenity of the interior.
As for the finding of Moses, the jury is out on its meaning in the work, but this biblical scene with its high-low theme of an elevated religious motif combined with women bathing was a popular feature of Dutch households.
One recent view by an art historian is that in combining the biblical with the bourgeois Vermeer was bringing together the old and the new, while placing the contemporary letter writer in the tradition of nurturing femininity symbolized by Pharaoh's daughter.
The inclusion of paintings-within-paintings in many of these works was often meant to cue the viewer as to the mood or substance of the correspondence. A case in point is ''Seated Woman With a Letter'' (1633), by Dirck Hals (brother of Frans). In this less-than-great painting, a plump and smiling Dutch vrouw sits facing the viewer, her left arm hung over a chair back. A letter dangles from her hand.
Directly behind her is a tranquil seascape, notice that a great many Dutchmen were often bounding on the main, but also bearing on the widespread perception that the ever-changing sea was a symbol of human love. In this case, the calm waters and the smile on the lady's face as she dangles the letter seem to give evidence that all is well on the romantic front.
Another seascape that clues emotional content occurs in a much better painting, Metsu's ''Woman Reading a Letter With a Maidservant'' (circa 1665-67). One of a beautiful pair (the other, by the same artist and of the same dates, shows a man writing a letter), it depicts a genteel, handsomely dressed seated woman, her sewing thimble dropped on the floor as she reads with satisfaction a letter presumably from the man in the other painting.
Next to her, the maid opens a curtain to show a choppy seascape with tossing boats, perhaps alluding to her mistress's separation from her man by an ocean voyage, while also suggesting that love, like the sea, is unpredictable. It's worth noting, by the way, that this painting contains a lovely likeness of a small black-and-white lap dog that is part of the action. Dutch painters were fond of dogs, had detailed knowledge of specific breeds and found places for them in many of their works.
By no means all of the paintings in this show deal with the haute bourgeoisie. In Jan Steen's ''Bordello Scene'' (circa 1655-58), a prostitute, flashily dressed for 17th-century Holland, lies back on a velvet cushion, happily tipsy and dangling a letter in her right hand. In the background shadows her potential john negotiates the price with a cronelike madam. On a prominent wall hangs a painting depicting the Prodigal Son driven from the whorehouse.
About the letter there is controversy. Does the letter's opening ''B,'' which is legible, refer to the biblical Bathsheba, and by extension her illicit relationship with King David? Or does the presence of the letter simply reflect the common exchange of notes between prostitutes and their clients? In any case, a crystal globe -- an emblem in that era of God's omniscience -- hanging from the ceiling between the painting and the prostitute, and a nearby clock that ticks away the transience of life, seem to send the message that it's time to think salvation.
But such somber thoughts are few and far between in this show. Far more notable is the brilliance of these artists in painting the materiality of the world, the animation of flesh, the stuffs of clothing and furnishings and the serene, neat spaces that Dutch life fit into. More for the eye than for the mind, their work is a feast.
''Love Letters: Dutch Genre Paintings in the Age of Vermeer'' remains on view at the Bruce Museum of Arts and Science, 1 Museum Drive, Greenwich, Conn., (203) 869-0376, through May 2.
ART REVIEW  Correction:  March 5, 2004, Friday  An art review in Weekend on Friday about ''Love Letters: Dutch Genre Paintings in the Age of Vermeer,'' at the Bruce Museum in Greenwich, Conn., gave an incomplete history of the love letter. What began in 17th-century Holland was the widespread custom of writing intimate letters; there were indeed earlier love letters, including those written by Héloïse and Abélard in the 12th century.
