The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum has given the sculptor Richard Serra what its officials describe as not only one of the grandest but also one of the most expensive contemporary art commissions of any museum in the world.
For its branch in Bilbao, Spain, the Guggenheim has asked Mr. Serra to create a room-size installation of monumental steel sculptures, including seven new ones. The region's Basque government, which covers the museum's operating costs and pays for its acquisitions, has spent about $20 million on the commission, contemporary-art experts say, less than the works would have sold for commercially.
The installation, expected to take 17 months to produce and install, is scheduled for completion in June 2005. When the new sculptures join ''Snake,'' Mr. Serra's first commission for Bilbao, there will be 1,208 tons of his steel sculptures in one room.
''We are editors and patrons at the same time,'' said Thomas Krens, director of the Guggenheim, as he stood in the middle of the museum's offices in New York one recent morning, poring over a model of the installation.
The Guggenheim has a tradition of asking artists to produce work just for its branches. In 1963 Thomas M. Messer, then the Guggenheim's director, commissioned Joan Miró to create a mural of ceramic tiles that is usually hidden behind a false wall in the first bay of its Frank Lloyd Wright rotunda on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan. It was temporarily uncovered last summer, for the first time in more than a decade, for a show of works from the permanent collection. Over the years the museum has also commissioned artists including Jeff Koons, Dan Flavin, James Rosenquist and Francesco Clemente to produce works for its permanent holdings, even though they may not always be on view.
In Bilbao, the Guggenheim does have several commissions on permanent view. Just outside the entrance, visitors are greeted by Mr. Koons's ''Puppy,'' a 43-foot-tall terrier whose coat is made of 70,000 flowering plants.
By increasing its collections through special commissions, the Guggenheim is trying to make its art as much an attraction as its architecture. Ever since the museum's landmark New York building opened in 1959, it has perhaps been more of an attraction for the tourists who consistently flood it than is the art collection. That tradition continued when the Guggenheim Bilbao opened its titanium-clad building by Frank Gehry in 1997.
Now, Mr. Krens said, by commissioning artists to create works, he and his curators are seeking to turn the Guggenheim's art holdings into landmarks as important to the museum's image as the buildings. The Basque government agrees with that strategy. From 1993 through 2003 it budgeted about $85 million for acquisitions, including the Serras.
''Museums should play an active rather than passive role in collecting,'' Mr. Krens said.
The selection of Mr. Serra to produce a giant installation made sense, given the scale of his sculptures. Moreover, the Guggenheim has a long history of collecting and exhibiting Mr. Serra's work. In 1991, when the museum acquired more than 200 works from the 1960's and 70's from the Italian industrialist Giuseppe Panza di Biumo, they included 14 by Mr. Serra, among them some important early pieces like his vulcanized rubber sculptures, as well as room-size installations. Two years later the museum mounted an exhibition of Mr. Serra's work. It commissioned ''Snake,'' a 104-foot-long sinuous curved steel sculpture, for the opening of the Guggenheim Bilbao in 1997, and two years later it held an exhibition there that included eight of the artist's signature ''Torqued Ellipses'' sculptures.
The new works will all be made of Cor-Ten steel, which changes color as it ages. Their surfaces will go from gray to orange to a deeper orange and end up amber, the artist said. As the steel changes color over 8 to 10 years, its surface becomes smoother and more even in texture.
Joining ''Snake'' in the 427-foot-long Gallery 104 (also known as the Fish Gallery because of its shape, which some say resembles the body of a fish) will be seven monumental labyrinthine sculptures purposely placed to envelop the visitor in different spatial experiences. In a video Mr. Serra made as a presentation of the room to government officials in Bilbao, he explained that he had created ''one installation of a continuous circulation of forms.''
As with all of Mr. Serra's monumental sculptures, seeing them from the outside is one visual experience, and walking through them is quite another. Visitors will ''have no sense from the outside what the interior condition is going to be'' and vice versa, so that ''the containment and the container become almost contradictory to what you think you can possibly anticipate,'' Mr. Serra said. ''These pieces are revealed only as you walk through them.''
Gauguin in Tahiti
When ''Gauguin Tahiti'' opens at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, on Sunday, more than 150 works from all over the world will go on view: paintings, carved wood sculptures, decorative objects, drawings, prints and illustrated manuscripts. Boston will be the only United States stop for the show, which is on view through June 20 and was previously at the Grand Palais in Paris.
In the process of putting the show together, its curators, George T. M. Shackelford, the chairman of the Boston museum's European art department, and Claire Frèches-Thory, the chief curator at the Musée d'Orsay in Paris, made some scholarly discoveries.
When Ms. Frèches-Thory was studying the archives of material that belonged to Victor Segalen, the writer and anthropologist who had bought a trove of Gauguin artifacts and memorabilia at a sale in Papeete, Tahiti, after the artist's death in 1903, she discovered a photograph of an Easter Island table that the artist had owned. The image showed the same hieroglyphic writing that is in the frieze behind the head of Tehamana, the artist's 15-year-old lover, in his final painting of her, done in 1893. The painting, ''The Ancestors of Tehamana,'' on loan from the Art Institute of Chicago, shows the young woman seated with flowers in her hair against a mysterious background of ancient figures thought to have been Gauguin's fantasy of her ancestors.
''It was unknown until Claire's discovery exactly where Gauguin came across these hieroglyphics,'' Mr. Shackelford said.
The exhibition will also show ''Noa Noa,'' a book Gauguin started writing in 1893; he continued adding to it until at least 1899. This will be the first time the manuscript has been seen outside France. Part travelogue, part fantasy, part notebook, ''Noa Noa'' is a visual journey through his Tahitian experience, filled with images and photographs, prints and ephemera. Because it is fragile, the museum is showing it in a vitrine with just two pages open for the public to see. On the wall behind it are monitors that show a CD-ROM version produced by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux, in Paris.
''They photographed every page of the book, which is about 150 pages,'' Mr. Shackelford said. ''Even the empty ones, and they have produced a CD-ROM of the entire manuscript.'' It is available in the museum's bookshop for $29.95.
The CD-ROM also includes ''Diverses Choses'' (1896-97), an unpublished manuscript by Gauguin that is a kind of appendix to ''Noa Noa,'' and ''Ancien Culte Mahorie,'' an earlier Gauguin manuscript about Tahitian religion that is owned by the Musée d'Orsay. ''Ancien Culte Mahorie'' cannot leave France because of the terms of its gift to the state.
''Now scholars and students will be able to read Gauguin's handwriting as if they were studying the original manuscripts, all of which are far too fragile to handle,'' Mr. Shackelford said.
INSIDE ART
