Slumped against a wall outside the Nets' locker room Wednesday night at the Target Center in Minneapolis, Nets Coach Lawrence Frank appeared even smaller than he is. Frank found himself saying what coaches say after a tough loss to a formidable opponent. The remarkable part was how long it took -- nearly a month -- before Frank reached that moment.
Frank's face appeared as ashen as Jeff Van Gundy's, and he kept his voice low while looking his questioners in the eye.
''We weren't going to go undefeated,'' Frank said after the Nets' 81-68 loss to the Timberwolves. ''The main thing is getting better.''
The defeat was Frank's first, since succeeding Byron Scott on Jan. 26, after 13 consecutive victories -- the best start by a new coach in North America's four major professional leagues.
Though Frank gave the players yesterday off after back-to-back games in different time zones, he planned to do what he usually does, study game videotape, interrupting it only for an appearance at the New York Stock Exchange to ring the opening bell.
Frank's work ethic and attention to detail served the Nets well in this stretch. But with the Nets shooting so poorly Wednesday night -- 38.6 percent for the game and 30 percent in the fourth quarter -- there was not much Frank could do to prevent the loss. So he took out his frustration on the scorer's table, kicking it in the final minutes.
''It's the N.B.A.,'' Nets forward Kenyon Martin said. ''No team is going to go 82-0 in this league, and I don't think any team ever will.''
So, where do the Nets go from here? Even with all the winning, the Nets remain six and a half games behind Indiana for the top seeding in the Eastern Conference playoffs with 26 games to play, a difficult deficit to overcome.
Having won consecutive conference championships, the Nets were not happy to hear the Timberwolves' Kevin Garnett call Detroit the most likely N.B.A. finalist from the East. Two of Garnett's teammates, Sam Cassell and Latrell Sprewell, lumped the Nets with Indiana and Detroit without picking a favorite.
''You wonder if some people around here have watched this team compete for the past couple of years,'' Nets center Jason Collins said. ''People who've watched us and people around here, we know what kind of character we have. Some people, I don't know what is with them.''
Still, questions remain. Only four victories in the franchise-record 14-game winning streak, which began with Scott's final game, came against teams with winning records: New Orleans (twice), Detroit and Houston.
Minnesota, the Midwest Division leader, is the best team the Nets have faced with Frank in charge, especially defensively. The Timberwolves beat Sacramento last week by containing the Kings' running game, and Wednesday night they did the same to the Nets. It's not a unique strategy -- Detroit tried the same thing -- but Wednesday the Timberwolves did it to perfection.
''We knew if we could control the high-flying dunks and the Globetrotter show, we could make them be in a halfcourt set, which is something they don't want to do,'' Garnett said. ''I felt like, for the most part, we did that. We took most of their easy buckets away.''
The Nets can expect more of that in a stretch of four games in five days, beginning with Miami on Saturday and the Lakers on Sunday at Continental Arena. The Nets travel to Denver on Tuesday and to Phoenix on Wednesday, the start of a four-game trip that concludes with Golden State and the Lakers.
Yet the notion that the Nets may have something to prove rankles forward Richard Jefferson. ''We've played so many statement games this year, it's not even funny,'' he said. ''We've played a lot of statement games for a team that won the Eastern Conference championship.''
PRO BASKETBALL
