Jayson Blair, the former New York Times reporter who was found last year to have fabricated or plagiarized portions of more than three dozen articles, admits many of his deceptions in a forthcoming memoir but writes that they were fueled by ambition, cocaine and alcohol abuse and an undiagnosed condition of manic depression.
In the book, ''Burning Down My Masters' House,'' scheduled for publication March 6, Mr. Blair writes of a path to what he calls his ''self-destruction.'' He is at various points contemplative (he discusses the pressures he felt as a black man in a predominantly white newsroom), introspective (he writes of the psychosis he said he experienced on some assignments) and piqued (he lashes out at more than a half dozen editors and reporters who he saw as thwarting his professional ascent).
But Mr. Blair, 27, expresses little remorse for the pain his actions caused -- whether for the subjects of his articles, many of them the families of American soldiers killed in Iraq, or for his former colleagues.
For readers of The Times, perhaps the most salient admission is Mr. Blair's acknowledgment of the extent of his deceptions, particularly during the six-month period before he resigned last May 1, when he had been dispatched to cover assignments in the Washington-area sniper attacks and the impact of the war in Iraq on the homefront.
''I lied and I lied, and then I lied some more,'' he writes in the first chapter of the book, which is to be released by New Millennium Press. ''I lied about where I had been, I lied about where I had found information, I lied about how I wrote the story.''
Mr. Blair, who declined to be interviewed pending several television appearances, writes in the book that he assembled many of his articles using such means as clippings from other newspapers, invented details and photographs he viewed in The Times's computer system.
''I lied about a plane flight I never took, about sleeping in a car I never rented, about a landmark on a highway I had never been on,'' he writes. ''I lied about a guy who helped me at a gas station that I found on the Internet and about crossing railroad tracks I only knew existed because of aerial photographs in my private collection.''
Yet he also maintains that a number of other articles during this period were solidly reported, and that ''to this day'' he remains proud of his work on the sniper case.
Mr. Blair also writes about one fabrication -- he suggests it was his first -- that the newspaper did not discover during an examination last year into his reporting. In a 625-word article published a week after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, Mr. Blair wrote of a day trader named Andrew Rosstein who had fled a brokerage office in tears after experiencing substantial losses.
''I improvised by creating a last name for him,'' Mr. Blair writes. ''I had lifted quotes from other papers before, but never made something up.''
''I do not know where it came from,'' he writes, ''or how I got the name or even what I was feeling at the moment -- other than a desperate desire to get into the newspaper.''
The discovery of the extent of Mr. Blair's deceptions laid bare profound fissures in the newsroom, leading on June 5 to the resignation of The Times's two top editors, Howell Raines and Gerald M. Boyd.
In an e-mail message to the news staff this week, Bill Keller, who succeeded Mr. Raines as executive editor, cautioned against taking Mr. Blair's book seriously.
''The author is an admitted fabricator,'' Mr. Keller wrote. ''The book pretends to be a mea culpa but ends up spewing imaginary blame in all directions.''
''We don't intend to respond to Jayson or his book,'' he added.
Yesterday Catherine J. Mathis, a spokeswoman for The Times, said: ''The events of last spring were deeply painful to The Times and its staff. In the days and weeks that followed, we completed a comprehensive examination of our journalistic and newsroom practices to determine what steps needed to be taken to address the issues raised. As a result, we have changed many news policies and strengthened our hiring, training and development practices, which we believe better serve our staff and our readers.''
Michael Viner, the president of New Millennium, characterized Mr. Keller's comments as evidence of ''the smear campaign by The New York Times against Mr. Blair and his book.''
New Millennium has circulated few advance copies of Mr. Blair's book and has required those who did view it to sign confidentiality agreements. A news assistant at The Times obtained a copy by ordering it from Amazon.com.
