Qatar has arrested two Russian secret agents and charged them in the killing of an exiled Chechen leader there, prompting a sharply worded rebuke from Russia on Thursday that accused Qatari authorities of violating international law.
In a statement, the Russian Foreign Ministry denied any Russian involvement in the death of Zelimkhan Yandarbiyev, the former president of the Chechen republic, who was killed Feb. 13 when a bomb destroyed his car in Doha, the capital of Qatar.
The statement called the arrests ''a provocation'' and was the first public acknowledgment that two men arrested by the authorities in Doha last week were not only Russian citizens but members of the secret services.
''They were legally assigned to the Russian Embassy in Qatar, conducting analytical work in connection with countering international terrorism, without violating local legislation in any way,'' the acting foreign minister, Igor S. Ivanov, said in the statement.
The arrests -- which Mr. Ivanov said involved ''weapons and brute force'' -- threatened to worsen relations that had long been strained by Mr. Yandarbiyev's presence in Qatar. They also provided a rare window into the clandestine world of Russia's secret services and their efforts to choke off international support for Chechen separatists.
Qatar's official news agency announced the arrest of suspects in Mr. Yandarbiyev's killing last week, but the authorities there have not provided any details, including the suspects' names and citizenship. According to news reports two men appeared before a judge this week and were formally charged.
A third Russian agent who was arrested has been released because he carried a diplomatic passport, Mr. Ivanov said in his statement, demanding that the others be released as well. It was an unusual public acknowledgment that an intelligence agent served under diplomatic guise.
A secretary at Qatar's embassy in Moscow said the ambassador, Muhammad Saad al-Kobaisi, would not comment on the matter. An official in Qatar's Foreign Ministry said by telephone that no one was available to comment.
Mr. Yandarbiyev, who was 51, served briefly as president of Chechnya after the death of its first separatist leader, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, in 1996. A poet and steadfast nationalist, Mr. Yandarbiyev took part in the negotiations that ended the first Chechen war later that year. He fled Chechnya sometime after the second war began in 1999, and for at least the last three years had lived in Qatar, despite repeated Russian requests for his extradition.
Russia accused Mr. Yandarbiyev of financing Chechnya's separatist rebels and organizing terrorist attacks, including the seizure of a theater in Moscow in October 2002 by at least 41 Chechens.
Although some have disputed Russia's efforts to link all Chechen rebel leaders to international terrorism, the United Nations included Mr. Yandarbiyev on its list of people suspected of having ties to Al Qaeda and other terrorist organizations. Mr. Ivanov said that Qatar had given Mr. Yandarbiyev sanctuary in spite of the United Nations' action.
Mr. Yandarbiyev died when an explosion tore through his sport utility vehicle shortly after he left Friday Prayers at a mosque in Doha. Two other people in the car were also killed, and Mr. Yandarbiyev's 13-year-old son was gravely wounded.
