In the beginning, Allan Houston was comfortable enough on the bench. But then he watched the winning streak turn into a mirage.
With Houston sidelined, the Knicks won five straight games in late January and early February, including a victory over Indiana. After the All-Star Game break, they scored another upset, over Detroit.
But Keith Van Horn was then shipped to Milwaukee, exposing Houston's absence on the perimeter. And the Knicks have now lost four consecutive games and six of seven. How badly do the Knicks miss Houston, who has been sidelined for 12 games?
Stephon Marbury sighed and shook his head firmly. ''Big time,'' he said after the Knicks lost to his former team, the Phoenix Suns, 113-95, Wednesday night. ''It's like, I can't get to the basket, I can't penetrate. When Allan comes back, it makes the game so much easier.''
The timetable for his return is murky, however.
Houston is along for this four-game road trip, rehabilitating his knees and working himself into contact situations with the assistants Mark Aguirre and Tyrone Corbin. It is unlikely he will play Friday night against the Clippers and he has no idea if he can play Sunday in Denver.
''I just don't want to push it where I have a setback and then have to sit out for a week and not progress,'' Houston said. ''I've done that before, so I'm just being wise about that.''
Houston has not played in 18 games this season after missing 10 games previously in his eight-year Knicks career. This season, the team is 8-10 without him.
Houston and Marbury were supposed to be the first Knicks backcourt to average 20 points apiece since Walt Frazier and Earl Monroe. Instead, Marbury has had little help for the past six weeks.
Houston's injury, compounded with the loss of Van Horn's shooting threat from the outside, has put pressure on everyone, starting with Marbury. He is shooting 33 for 89 (37 percent) in the last four games.
Penny Hardaway is worse, shooting 10 for 42, for 23.8 percent.
''I just got to relax,'' Hardaway said. ''It only happened after Keith got traded. I'm putting more pressure on me because I was playing well up until that point. All of a sudden, the last four games, it's been, 'O.K., go out there, got to go out and make shots, you got to do this to stop the losing streak.' ''
Coach Lenny Wilkens told Hardaway on Wednesday to remember his skills and not to force anything.
The chemistry of the team has been jumbled as it tries to incorporate the latest new players, Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed. Most glaring, the Knicks have allowed an average of 101 points the past four games, compared with the 87.4 points per game during their winning streak.
According to Kurt Thomas, ''the streak came from hard work and doing what you have to do to get the win, and the last couple of games we haven't been doing that.''
Thomas admitted that his severely swollen pinky finger has made him more cautious on defense.
The Knicks got a chance to rest in Los Angeles after their consecutive losses to begin the road trip. That means Houston was only able to get an individual workout and not a full practice with the team. It has becoming increasingly painful for him to watch.
''You just got to keep fighting,'' Houston said. ''It is hard when you have Tim out and I'm out; it's tough on everybody. At the same time, the guys who are in there have to do the job according to what they can do. But that has been just the problem.''
Wilkens chastised his players for not showing heart or focus on defense against the Suns. They allowed the Suns to outrebound them, 58-26, the Knicks' largest deficit in 30 years.
''I would say that mentally we were not there,'' Wilkens said. Nor were they there physically. ''All is not lost,'' Wilkens said.
In the Eastern Conference, the Knicks' playoff competitors also continue to lose.
''We still can turn it around,'' Wilkens said. ''We've been through a lot, we've been through a lot of changes. It's a step back, but it's not like we're out of the race.''
REBOUNDS
TIM THOMAS is questionable for the game with the Clippers after hyperextending his right elbow against the Suns.
PRO BASKETBALL
