Supermarket executives and union leaders involved in a four-and-a-half month-old labor dispute in Southern California reached a tentative agreement last night after 16 days of intense bargaining, union leaders said.
Officials with the United Food and Commercial Workers Union and with California's three largest grocery chains reached the deal, which is expected to end a dispute involving 59,000 striking or locked-out workers at 852 supermarkets.
In a statement isssued late Thursday, the union said it would not disclose details of the agreement until members voted on it on Saturday and Sunday.
The dispute, which is one of the largest labor disputes in the nation in years, has inconvenienced millions of shoppers, created great financial pain for union members and caused the three supermarket chains to lose more than $2 billion in sales as many shoppers honored the picket lines.
The dispute involves Albertsons, Kroger, which owns the Ralphs grocery chain, and Safeway, which owns the Vons and Pavilions grocery chains.
Vons and Pavilions workers went on strike on Oct. 11 when the union resisted management's demands to create a lower wage tier and a reduced health benefit plan for new employees and to cap the companies' health contributions for current workers. To show solidarity with Safeway, Albertsons and Ralphs locked out their workers the next day.
Officials knowledgeable about the negotiations said the union had agreed to a lower wage tier for new workers. These officials said the companies had pressured the union into agreeing to have newly hired workers pay some weekly premiums for their health insurance, which is a departure from the policy with current workers, who pay no premium. In addition, these officials said, the union agreed in large part to the companies' demand to place a cap on their contributions to the health plan for current workers. But these officials said the union achieved its objective of persuading the companies to set aside their demand for a separate health and pension fund for future employees.
Peter Hurtgen, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, has met with the two sides and repeatedly pushed them to reach a deal. The dispute has become a huge cause for all of organized labor, and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the front-runner in the Democratic presidential campaign, walked Thursday alongside strikers at a Vons in Santa Monica.
At the Pavilions store at Melrose and Vine in Hollywood, the mood among workers Thursday night was bitter even after they heard news of a settlement. For week after week, they watched many shoppers ignore the picket line and more and more of their co-workers return to work.
Several Pavilions workers said they were upset that the tentative accord included a lower wage tier for new workers, fearing that it would endanger their jobs.
''If there are new guys for less, they're going to replace us eventually,'' said Reymundo Borjon, a 43-year-old grocery stocker who earns $10 an hour after four-and-a-half years on the job. ''They'll come up with anything. They'll say, 'You stole something.' You know you're going to have to be careful.''
Oscar Karillo, a 34-year-old dairy department worker at Pavilions, said he faced such a financial squeeze during the dispute that he give his car back to the dealer because he could not make the payments.
Even though he knew hardly any details about the agreement, he said he would vote to ratify it. ''I got to eat, man,'' he said. ''I have a wife and two kids. Whatever it is I'm going to take it.''
The union was under intense pressure to settle because its members were feeling so financially battered by the dispute and because the union and its Southern California locals had been financially weakened by the tens of millions of dollars spent to finance strike benefits. At some of the Safeway stores, more than 30 percent of the workers had crossed the picket line and returned to work.
But the supermarkets also faced serious pressures because they lost tens of millions of dollars in profits because of the dispute. In addition, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. was escalating its pressure tactics against the supermarkets, picketing executives houses, bothering board members, and holding sit-ins at Safeway stores.
Company officials warned that they would take a tough stance in the negotiations because they said it was essential for them to lower their labor costs to help them compete against nonunion competitors like Wal-Mart, Costco and Trader Joe.
Creating urgency for the state's three big grocery chains, Wal-Mart, the nation's largest retailer, has announced plans to build 40 combined discount stores and supermarkets in California over the next five years.
Throughout the dispute, supermarket executives said their unionized workers had a Cadillac health plan that the companies could no longer afford when confronted by more intense nonunion competition. The executives noted that with wages and benefits combined, Wal-Mart workers often earned $8 to $12 less per hour than the unionized supermarket workers.
But union officials sought to turn this dispute into a crusade to save health plans from assault. Labor leaders voiced fears that if the food and commercial workers agreed to major concessions on health care, that would pressure unions across the country to agree to less generous health plans in future bargaining.
