Jamal Lewis, the Baltimore Ravens' star running back, pleaded not guilty on Thursday to federal charges that he tried to help a friend buy cocaine in June 2000, a month before he signed a $35.3 million contract with the Ravens.
Lewis turned himself in to federal agents Thursday morning and was arrested and booked. He was released on a $500,000 bond after a 15-minute hearing in federal court.
Lewis answered ''yes'' when asked by the judge and the United States attorney if he understood his rights and his plea but otherwise did not speak during the hearing.
Afterward, Lewis, dressed in a light gray suit, stood in a cold rain outside United States District Court, surrounded by his defense team, and proclaimed his innocence of charges that could end his career in the National Football League. If convicted on the conspiracy count, Lewis could face 10 years to life in prison.
''It is extremely important to me that my family, my friends, my fans and the Ravens organization knows that I am innocent,'' said Lewis, who rushed for 2,066 yards last season, the second-highest total in N.F.L. history.
Lewis and his co-defendant, Angelo Jackson, who grew up together, were charged with conspiring to distribute at least five kilograms of cocaine between June 23, 2000, and July 19, 2000. They are also charged with one count of using a communication facility (a cellphone) to distribute cocaine. The charge carries a penalty of four years.
United States Magistrate E. Clayton Scofield III allowed Lewis to be released on a bond, secured by a $100,000 deposit.
Lewis, 24, is being represented by the lawyers Ed Garland and Don Samuel, who successfully defended Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis on a murder charge here in 2000. Garland said he would prefer that the trial be heard in June before the start of training camp.
The F.B.I. alleges that Lewis was part of a drug ring in the Bowen Homes housing project. The indictment says Lewis introduced Jackson, now 26, to a female informant posing as a cocaine distributor.
Authorities say Lewis is on tape on June 23, 2000, telling the informant, who has not been identified, that Lewis had a friend (Jackson) he wanted her to meet. The indictment says Lewis drove Jackson to an Atlanta restaurant to meet the informant and set up the drug purchase.
The F.B.I. said the tape recordings of conversations included the informant telling Lewis he could buy the cocaine and then raise the price for his own profit before selling it to Jackson. Authorities said Lewis is on the tape saying ''yeah'' to that possibility.
''She was someone who came along trying to set him up to get herself out of jail,'' Garland said of the informant. ''Her story will be quite interesting and come out in the future.''
The informant did not sell drugs to Jackson, but the authorities have nonetheless accused Lewis of conspiracy.
PRO FOOTBALL
