If the Bush administration is planning to trumpet Alan Greenspan's endorsement for making the president's tax cuts permanent, it has to accept both sides of his argument. Mr. Greenspan's warning to Congress this week that it ought to scale back spending on Social Security and other government programs to reduce looming federal deficits provides stark evidence of the awful choices facing the nation in the wake of President Bush's reckless decision to slash taxes for the wealthy.
Mr. Greenspan, the Fed chairman, qualified his support for the permanent cuts Mr. Bush is now seeking. Congress, he said, had to find ways to offset the loss in revenue with sharp restraints on spending. Mr. Bush and his Republican allies have attempted to present that as a relatively easy choice involving reductions in discretionary domestic spending. But that would take care of only a sliver of the deficit, while harming a multitude of important and useful programs.
In testimony before the House Budget Committee on Wednesday, Mr. Greenspan raised a red flag about Social Security, warning that federal deficits, already large, would begin to explode after the first wave of baby boomers becomes eligible for Social Security benefits four years from now, and for Medicare three years after that. During the Clinton administration, the assumption was that part of the surplus would be used to shore up entitlements for retirees. Now the tax cuts have left the federal government practically helpless.
Part of Mr. Greenspan's take-your-medicine solution is to reduce Social Security's spending on future retirees by raising the age of eligibility and by changing the inflation index to make payments less generous but more attuned to what he considers real increases in the cost of living. Those are responsible proposals, worthy of extended debate. But they would be extremely hard to sell to the public, and they would not be enough to solve all the looming entitlement problems.
It is always difficult to decipher just what the often-opaque Fed chairman means. Under questioning, he acknowledged that Congress was unlikely to solve the deficit problem solely by cutting spending and would inevitably have to raise some taxes to keep deficits manageable. We took his testimony to mean that long-term deficit reduction is more important than permanent tax cuts. The White House, alas, is taking the opposite approach. It wants the tax cuts locked in before it provides any serious plan for how to restrain future deficits.
