An exhibition of prints and multiples by the English artist Richard Hamilton at the Yale Center for British Art here is a monumental affair, with a 298-page catalog to match. Mr. Hamilton himself was much applauded by an eager throng of visitors recently when he led a tour of the show. And the exhibition is one that never flags, thanks to the variety of the subject matter and the unending wit and technical versatility of the artist.
Born in 1922, Mr. Hamilton was from an early age an outsider's insider. After being expelled from the Royal Academy School in London for ignoring its hallowed ways, he spent 1947 and 1948 in compulsory military service. His spare moments during those years were given primarily to close study of James Joyce's ''Ulysses.''
He enrolled in the Slade School in London in 1948, and in 1949 he made his first studies of Leopold Bloom, the chief character in ''Ulysses.'' Bloom was forever to be in and out of Mr. Hamilton's thoughts, serving as a 20th-century Everyman.
The notion of the art world as a sub-department of an ivory tower did not survive the end of World War II. Mr. Hamilton's understanding of this is well set out in the catalog to this show: ''After 1945, Hamilton asserted his conviction that the mass media presented life in a mid-20th century that had a mythological and epic quality that was just as powerful in its expression, and as worthwhile in artistic terms, as anything in history that had inspired generations before him. Henceforth this was to be the central tenet of his work.''
In 1957 Mr. Hamilton epitomized these beliefs in a painting and two lithographs called ''Hommage à Chrysler Corp.'' These were about automobiles, but they had a subtext that had to do with beautiful women. The erotic aspect of automobile design had never before been treated in quite this way, and it took a while for connoisseurs to get the hang of it. But American cars were never again to be looked at in quite the same way in England.
The multifarious magic of James Joyce's ''Ulysses'' powers many a memorable print in the Yale show. ''Ulysses'' has never lacked for illustrators, but the quintessence of them can be found in Mr. Hamilton's portrayals of Leopold Bloom.
His portrait of Bloom supine in his bath and seen from above springs from a single phrase -- ''he foresaw his pale body'' -- in the ''Lotus-Eaters'' episode of ''Ulysses.'' Joyce there spoke of Bloom as ''reclining, naked, in a womb of warmth, oiled by scented melting soap, softly laved.'' This print, done in 1990, epitomizes a crucial moment in one of the great achievements of 20th-century literature.
From that same fertile source there is also a memorable and almost encyclopedic print called ''How a Great Daily Organ Is Turned Out.'' This is based on a scene in the offices of the Freeman's Journal in the ''Aeolus'' episode of ''Ulysses.''
Wildly disparate images, incorporating the full gamut of intaglio techniques, race up and down and across the page. (Visitors are challenged to keep them all in mind at once, thereby experiencing the tumult of the newsroom.) Scenes from everyday life keep company with advertisements, and nothing that is going on rhymes with anything else. But veterans of newsrooms will recognize the mounting excitement with which someone is going to make it all fit together.
Elsewhere, Oscar Wilde and Oliver St. John Gogarty make solo appearances, as irreplaceable Dubliners. A place is also rightly found for the Milanese art dealer Giorgio Marconi, who has had six shows of Mr. Hamilton's work since 1967.
One of the characteristics of printmaking, compared to painting or sculpture, is that a really gifted printmaker gets to work with European master printers whose company can be both a delight and an honor.
The great master printers do not set out to ''improve'' the print, let alone to make it a monument to themselves. But they know what can be done, and what can't (or never has) been done. And they know how to inspire younger printers, on occasion, to tread new ground and not fall on their faces.
A prime example of this in the current show is Mr. Hamilton's ''I'm Dreaming of a Black Christmas'' (1971), a screenprint on collotype with collage.
The figure of Bing Crosby is portrayed with an almost unbelievable luxury of tone and texture, as is the arcaded background. To achieve this, two German master printers worked, one after the other, to perfect what was, in effect, a masterpiece of inspired deception.
In 1972 a German publisher asked Mr. Hamilton to contribute to a portfolio of prints in honor of Picasso's 90th birthday. Mr. Hamilton said he would do it, if he could work with the master printer Aldo Crommelynck, who had worked with Picasso since 1963.
Working with Mr. Crommelynck, a great man in his field, resulted in a reworking not of Velázquez's ''Meninas'' but of one of the 45 variants of that great painting that Picasso had made in 1957. An important revision was made when Mr. Hamilton substituted himself and his wife, Rita Donagh, for King Philip IV and his consort, Mariana, at the back of the painting.
There could be no more graceful conclusion for this majestic exhibition.
''Richard Hamilton'' is at the Yale Center for British Art, 1080 Chapel Street, New Haven, (203) 432-2800, through May 24.
ART REVIEW
