The Senate voted Thursday to require handgun manufacturers to sell weapons with child-proof locks.
The measure was added to a bill the Senate is considering that would grant immunity to gun makers and dealers against civil lawsuits. Senator Barbara Boxer, the California Democrat who sponsored the amendment, described the 70-to-27 vote as ''a very strong signal'' that lawmakers would be willing to further amend the bill, despite pressure from President Bush not to do so.
Gun makers have argued that legislative action is unneeded because they are already voluntarily moving to produce weapons with the locks.
The Senate passed a similar safety lock measure in 1999. But the gun bill to which it was attached did not make it out of the House because of disputes about other provisions, including how to regulate gun shows.
On Thursday other parts of the Senate's debate over legal immunity for gun dealers and manufacturers turned into a political free-for-all. Democrats tried to use the measure as a vehicle to extend unemployment benefits, and the majority leader, Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, tried to use it to renew parts of a landmark civil rights measure. Both efforts were unsuccessful.
The unemployment benefits extension, sponsored by Senator Maria Cantwell, Democrat of Washington, failed on a procedural motion when it fell two votes short of the 60 needed for the Senate to take it up. The civil rights amendment was withdrawn when Mr. Frist realized he did not have the votes to tack it onto the bill.
The debate illustrates how both parties are trying to use the gun immunity bill, which has broad bipartisan support and is expected to pass the Senate easily next week, to further their political aims in an election year. In addition to the unemployment measure, Democrats have also discussed using the bill to try to overturn new overtime regulations promulgated by the Bush administration -- an issue of importance to working families.
Dr. Frist's amendment caught many lawmakers off guard. Dr. Frist said he decided to introduce the measure, which would have made permanent certain sections of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, after a recent trip to Alabama and Tennessee with Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia. The act is set to expire in 2007. The effort fell apart after Mr. Lewis issued a statement calling Dr. Frist's maneuver admirable, but premature.
Other Democrats were not so generous; they called the move a political ploy to give Republicans a chance to demonstrate their commitment to civil rights, while forcing Democrats who oppose the gun bill to vote against an issue dear to them.
''It's a convenient way to play 'gotcha,'  '' said Senator Jon Corzine, Democrat of New Jersey.
Advocates of gun control, who would like to defeat the immunity bill, were left frustrated. ''The argument in the court of opinion needs to be about the underlying bill,'' said Richard Aborn, a former president of the Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence, an advocacy group.
The bill would shield gun makers and dealers from lawsuits, so long as they do not violate laws or sell defective weapons. The industry says it needs the protection to stave off jury awards that could put manufacturers out of business. Opponents call the measure a special-interest giveaway that would deny victims their legitimate right to sue.
The bill's backers defeated two efforts to permit certain suits to proceed even if the immunity legislation passes. The Senate rejected, by a vote of 56 to 40, an amendment permitting suits that stem from the 2002 sniper attacks in the Washington area. Lawmakers also rejected, by 56 to 38, an amendment that would allow civil suits against the industry by law enforcement officers who are victims of gun violence.
The question now is whether the Senate will vote to add two other gun-related measures -- one to extend the so-called assault weapons ban, and another to require instant background checks of customers at gun shows -- to the immunity bill.
The issues are starting to figure into the presidential campaign. The Senate is set to vote on them on Tuesday, a day when 10 states will hold primaries. Democrats have pressed Senators John Kerry and John Edwards, the party's presidential contenders, to be present. Spokesmen for both men said they were trying to revise their schedules.
Correction:  February 28, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a vote by the Senate to require safety locks on guns referred incorrectly to a voluntary program to provide them. Gun manufacturers said that because they already provide the locks through the program, they did not work to defeat the amendment. They did not they were moving toward adopting such a program.
