Directed by Unsu Lee and Paul Barnett  Not rated, 80 minutes
''Confessions of a Burning Man,'' an incoherent documentary about the annual Burning Man arts festival in the northern Nevada desert, makes the fatal flaw of cinematically imitating the anarchistic spirit of the event it observes. The 10-day festival, which draws more than 25,000 people annually to the Black Rock Desert of Nevada, where a temporary city is created and then disassembled, is a kind of modern-day Woodstock festival with a new-age, survivalist, environmentally sensitive aesthetic.
The participants complete and then remove large, fanciful artworks, many of which have a magical, childlike charm. At the center of the festival is a giant wooden effigy of a man that is ritually burned each year. While the festival lasts, it is often a battle against the elements. Despite the brutal environment, with its frequent sandstorms and extremes of temperature, the festival becomes a giant outdoor circus cum science fair cum art project peopled with jugglers, clowns, yoga instructors and nudists, euphorically cavorting into the wee hours.
Although there is much to say about the history, aesthetics and philosophy of Burning Man (its founder, Larry Harvey, does a lamentably sketchy job), the film, which opens today in New York, is too lazy and too loosely structured to accomplish much besides conveying some vivid physical impressions. There is no narrator, and the structure that exists is clouded by the new-age mumbo-jumbo of eight principal commentators.
As these dull, inarticulate people ramble on about their personal traumas and breakthroughs, they suggest the largest, most self-centered outdoor therapy group ever assembled. In the matter of drugs the movie is patently dishonest. Although there is not a single mention of drug-taking in the entire film, it's perfectly apparent that the community spirit of Burning Man would be unimaginable without the fuel of mind-altering chemicals.
STEPHEN HOLDEN
FILM IN REVIEW
