The European Union's trade commissioner told senior American lawmakers on Thursday that the United States will face $4 billion in sanctions starting on Monday because Congress has failed to eliminate overseas tax shelters for American exporters that were declared illegal by the World Trade Organization.
The official, Pascal Lamy, delivered a similar warning in November as the Europeans were preparing to levy sanctions against the United States for tariffs on steel imports. President Bush lifted the disputed tariffs a month later.
But the political and economic climate has changed, and Mr. Lamy's reception in Washington this week has been markedly different. He won no assurances from senior members of Congress that competing bills aimed at resolving the problem would even reach floor debate before the spring recess.
Instead, the politics of the presidential campaign, with its focus on job losses and trade, has helped block any agreement. What was essentially a tax issue is now being portrayed by Republicans and Democrats as a jobs issue, and neither party wants to appear on the wrong side of that debate.
Even though the $4 billion in sanctions is the largest penalty ever authorized by the W.T.O., it has not elicited the same sense of outrage among Americans as the threat of the steel tariffs, in part because the potential sting of the sanctions has been blunted by the drop in the dollar's exchange rate with the euro, which has reduced the price abroad of American exports.
Industry is supporting legislation sponsored by Representative Bill Thomas, Republican of California and chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. Called the American Jobs Creation Act, the measure would eliminate the existing tax break found by the W.T.O. to be illegal and overhaul laws on international corporate taxation. But it would also compensate American manufacturers and producers with at least $61 billion in other tax breaks over the next 10 years.
The Senate bill, sponsored by Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the Finance Committee, and Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, would provide tax breaks for domestic manufacturers. Neither of the measures, however, will be enacted by the Monday deadline.
Mr. Grassley said he told Mr. Lamy during a private meeting on Thursday that he hoped to get his bill through the Senate next week.
''I can't fault him for wanting the United States to abide by the W.T.O. rules,'' Mr. Grassley said, ''but we're down to crunch time. As the sanctions kick in, rising month by month, I think we'll get businesses calling us and saying, 'Get this bill passed, get this bill passed.'''
Yet the chances that any legislation will be enacted are complicated by differences between the bills. The House measure would cost more than $60 billion while the Senate bill is revenue-neutral.
Mr. Grassley also says his approach would preserve more American jobs because it provides tax relief for domestic manufacturers but does not include all the tax relief for overseas operations found in Mr. Thomas's bill.
In that respect, the Senate proposal more closely resembles an alternative measure sponsored by Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York. In a letter to President Bush, Mr. Rangel and other leading House Democrats said on Thursday that the failure of Republican lawmakers to act on this legislation amounted to a ''lose-lose proposition for American workers and businesses.''
''As a result, Europe is on the brink of applying punitive sanctions to American exports of key manufacturing products,'' said the letter, which was signed by Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, and other senior lawmakers.
Mr. Lamy told a trade association lunch here that the sanctions would begin on Monday and only be lifted ''the day Congress passes the necessary legislation.''
He said he would have preferred that Congress repeal the export subsidies for American exports once it had lost the case on appeal two years ago.
''The name of this game is repeal, not retaliate and not sanction,'' Mr. Lamy said in a speech at the European-American Business Council.
He refused to take sides on the escalating debate around the differing measures before Congress, saying only that he looked forward to working with Mr. Thomas and Mr. Grassley when each chamber had passed legislation and lawmakers were meeting to resolve their differences in conference.
European and American officials have warned that a penalty of $4 billion could test the W.T.O. and urged that the issue be resolved quickly.
Two years ago, after Washington lost the initial ruling, Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative, said of the looming penalty that ''there's no doubt that if it starts to go into affecting that much trade, it's like using a nuclear weapon on the trading system.''
This week, a senior European official warned it was important that the United States acknowledge the validity of the penalty and then move quickly to resolve the problem.
''It is a huge issue of credibility of the W.T.O. dispute-settlement system,'' the official said.
The Europeans have promised to phase in their sanctions gradually, beginning with a 5 percent tariff and rising to a 17 percent tariff over the coming year.
The pain will be felt primarily by American farmers and manufacturers. The Europeans will begin imposing tariffs on agricultural products, leather goods, paper, steel, nuclear reactors, machinery, carpets, clothing and other items that are directly competitive with their own products.
With the steel tariffs, the Europeans had identified products in states that would be critical in the presidential election, a tactic they discarded in this case, choosing instead to sanction competing American products.
The new duties beginning in March will initially total $16.5 million a month and are scheduled to rise to $46.4 million a month in December.
The W.T.O. approved the sanctions last May but the Europeans held off imposing them in hope that Congress would enact new legislation.
