A Pulitzer Hopeful That's in Demand
Chicago can be miserable this time of year, but that has not stopped commercial producers and almost every major artistic director in New York from heading to the Goodman Theater to see Adam Guettel's ''Light in the Piazza.'' Based on a romance novella set in Florence by Elizabeth Spencer, the romantic musical, which may compete with ''Caroline, or Change'' for this year's Pulitzer Prize for drama, has become the latest artistically praised and commercially questionable musical to be courted by just about everyone with a dollar to spend on producing musical theater.
Tim Sanford of Playwrights Horizons and Lynne Meadow of Manhattan Theater Club flew out to see the show. Representatives of the Public Theater have also checked it out, but the smart money is that André Bishop of Lincoln Center, along with one or more commercial producers, will win the ''Piazza'' sweepstakes and present the show next fall. ''While it definitely should go to Broadway,'' said Peter Franklin, agent for Mr. Guettel, the composer and lyricist, and Craig Lucas, who wrote the book, ''the only question is, should it stop at a nonprofit first?''
There has been some talk that the staging (and the director, currently Bartlett Sher) would have to be rethought if the show were to move to a commercial theater. But Mr. Franklin said he disagreed, blaming a few rumormongers for the speculation. ''For some producers,'' he said, ''as soon as they hear about a show, the first thing they say is, 'Who can I fire?' ''
A Building Boom
When you think of multiplex theaters, popcorn and Hollywood movies come to mind, but such complexes are becoming increasingly common Off Broadway. The latest example is a three-theater center being built on 10th Avenue between 52nd and 53rd Streets for the Intar Theater and the Ensemble Studio Theater. It should be completed by fall 2006.
Intar, the longest-running Hispanic theater company in New York, is currently on West 53rd Street, and the respected Ensemble Studio Theater, whose annual marathon of one-act plays manages to lure downtown theatergoers uptown, has been renting cramped space on West 52nd Street for three decades.
''We've been like a family of 22 who are all using the same bathroom,'' said the Ensemble Studio Theater artistic director, Curt Dempster.
The new theaters are part of an Off Broadway building boom under way on the West Side of Manhattan. Theater Row kicked it off last year with its five theaters on 42nd Street, near the new Playwrights Horizons. There are already plans for at least two other new centers this year. Dodger Theatricals said it had made major progress on a five-theater complex in the former Cineplex Odeon theaters, beneath Worldwide Plaza on 50th Street between Eighth and Ninth Avenues, and expects to open this fall. A group that includes the ''Avenue Q'' producers Jeffrey Seller and Kevin McCollum plans to introduce three new theaters on 37th Street between 9th and 10th Avenues.
Ensemble Studio Theater's new complex includes a 250-seat theater and a 99-seat theater, two large rehearsal studios, a green room, offices and two towers of residential apartments. Intar will have a 199-seat space. The city, which previously owned the property, sold it to a developer with the understanding that the two theaters would be given a home.
Labor Contract
The League of American Theaters and Producers and the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, the union representing theatrical stagecraft workers across the United States and Canada, announced yesterday that they had reached a new three-year contract. It includes an arrangement, which will be in effect for 18 months, allowing producers of touring shows that meet certain criteria to pay reduced salaries to Equity actors. The proliferation of non-Equity tours, which are cheaper to produce, will be a major issue in the coming contract negotiations between the League and Actors Equity Association, but this new deal may point the way to a resolution.
Revisiting a Murderer
After writing a theatrical version of ''In the Belly of the Beast,'' an edited compilation of the murderer Jack Henry Abbott's letters from prison, Adrian Hall resumed his own correspondence with Abbott, who had spent most of his life behind bars. Such a correspondence, of course, had been tried before, with fatal results. Norman Mailer, a pen pal of Abbott, famously lobbied for his release. After being freed, Abbott murdered a young waiter.
Mr. Hall's play was well received when it opened in 1985, but the man it portrayed was not a supporter. ''He hated it,'' Mr. Hall said by phone. ''He thought it was one-sided and said that the way I write, I should be in prison.''
After Abbott hanged himself in prison in 2002, Mr. Hall took up his play again, rewriting it as a tract against the prison system. ''In the Belly of the Beast Revisited'' began performances on Monday at the 29th Street Rep. In the new play Mr. Hall incorporates Abbott's less-known follow-up book, ''My Return,'' written with Naomi Zack. Without agreeing with Abbott's original criticism, he calls the new play less one-sided. ''What interested me was when he died, there was an avalanche of hate in the press for this man,'' Mr. Hall said. ''I wanted to set the record straight.''
Playing Abbott will be David Mogentale, an athletic actor who has built a career on thugs, maniacs and especially killers. ''I've played about seven or eight, and that's not even counting the guys who brutalize people,'' said Mr. Mogentale, who estimates that 25 percent of his roles are murderers. ''I don't know why I'm attracted to these parts,'' he said. ''I had a happy childhood.''
Along the Way
*Meryl Streep is to accept the New Dramatists' 2004 lifetime achievement award at the New York Marriott Marquis on May 27.
*Philip Seymour Hoffman, Kevin Bacon, Peter Dinklage and Kyra Sedgwick will join the star-studded cast of ''Autobahn,'' Neil LaBute's collection of five one-acts for the MCC Theater on March 8 at the Little Shubert Theater on 42nd Street.
On Stage and Off  Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, a brief report in the On Stage and Off column of Weekend on Friday about an agreement between the League of American Theaters and Producers and the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees misstated its effect. The arrangement, which reduces salaries on some touring shows, applies only to members of the Stage Employees' union, not to members of Actors' Equity on tour.
