The battle over gay marriages has moved to the upstate college village of New Paltz, where the mayor announced yesterday that several gay couples would be married there today.
The mayor, Jason West, said his office expected to marry at least six same-sex couples today, in what appeared to be the first such ceremonies in New York State, where same-sex couples have historically been refused marriage licenses.
Mr. West, who is 26 and was elected last year on the Green Party ticket, said that marriages for gay couples were a matter of equal rights. ''I will simply be fulfilling my oath of office as mayor to solemnize a marriage and provide equal protection under the law for all citizens,'' Mr. West said by telephone yesterday.
The national debate over whether gay couples should have the right to marry has gained momentum recently, as San Francisco began to issue licenses and the Massachusetts Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional to prohibit gay marriage. In New York State, advocates and opponents of gay marriage interpret the law differently. Mr. West said the New Paltz marriages would be the first in New York State, though it was not clear last night whether the unions would be legally recognized.
''This is about family values and helping two consenting adults spend the rest of their lives together,'' the mayor said. ''They just want the same standing as other married couples in terms of hospital visitation rights, pensions and other things.''
President Bush announced this week that he would support a constitutional amendment against gay marriage. Gov. George E. Pataki has said the issue should be decided by the states. Some states have passed laws that outlaw gay marriages. Earlier this month, Ohio became the 38th state to pass such a ban. New York does not have a ban.
In the village of New Paltz, it was a newly arrived gay couple, married in the Netherlands, that inspired two of today's participants in the ceremony. ''Basically Jeff, my partner of six years, got wedding envy,'' one of the men, Billiam van Roestenberg, said. ''He saw the pictures and wanted us to have the same.'' The couple met six years ago on a sidewalk outside Barney's in New York. Mr. van Roestenberg said they had decided to get married ''before the Constitution changes.''
Mr. van Roestenberg said he and his partner, Jeffrey S. McGowan, both 39, planned for the ceremony to take place in a bed and breakfast inn in a three-story pink Victorian house. But yesterday, more couples called and expressed interest, and Mr. West said the site might need to be changed to accommodate everyone.
Even if the marriages go forward, the real test will be how they stand up against legal challenges. Mr. West said he would defy any challenges. ''I am willing to go to jail to hold these marriages,'' he said. ''This is a stand any decent American should take.''
