President Bush issued an executive order on Thursday that will allow American companies to begin negotiating a return to Libya, but members of the Senate said that more sanctions would have to be lifted before the United States would be able to include Libya in its program to find alternative work for weapons makers.
Mr. Bush's action had been widely anticipated after Libya agreed in December to dismantle its nuclear weapons program. Administration officials told Congress on Thursday that 55,000 pounds of ''sensitive Libyan equipment'' had already been flown from Libya to Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, including centrifuges that were still in crates from the A.Q. Khan Research Laboratories in Pakistan. It was Dr. Khan's network of nuclear suppliers, American officials say, that provided Libya with nuclear technology, though the project was halted long before it could produce a weapon.
Senator Richard G. Lugar, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said at a hearing on Libya on Thursday that no money from the nonproliferation bill that bears his name, the Nunn-Lugar Act, could be spent to retrain Libyan nuclear scientists because the act prohibits aid to countries under sanctions. ''Well, our feeling is that we better lift those sanctions,'' he said.
The law may also need to be expanded to operate beyond the former Soviet Union. President Bush has said that he favors doing so, but he has not said how he would pay for the broader mission.
The partial lifting of sanctions enables Libya, which produces about 1.4 million barrels of oil every day, to draw back American oil companies. A number of American companies, including Marathon Oil, Occidental Petroleum and ConocoPhillips, have already indicated interest in exploring new relationships with Libya.
Some survivors of the bombing of Pan Am 103 have accused Mr. Bush of bending to oil interests by beginning to normalize relations with Libya.
Correction:  March 3, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Friday about the lifting of sanctions after Libya reaffirmed its responsibility for the bombing of Pan Am 103 misidentified critics of the Bush administration's efforts to re-establish normal relations with that country. It was some relatives of the victims of Pan Am 103 who spoke out, not passengers and crew members from the flight; all were killed.
