Nearly a year after street vendors began clogging New York City streets after a law controlling them lapsed, state lawmakers said yesterday that they had reached agreement to reinstate the law.
Under the proposed legislation, the basic outlines of the law that expired last spring would remain intact, with new restrictions that would make the area around ground zero off limits to vendors and prohibit any peddling within five feet of a street corner, officials said.
''I am pleased that the State Assembly and Senate have agreed on legislation to renew the regulation of vendors on our streets,'' Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said in a statement. ''Without this law, many streets have been clogged with vendors, making it hazardous for pedestrians and hurting our quality of life.''
The failure to pass legislation regulating vendors had been seen as another example of the gridlock in Albany. The legislation had wide support, but had fallen victim to partisan squabbling over details.
Technically, the law that lawmakers agreed upon yesterday affects veterans, particularly disabled war veterans. Dating back to 1894, the law was put in place to help veterans of the Civil War by exempting them from the municipal laws limiting peddling and hawking.
Over the years, however, the courts have decided that other vendors are allowed to work on blocks where veterans sell their wares, depending on the products they sell. While there were only 60 disabled veterans with licenses under the old law and roughly 850 more vendors who had general merchandise licenses from the city, there are an estimated 10,000 vendors citywide.
One of the biggest hurdles to passing new legislation had to do with whether fingerprinting of vendors should be required.
The Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, had initially wanted such a procedure, but in the end agreed to drop it to reach a deal. ''It is a year since we have had legislation,'' he said. ''We think it is time for us to move.''
Mr. Bruno said the legislation would be introduced on Monday, when the Legislature is back in session, and is expected to pass both the Assembly and the Senate.
Through an aide, Gov. George E. Pataki signaled that he was ready to sign the legislation if the mayor and the Legislature had reached an agreement.
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver said the reason the deal took so long is that people were trying to strike a ''fair balance between the rights of the peddlers and the rights of business owners on the streets.''
He said initially people ''reach for the stars,'' but ''as time goes by, people begin to compromise.''
In addition to pressure from business leaders, politicians were also hearing from citizens having to deal with the cluttered sidewalks and veterans who wanted their special status back.
Assemblyman Steven Sanders, who represents the East Side of Manhattan and who sponsored both the 1991 legislation and the new proposal, said it was vital to resolve the issue.
''There really is nothing more important than providing some order on the city's streets,'' he said. ''Regrettably, it took longer than it should have.''
In addition to restricting activity around ground zero, another block would be added to the list of restricted areas that existed under the old law -- 42nd Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues. The new law would also increase the number of licenses given to veterans to 105.
Mr. Sanders said the restriction on the distance a vendor could stand from a street corner was a critical change. ''It ensures that people are able to cross the streets without dancing around all kinds of obstructions,'' he said.
In addition, this law would not expire as the 1991 law did, so there is little likelihood that the city will find itself without a vending law again, Mr. Sanders said.Some critics have said that the vending law was a relic of a very different city and that there are better ways of helping veterans. Mr. Sanders said, however, that some people still choose to make a living peddling and that it was not for the state to tell them how to live.
''New York City is different than it was in the 1890's,'' he said. ''It is even different than it was in 1991.''
The new law takes into account the realities of the post-Sept. 11 landscape, Mr. Sanders said, by banning vending around ground zero, and still manages to respect the rights of veterans, who are as present on people's minds now as they have been during any war past.
