Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Iraq's most powerful religious leader, demanded Thursday that nationwide elections be held by the end of the year, but dropped his earlier insistence on holding them before the United States transfers sovereignty to the Iraqis on June 30.
In a statement released by his office in Najaf, Ayatollah Sistani called for ''clear guarantees,'' possibly in the form of a resolution by the United Nations Security Council, that elections would be held in 2004. He said the caretaker government that is likely to take control of the country from the Americans at the end of June should confine itself to an agenda largely limited to setting up the elections.
''The period in which an unelected government should take control of this country must be short and for few months only,'' the ayatollah said.
His remarks increased pressure on the United Nations, the United States and Iraq's American-appointed leaders to get to work immediately on setting up the elections. There is no firm plan on how to do so, or for what shape the caretaker government would take after June 30. Nor is it clear how such a government would have the power to administer a country faced with violence and growing religious and ethnic differences.
The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, said last week that the earliest date for elections would be the end of this year, provided planning begins immediately. But he also implied that it would be difficult to stay on that timetable and suggested that elections could be held later in 2005.
Although Ayatollah Sistani has long maintained that he and other Shiite leaders should remain aloof from the give-and-take of politics, he is not hesitating to use his moral authority to affect decisions that will shape Iraq's future.
His remarks last month forced the United States to abandon a plan to hand over sovereignty through a system of nationwide caucuses. And it was his pleas that brought the United Nations back to Iraq after it had largely pulled out following the deadly truck-bombing of its headquarters in Baghdad last August.
A team of United Nations experts who visited Iraq issued a report last week concluding it would not be feasible to hold credible elections before June 30. The United States argued that Iraq lacked a roster of voters and other fundamental elements that could make elections possible.
In his statement on Thursday, Ayatollah Sistani said he accepted the United Nations team's assessment. He did not spell out any design for the caretaker government.
The 25 members of the Iraqi Governing Council are drafting a temporary constitution that is supposed to lay out the shape of the government.
Ayatollah Sistani, leader of the country's Shiite Muslims, said the elections should select members of a national assembly, which could then draft a permanent constitution.
''Although the team has dismissed the idea of handing sovereignty over to an elected government, its decision that it is possible to hold elections at the end of this year is extremely important,'' the statement said.
Before issuing his statement, Ayatollah Sistani met for more than an hour with five Shiite members of the Iraqi Governing Council. It was not clear what was discussed.
Mr. Annan said last week that one of the first necessary steps would be to have an election commission establish the rules and structure for a national vote. After that, he said, it would take at least eight months to set up polling places and other election hardware.
''We support the statement made by Sistani in all its details,'' Mowaffak al-Rubaie, a member of the Governing Council, said after the meeting. ''We have been blessed by visiting Sistani, and we took instructions from him.'' He gave no other details.
Officials at the United Nations said Thursday they would withhold publ comment on Ayatollah Sistani's statement.
While Iraqi leaders continue to wrestle with the timing and structure of the elections, they are also working to resolve several other potentially divisive issues, including an interim constitution, due on Saturday, and a status-of-forces agreement for the continuing presence of American troops, due by March.
The negotiations over the temporary constitution have been riven by disagreements over several issues, including the role of Islam in politics and the degree of autonomy that should be granted to the Kurdish people in the north.
Dan Senor, a spokesman for the civilian administrators here, predicted that the Iraqis would complete their work by their deadline Saturday. But he suggested that some important elements of the document might be left for later.
''It doesn't have to cover everything,'' Mr. Senor said of the temporary constitution. ''But it certainly has to include the separation of powers, an independent judiciary. We believe that federalism should be addressed.''
Ayatollah Sistani is said to be closely watching the debates over the interim constitution and is presumed by many people to have an effective veto power over it.
American occupation officials have pressed ahead rapidly with plans to pull back from the country's major cities, including Baghdad, and to hand over responsibility for much of the security to Iraq's reconstituted police, civil defense force and army.
The American military commander in Iraq, Lt. Gen Ricardo Sanchez, said at a news conference in Baghdad today that he expected the pullback of United States units to camps outside the cities, or on the cities' outskirts, to take place by ''mid- to late April,'' two months ahead of the date for the sovereignty transfer. But he said any Iraqi resistance groups planning to exploit the pullback ''will be making a deadly error,'' because American troops will remain poised with ''quick-reaction forces'' to strike against any attackers inside the cities.
''Let me emphasize that this does not mean that we are not going to be in the cities,'' General Sanchez said, outlining plans for American troops to mount joint patrols with Iraqi security forces and to conduct any other military operations inside the cities that are judged necessary.
He gave a cautiously optimistic assessment of American progress in the war, saying he was confident that the new Iraqi political structures could be successfully defended by American and Iraqi forces and their allied partners. He refused to be drawn out on the question of whether American troop commanders considered the June 30 date for the sovereignty transfer to be too hasty -- a view common among other American officers in Iraq -- saying that the date was fixed.
But when he was pressed on the challenges American troops may face after June 30, he offered a mixed view. ''The security situation is manageable whatever governance situation there may be.''
Later, he was more cautious. ''Is it possible the country could move to civil war, and U.S. forces could end up having to separate ethnic groups?'' he said. ''I think it's possible, but I don't think it's likely.''
Allied officials who spoke with reporters later said United States commanders were continuing to prepare for the risk of increasing attacks as June 30 neared, both by groups loyal to Saddam Hussein and Islamic terrorists -- ''either from people who are looking back to things as they used to be, or looking forward to a sort of apocalyptic, extremist country'' like Afghanistan under the Taliban, as one official put it.
But General Sanchez said he was confident that historians would judge American military operations in Iraq favorably, once the mission ends, whenever that may be. Inside a year since Mr. Hussein was toppled, he said, the American occupation had defeated a dictatorial government, ''taken care of the defeated'' by restoring basic freedoms and starting an economic revival, and laid down plans for a return of sovereignty. ''It will be a remarkable case study in what a powerful, benevolent army can do,'' he said.
