Israeli security forces shot dead two Palestinians and wounded dozens, according to Palestinian doctors, in daylong clashes on Thursday with stone-throwing protesters in two West Bank villages. It was the deadliest confrontation yet linked to Israel's separation barrier.
Also, two Palestinian gunmen killed an Israeli soldier at an industrial zone in the northern Gaza Strip, where thousands of Palestinians work in Israeli-run factories. Both attackers were fatally shot by other soldiers.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, demanded that Israel return millions of dollars seized Wednesday during a raid of Palestinian banks in Ramallah. Israel said its troops took around $7 million to $9 million dollars in various currencies from some 400 accounts, saying the money was being used to finance terror attacks.
Mr. Qurei, after meeting with bank officials, said, ''This money was stolen and must be given back.''
Palestinians have been protesting the barrier all week to highlight the hearings on its legality, held Monday through Wednesday, at the International Court of Justice at The Hague.
Any ruling by the court is only advisory, and none is expected for a couple of months. Still, the hearings focused international attention on the barrier, much of it being built inside the West Bank. Israel says the barrier is essential to preventing suicide bombings; Palestinians argue that it gobbles up land they seek for a future state.
Here in Biddu, a village just a few miles northwest of Jerusalem, hundreds of protesting Palestinians filled a narrow street. They turned a car on its side and hurled stones at Israeli forces from behind it.
The Israelis responded with repeated rounds of tear gas and rubber bullets. The military and police said they were not aware of live bullets being used. But Palestinian witnesses and doctors who treated the wounded said live rounds fired by the Israeli forces accounted for the two Palestinian deaths and several of the wounded.
One Palestinian man, Muhammad Bedwan, 21, raised his head from behind the car and was hit in the forehead, witnesses said. Other protesters carried him to one of the ambulances that shuttled from the protest to a nearby clinic throughout the day. He was later taken to nearby Ramallah for treatment.
Dr. Khaled Ayyash, director of the Biddu clinic, said that about 50 Palestinians were wounded. Around 20 were hit by live rounds or rubber bullets, and the rest suffered from tear gas inhalation, he said.
Several policemen were lightly wounded, the Israeli police said.
It was the third straight day of demonstrations in Biddu and a neighboring village, Beit Surik.
Israeli earthmovers began preparing the ground this week around the villages for a new segment of the barrier. Residents say they will be separated from farmland and trapped in an isolated enclave.
The area has been mostly calm during the current uprising, and because the villages are near the West Bank boundary, many residents have been working inside Israel.
''People feel they are going to be cut off by the wall,'' said Alauddin Shawahine, a Biddu pharmacist.
Israeli officials said the Palestinians were seeking access to the Israeli economy even as attacks on Israelis continued, pointing to the Thursday morning shooting in the Gaza industrial zone. The Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a faction loyal to Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat, claimed responsibility for the attack.
Dore Gold, an adviser to the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, said the Palestinian leadership ''wants to maintain the right of armed struggle against Israel and use The Hague to tear down Israel's defenses.''
Last month, a young Palestinian mother carried out a suicide bombing in the same area in Gaza, killing four members of the Israeli security forces. As it did after that attack, Israel closed the area after the Thursday shooting, though it did not say for how long.
The closure affects at least 4,000 Palestinians who work in factories in the industrial zone, jobs that are highly prized in Gaza, where unemployment and poverty are rampant. It will also affect an even larger number who commute through the area to Israel.
In another incident on Thursday, Israeli troops temporarily blocked visitors from entering Mr. Arafat's compound in Ramallah.
Just outside the compound, the soldiers shot and wounded a Palestinian man after he threw a firebomb at the troops, Israeli security officials said.
Israeli troops have not operated that close to Mr. Arafat's compound in recent months. An Israeli security official described it as an arrest operation, but no one was detained, and the soldiers left after several hours.
