The Ford Motor Company ceased production at its sprawling assembly plant here on Thursday, ending 56 years as a manufacturing fixture in north-central New Jersey and stripping away yet another major name from the state's industrial base.
The closing of operations was ceremonial and bittersweet. During a shortened final shift, workers turned out the last 50 of the nearly 1.7 million small pickup trucks the plant has produced since the early 1990's and then retired to the cafeteria for a midmorning sendoff of hot dogs, soft drinks and cake. Afterward, some workers drifted away to bars and diners for their goodbyes.
''It's been a sad day because these people have done more than was expected of them, with all the adversity, knowing the plant was going to close,'' said Robert LaPoint, chairman of Local 980 of the United Auto Workers, which represented Edison's 750 production workers. ''They go out with their heads held proud.''
The closing adds to the steady erosion of manufacturing in New Jersey that started nearly 35 years ago.
''It's another part of the passing of an era for New Jersey and the rest of the region,'' said Joseph J. Seneca, a professor at Rutgers and chairman of the New Jersey Council of Economic Advisers, which provides economic analysis to the governor and the Legislature. Since 1969, New Jersey has lost about 540,000 manufacturing jobs, Professor Seneca said. At the end of 2003, he said, New Jersey had 355,100 manufacturing jobs, or 8.8 percent of total employment, down from a peak of 893,600 jobs, or 34.7 percent of all employment, in 1969.
In part, he said, the Edison plant fell victim to ''intense worldwide competition'' in the auto industry and an excess of production plants and assembly lines.
Ford's contract with the U.A.W. provided Edison's workers with three options: retirement, transfer or dismissal with three years' pay. About 300 workers are retiring and will receive various one-time payments, in addition to their regular pensions, a Ford spokesman, Octavio Navarro, said. Those payments include $35,000 for workers whose age and years of service total at least 85, Mr. LaPoint said.
At the moment, between 150 and 200 are considering relocating to another Ford plant at their regular salary, Mr. Navarro said. The others have opted for dismissal. Under the contract, these workers will receive their current salary through 2007 if they perform some type of community service each day, such as hospital volunteering, Mr. Navarro said.
During the afternoon, several workers lingered at a picnic table behind the union office. Some drank beer, others brandy.
Gregory O'Neal, 40, who has worked at the plant for five years, call the closing ''pleasant.'' He said: ''We must move on. Ford is a family. They're going to take care of their people until the end.'' He said he was opting for the termination plan with three years' pay.
A pipe fitter, Kevin Lewis, 48, said he was bitter. He has three children, and the oldest is headed for college this fall. ''There are things I have to pay for this year,'' he said, ''and I'm not sure how I'm going to pay for them.''
At Craig's Deli, the owner, Craig Mailler, said he expected to lose about 20 percent of his business. ''It's going to kill me,'' he said. But, he added, he will no longer have to open at 5 a.m. ''I used to do $150 in the first hour,'' he said. ''Now if I do $20, I'll be lucky.''
Mr. Navarro said the Edison work force turned out quality Ranger and Mazda B-Series pickups and had earned high performance grades from the company. ''It was an economic issue at the end of the day,'' Mr. Navarro said of the reason for the plant's demise. In a major retrenchment plan announced in January 2002, Ford said the Edison plant would be shut by the middle of the decade, along with other plants in Ohio, Michigan, Missouri and Ontario, and that 35,000 workers over all would be terminated.
Cutbacks in Edison started months ago. Since last year, about 600 jobs have been eliminated there, Mr. Navarro said. The Edison plant opened in 1948 in Ford's post-World War II expansion. Over the years, the company said, it produced nearly 6.9 millions vehicles, starting with Lincolns in its first decade, then Falcons, Comets and Mustangs in the 1960's, and Pintos, Bobcats, Escorts and Lynxes from 1972 to 1990. Then, production shifted to the pickups.
The future of the site is now uncertain. A Ford spokeswoman, Angie Kozleski, said a dozen developers have submitted bids to buy the land.
Edison's mayor, George A. Spadoro, said he sympathized with Ford's workers and local merchants who will suffer financially. But he envisioned a combination of new retail, commercial and entertainment outlets on the site -- on a busy Route 1 commercial strip -- that will generate enough jobs to offset loss of the Ford workers.
''From the ashes of the closed plant will rise a wonderful mixed-use property,'' he said.
