Except for the water that dripped from his ceiling when it rained, Adam White, a young lawyer, loved the tiny studio he found a decade ago on the top floor of a five-story walk-up on East 83rd Street. It was only $590 a month and protected by rent stabilization.
So after the landlord tried and failed to stop the leaks over several years, Mr. White withheld two months' rent and demanded that they finally be fixed. The landlord filed an eviction notice in Housing Court, but the two sides soon came to an agreement. Mr. White received a rebate on his rent, and a promise of a more thorough repair job. The landlord dropped the court case, and it was dismissed.
In some ways the case was a typical landlord-tenant tug of war. But six years later, Mr. White, now with a girlfriend and a baby, was stunned to learn that he had been turned down for a large, sunny apartment in Brooklyn because a tenant screening report showed that he had been sued in Housing Court for failing to pay rent on his Manhattan studio.
Mr. White, tenant advocates say, is one of thousands of New York renters who have been barred from renting apartments -- in expensive high-rises as well as in rent-regulated tenements in less affluent neighborhoods -- because of reports of Housing Court cases that were as often as not dismissed, or won by the tenant.
Yesterday lawyers representing Mr. White, including lawyers for AARP, an association representing older Americans, filed a class-action lawsuit against First American Registry, a large tenant-screening company, seeking an injunction requiring it to provide updated, accurate information in its reports.
Reports with incomplete information have ''a chilling effect on tenants,'' said James B. Fishman, the lead counsel in the case, who is a tenant lawyer and former assistant attorney general for New York State in the consumer frauds bureau. ''Tenants with complaints about noise, repairs or heat will have to pay their rent and keep their mouths shut because landlords can have them blacklisted.''
Stacy J. Canan, a lawyer with AARP and a co-counsel in the suit, filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan, said her organization had decided to assist in the case because improper screening of tenants in New York and around the country could be particularly harmful to older tenants, who sometimes struggle to find housing that they can afford so they can live independently.
The report on Mr. White was filed by First American Registry, which systematically buys records of housing court filings across the country and does screening for landlords for as little as $10 to $15 a search. It says it has become the largest residential screening company in the country because of its reputation for accuracy and for protecting privacy.
Nevel DeHart, the executive vice president of Registry-SafeRent, which operates the screening service being sued, said the reports were based on an accurate account of public records.
He said the company, a subsidiary of First Advantage Corporation, strictly follows credit reporting rules and thoroughly investigates all complaints, correcting any mistakes that are found.
''What we report is what is in the public record; we don't alter the public record,'' Mr. DeHart said.
But the suit contends that under federal and state fair-credit reporting laws, the company has an obligation not only to reprint court filings, but also to make sure the reports are complete and not misleading. By the time prospective tenants learn about outdated information in a report, they have lost the apartments they were seeking, tenant advocates said. Last year, more than 360,000 Housing Court cases were filed in the city, the majority for nonpayment of rent, court officials said.
Sometimes, the tenant-screening procedures make it harder for tenants to move out, and harder for a landlord to re-rent an apartment. Monica Felix, a health aide in a day care center, receives a federal rent subsidy. She said her landlord sued her after the government refused to pay its share of her rent because of leak damage in her apartment on University Avenue in the Bronx.
Ms. Felix received emergency permission to move to another apartment, but when she found a place she liked on Bronx Park East, and paid a $20 credit check fee, she was turned down because American Registry's credit check showed that she had recently been sued in Housing Court.
Although city housing officials say she cannot be held liable for the government payments, she says she is unable to move until the court case is resolved, even though she will lose her rent subsidy if she does not move by April. A hearing in the case was delayed until next month, when her landlord's lawyer did not show up, she said.
Residential Real Estate
