Fueled by national controversy and an Ash Wednesday opening, ''The Passion of the Christ,'' Mel Gibson's new film about the Crucifixion, took in $23.5 million at the box office on its opening day.
The figure was the fifth-largest Wednesday opening in Hollywood history. ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' holds first place, having opened in December with $34.4 million, and second is ''Star Wars: Episode I, the Phantom Menace,'' which took in $31.36 million, adjusted for inflation, on its first day in 1999. Industry experts agreed that the box-office figure was astonishing for an extremely violent, R-rated, religious film in Aramaic and Latin with English subtitles.
''This number would be impressive for a mainstream blockbuster, let alone a subtitled historical-religious epic,'' said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which tracks ticket sales. ''This shows the power of public discourse with regard to religious topics and the effect a full-blown media blitz can have on the public.''
The movie, which has become a social and cultural phenomenon and sparked a raging debate over whether the graphic depiction of Jesus' death could reignite anti-Semitism, opened on 4,600 screens in 3,006 theaters on Wednesday. The film took in $3 million more in advance screenings on Monday and Tuesday.
Bob Berney, president of Newmarket Films, which is distributing the picture, said he expected the number of theaters to increase slightly next week because of the intense interest. The film is already moving to more screens on Friday, for a total of 4,793 in 3,043 theaters.
''The success of the film so far is incredible, and it's across the board,'' Mr. Berney said. He added that theaters were packed not just in Bible Belt cities like Houston and Oklahoma City, but also at the AMC theater on 42nd Street in Manhattan and the soaring ArcLight Cinemas in Hollywood. It was unclear if the film would sustain its huge opening-day numbers through the weekend. Mr. Berney said Thursday ticket sales were $2 million by 8 a.m. but would probably not reach Wednesday's total. Some producers and studio executives, looking at the numbers, said the film would probably take in $75 million by the close of the weekend and, if attendance continued to hold up, could take in as much as $100 million in the first five days.
''My feeling is these people will go back more than once,'' Mr. Berney said. ''And with this kind of number, people who are not part of churches will go just out of feeling that they've got to see it, a curiosity.''
He predicted that attendance would not drop off radically, as happens with many films that spark heavy initial interest. ''I don't know how long it will go,'' he said, ''but there will be enough repeat business to sustain it for quite a while.''
--------------------
Papal Statement Is Urged
JERUSALEM, Feb. 26 (AP) -- One of Israel's two chief rabbis urged Pope John Paul II on Thursday to reaffirm publicly that Jews are not to blame for the death of Jesus, saying he fears that Mel Gibson's film ''The Passion of the Christ'' could revive such beliefs.
The Ashkenazi chief rabbi, Yona Metzger, said he was sending a letter to the pope asking him to reiterate a Roman Catholic Church decision in the 1960's that reversed the centuries-old doctrine that Jews were behind the Crucifixion.
Vatican officials responded by saying the church's opposition to anti-Semitism is clear, as expressed by its 1965 document on the matter. They added that the pope has on many occasions reiterated this view, notably when he visited Israel in 2000 and when he went to the synagogue in Rome in 1986.
