The golf course at La Costa Resort and Spa was saturated Thursday by heavy rains, forcing postponement of the second round of the Match Play Championship. Second-round matches will be played Friday morning, followed by third-round matches in the afternoon.
A mini-river ran through four holes -- Nos. 1, 9, 16 and 18 -- because of rains earlier in the week and on Wednesday night.
The extended forecast in the San Diego area was good, and officials remained confident the tournament would be completed by Sunday.
''There's a little chance of some showers, but nothing severe,'' said Mike Shea, the senior director of rules for the PGA Tour.
Officials decided to postpone play Thursday when it became obvious there was too much water on the course.
''The main concern is the casual water in the fairways, and we just couldn't play the game properly,'' Shea said. ''At some point in time, you just have to say it doesn't make sense.''
Second-Round Lineup
Friday's morning matches will feature David Toms versus Shaun Micheel, John Huston vs. Peter Lonard, Kenny Perry vs. Steve Flesch, Phil Mickelson vs. Ben Curtis, Tiger Woods vs. Trevor Immelman, Mike Weir vs. Stephen Leaney, Vijay Singh vs. Jerry Kelly, Davis Love III vs. Fred Couples, Padraig Harrington vs. Bob Estes, Duffy Waldorf vs. Ian Poulter, Darren Clarke vs. Alex Cejka, Stuart Appleby vs. Chris DiMarco, Thomas Bjorn vs. Fredrik Jacobson, Colin Montgomerie vs. Stewart Cink, Chad Campbell vs. Loren Roberts, and Robert Allenby vs. Adam Scott.
Clarke Shapes Up
The prospect of playing five matches in three days did not faze Darren Clarke, who has lost about 35 pounds in six months. Clarke won the match play championship in 2000, defeating Tiger Woods in the final match. But Woods and others had urged Clarke to lose weight for years, and he finally did.
''Basically I'm in the gym six days a week, working out two hours a day,'' Clarke said. ''If I was to go all the way this week, then certainly I think I'd be in a lot better shape to do that.''
Last year's Masters convinced Clarke that he needed to get in better shape.
He held a three-stroke lead after the first round but faded into a tie for 28th after shooting 76-78-74 in the last three rounds. Bad weather forced players to play 36 holes on Friday, and he felt himself running out of energy.
''I knew part of the reason why I played so poorly after the first round was because I wasn't in shape, so I had to change,'' Clarke said.
Clarke also changed his diet, and he has gotten used to it.
''Just not as many trips to In-N-Out Burger,'' he said.
Montgomerie Fights Back
Colin Montgomerie has fallen to No. 57 in the world ranking after being a fixture in the top 20 for years. At 40, Montgomerie believes he has many good years left, but admits it will take hard work to regain his form. For most of the 1990's, he was considered Europe's best player, winning the European Order of Merit seven consecutive years.
''It's so easy to drop out of the top 50,'' Montgomerie said. ''I've proved it. It's so bloody simple to drop away, so easy to let it go, and so bloody difficult to get it back again. It is a bit of a grind. I've got to keep the family, as well, together, and I've got to put that first, and yet I want to get my career back on the go as well, and it's very tough.
''I'm still ambitious enough and feel that I'm good enough to compete at this level. It was only a year and a half ago that I was doing my Ryder Cup thing to prove that I still can compete at this level. If I win an Order of Merit now, then it'll be worth more than all seven put together.''
GOLF: NOTEBOOK
