Following are excerpts from statements by the Democratic presidential candidates last night at a debate in Los Angeles, as recorded by The New York Times:
JOHN EDWARDS  On Mr. Kerry
There's a fundamental question here . . . that has to be decided by voters in this country, Democratic primary voters, which is first, Do we need real change in America and real change in Washington, D.C.? If people believe we do, I do.
Then the second question is: Do you believe that change is more likely to be brought about by someone who has spent 20 years in Washington, or by someone who's more of an outsider to this process, somebody who comes from the same place that most Americans come from?
JOHN KERRY  On Mr. Edwards
I respect completely where John comes from and the story of his life. It's an American story. But there are many other American stories. . . . I've had experiences that John hasn't had and others here haven't had. And we all bring to the table our life.
I believe that my 35 years of experience fighting against powerful forces in this country that don't want to do things for the very people John is talking about, and leading and fighting in international affairs, national security, military affairs, is critical to what this country needs today in terms of leadership.
AL SHARPTON  On same-sex marriage
This is where I agree with Senator Kerry and Senator Edwards. Bush is trying to go from race baiting with quotas in 2000 to gay baiting in 2004. And all of us ought to be united that he does not scapegoat the gay and lesbian community like he did minorities four years ago. . . . The issue in 2004 is not if gays marry. The issue's not who you go to bed with. The issue is whether either of you have a job when you get up in the morning.
DENNIS J. KUCINICH  On his core issues
I'm here to provide the people of this country with a real choice in their selection. Some of the differences that are here are stylistic. I'm offering some substantive change in this country. . . .
I'm the voice for getting out of Iraq, for universal single-payer health care, for getting out of Nafta and the W.T.O., for having our children go to college tuition-free, for saving Social Security from privatization.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
