The United States, North Korea and four other nations on Thursday discussed freezing North Korea's nuclear program in exchange for energy aid. But the continuing talks here also exposed stark disagreements that left diplomats wondering whether they could emerge with much more than a commitment to keep negotiating.
Both the United States and North Korea appeared to make modest concessions at the talks, several participants said, and the tone was described as constructive and lacking the invective that often punctuates discussions with North Korea. The two had private meetings during each of the first two days as well as participating in group discussions.
But it was clear that the United States and North Korea made scant progress in resolving their differences over the scope of North Korea's nuclear program, the steps it would have to take to abolish it and the timing of any aid packages for North Korea.
To underscore their differences, North Korea hurriedly convened international reporters Thursday night and denounced the ''hard line stance'' of the United States for preventing progress.
''The second round of six-nation talks isn't making progress because of the United States' hard-line position,'' said Choe Jin Su, the North Korean ambassador in Beijing.
''We will abandon our nuclear weapons program when the United States drops its hostile policy toward North Korea,'' Mr. Choe said. ''The United States should take all the responsibility for the meeting not making progress.''
It was not clear whether North Korea's statement was a warning that it planned to withdraw from the talks or merely public posturing before the third and possibly final day of negotiations on Friday.
Assessments of how well the talks were going depended heavily on which party was doing the assessing. In addition to the United States and North Korea, Japan, South Korea, China and Russia are taking part in the discussions.
China, which brokered the talks, said the participants had made significant progress in discussing the ''comprehensive stopping of nuclear activities.''
South Korea also presented an upbeat view of the first two days of discussions, which Lee Soo Hyuck, South Korea's chief negotiator, said focused largely on South Korea's own plan for freezing and later dismantling North Korea's nuclear program in exchange for energy aid.
Speaking to reporters after the talks, Mr. Lee said China and Russia joined South Korea in offering energy assistance to North Korea if its agreed to a comprehensive freeze on the way to finally abolishing its nuclear program.
Mr. Lee said the United States and Japan said they would not participate in such an aid program. But he added that the United States signaled ''its understanding and support'' for the plan, a stance that might be interpreted as a modest concession by the Bush administration. The administration had said that it opposed any aid for North Korea until the country unilaterally dismantled all atomic weapons facilities.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell called the meetings ''positive.'' Speaking in Washington, he said, ''There is a promising attitude that is emerging from those meetings, and hopefully we can move in the right direction from there.''
The Russian delegate at the talks, Aleksandr Losyukov, provided a more skeptical analysis, telling reporters that significant differences emerged between the United States and North Korea and that some splits were evident among the other parties as well.
He said North Korea insisted that it would abolish only the military component of its nuclear program and would retain a ''peaceful nuclear program'' for the purpose of generating electricity.
The United States has firmly opposed that idea, in part because North Korea does not currently produce any electricity from nuclear power plants. Keeping a civilian program might make it easier for North Korea to quickly resume an arms program.
Mr. Losyukov and South Korean diplomats also made it clear that North Korea continued to deny that it had two distinct efforts to produce fissile material for nuclear bombs -- one from plutonium and the other by uranium enrichment. The United States has demanded that North Korea admit to seeking the raw fuel for atomic weapons from both sources.
