Every once in a while a movie comes through with a daring brand of emotional and filmmaking honesty that redefines the medium. ''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' is not such a movie. This reimagining of the recklessly melodramatic 1987 original is packed with flashy, taffeta silliness and a desperation for a sweaty PG-13 sexiness so laughable that the cast deserves Oscar nominations for getting through the picture without cracking up. It's one of the rare films for which a blooper reel would be redundant.
The movie starts the goofiness with the legend ''based on true events,'' placing ''Nights'' in the pantheon of historically faithful films like ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre,'' ''Against the Ropes'' and ''Showgirls.''
Well, there are clearly some things that are true. Apparently there really is a Havana, and there actually was a year 1958, in which the film is set. A teenager, Katey Miller (Romola Garai) has just moved to Havana with her family; her father, Bert (John Slattery), has gone there to work for the Ford Motor Company.
A nervous, repressed bookworm, Katey wraps her arms around her torso and wears a black cardigan as she sits by the pool, making us wonder if she grew up to be the Diane Keaton character in ''Something's Gotta Give.'' We know she's smart because in the first 10 minutes Radcliffe comes up so often in conversation about her that it starts to sound like Ivy League product placement.
Enter the foxy, sultry Javier (Diego Luna), a busboy whom Katey accidentally disgraces when she knocks over his tray of drinks. When she rushes to pay for the beverages, he bats his lush eyelashes and hisses, ''I don't need your charity,'' biting off the syllables of the last word as if he were chomping off plugs of tobacco on the pitching mound. Of course, this unfortunate introduction leads them down the path of amor -- love.
Despite seeming like an episode of ''American Dreams'' written by Pepé Le Pew, ''Nights'' has a few things in its favor. Chief among these, um, assets is an initially welcome cameo, though just mentioning it probably gives it away. (Unfortunately, the appearance lingers too long, going from cameo to the guest star who wouldn't leave.) Some of the Puerto Rican locations are dead ringers for Havana, particularly one that looks remarkably like that majestic Havana resort, the Hotel Nacional; the production designer Hugo Luczyc-Wyhowski has no need to hang his head, nor does the cinematographer, Anthony Richmond, who glazes the images with a warm sunlight.
Oddly enough, Mr. Luna shouldn't be too embarrassed, either. He has a playful, nuzzling way with dialogue and gently nudges much -- though obviously not all -- of the campiness out of material like ''What does looking have to do with it? Just feel the music!'' Given that he's only recently fluent in English, he does as well as he can with lines that sound as if they were spoken by Dirk Diggler in the porno-movies-within-the-movie in ''Boogie Nights.''
Poor Ms. Garai doesn't do nearly as well. Her entire performance consists of her training her stunned lower jaw on everyone else in the movie. (She seems to be doing a Drew Barrymore impression.) Ms. Garai is forced to mature too quickly, making the transition from nerdy to physically confident faster than this movie goes from clichéd to absurd. And that's a difficult task in a film that features ''Cubans'' dirty dancing -- in broad daylight in a public square -- as if they were the original cast of Bob Fosse's ''Chicago.'' Even the little kids fling their hips around like extras in a Christina Aguilera video. It's no wonder Fidel Castro wanted Batista out of the country.
Fittingly, politics rears its ugly head. Javier's firebrand brother, Carlos (René Lavan), lays into him for not furthering the goals of the revolution, flaring his nostrils through lines like ''You pour money into the pockets of the gangsters who run this country?''
It's safe to say that Carlos doesn't take Javier seriously. Then again, ''Nights,'' which opens nationwide today, is a series of condescensions. Javier mocks the stiff Katey. Then he develops a semipolitical conscience in a postcoital moment, which, of course, is when it happens with most teenagers. Continuing the string of humiliations, Katey gives the cold shoulder to her little sister, Susie (the engaging Mika Boorem), when she gets Javier fired. But since Javier's dismissal gives Katey the idea to recruit him as her dance partner for a contest that could win him $5,000 and his family's ticket to the United States -- igniting the rickety plot -- it seems Katey owes Susie something. And Katey's mom (Sela Ward) is furious when she finds out her daughter has been spending time with Javier.
Amusingly, Katey's eyes nearly pop out of their sockets when she sees Javier rolling his hips at the hot-hot-hot nightclub La Rosa Negro, where walking across the room to the bar becomes an opening act. Only because she's the film's star does Javier abandon the phalanx of beautiful Latinas to join a girl who's culturally so white she's nearly translucent. All of this patronizing makes sense in a movie that turns the Cuban Revolution into a Carnival Cruise Lines dance number. It continues the tradition of ruining the country as a film backdrop, as found in ''Havana'' (1990) and ''Cuba'' (1979), where the unfortunate American movie characters have their love affairs ruined by that annoying sociopolitical turmoil.
Then again, ''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' is a movie set in a mythological time-warp village with no poor people, where nobody smokes and all the music seems to have been produced by Dallas Austin for a Black Eyed Peas album. Evidently 1958 Havana is the land where tolerance and hip-hop were invented. Oh, and some peasants got together to samba around a young, hot couple as a regime that still raises questions was just getting started.
To quote Roger Debris from ''The Producers,'' ''It's just drenched with historical goodies like that.''
''Dirty Dancing: Havana Nights'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has acid-washed sleaziness guaranteed to get it mocked on ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien,'' strong language, sexuality and mucho hip-shaking.
DIRTY DANCING  Havana Nights
Directed by Guy Ferland; written by Boaz Yakin and Victoria Arch, based on a story by Kate Gunzinger and Peter Sagal; director of photography, Anthony Richmond; edited by Scott Richter and Luis Colina; music by Heitor Pereira; choreography by Joann Jansen; production designer, Hugo Luczyc-Wyhowski; produced by Lawrence Bender and Sarah Green; released by Lions Gate Films and Miramax Films. Running time: 86 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Diego Luna (Javier Suarez), Romola Garai (Katey Miller), Sela Ward (Jeannie Miller), John Slattery (Bert Miller), Jonathan Jackson (James Phelps), René Lavan (Carlos Suarez), Mika Boorem (Susie Miller) and January Jones (Eve).
FILM REVIEW
