A California jury ruled on Thursday in favor of I.B.M. in a case brought by two former employees who contended that they contracted cancer because they had been exposed to dangerous chemicals at I.B.M.'s disk-drive factory in San Jose.
The verdict, which came after less than two days of deliberations, is a blow to worker advocacy groups who hoped that the jury would support their argument that electronics companies knowingly exposed workers to noxious chemicals in the 1970's and 80's.
The case was brought by Alida Hernandez, 73, whose cancer was diagnosed in 1993, and James Moore, 62, who suffers from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
It was the first of more than 200 worker lawsuits filed against I.B.M. in various states.
Robert C. Weber, the lawyer for I.B.M., asserted that the plaintiffs' arguments were based on ''smoke, mirrors and hokum,'' and that the employees could have contracted cancer from other factors unconnected to their work at I.B.M. He said the speed with which the jury reached its verdict was significant.
''When the plaintiffs pick out their two best cases,'' Mr. Weber said, ''and try them for four and a half months, and can't keep a jury thinking for more than a day and a half, that's a statement. The statement is: There is no factual support for these allegations.''
An I.B.M. spokesman, Chris Andrews, said the company was pleased with the verdict and hoped it would send the message that I.B.M. ''did not and does not cause injuries.''
But Richard Alexander, a lawyer for the two former employees, attributed the loss to California law. He said the law precluded him from introducing crucial pieces of evidence, like a study of the causes of death of I.B.M. employees and evidence of a defective exhaust system in the factory.
He said he expected better results from cases in other states, including one scheduled to begin next week in New York. In that case, in White Plains, the plaintiff, Candace Curtis, contends that she suffered birth defects contracted some 20 years ago while her mother worked at an I.B.M. semiconductor plant in East Fishkill, in Dutchess County.
''We were handcuffed by California law,'' Mr. Alexander maintained. ''That won't happen in New York.''
Lenny Siegel, executive director of the Center for Public Environmental Oversight, a nonprofit group that focuses on environmental cleanup at industrial sites, said the jury's verdict reflected the difficulty of proving the cause of cancer.
''The problem with toxic illnesses is that given all the things people are exposed to, it's extremely hard to prove someone gets sick from a specific cause,'' Mr. Siegel said. But he added that the verdict did not undermine his belief that technology companies put their workers at risk. ''I don't think there's any question that people who worked in these plants were hurt by chemical exposure,'' he said.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs in the case had argued that I.B.M. shrugged off the workers' health complaints, all the while knowing that the chemicals were toxic.
In a closing argument this week, Mr. Alexander declared that I.B.M. had practiced ''corporate medicine'' by putting profits ahead of employee health.
TECHNOLOGY
