Mike Tyson, the former heavyweight champion, added to his record of unsanctioned violence yesterday by acknowledging in court that his ''conduct was very disorderly'' when he got into a fight in Brooklyn last June with two autograph seekers, leaving one of them unconscious.
In a deal with prosecutors in Criminal Court in Brooklyn, Mr. Tyson agreed to plead guilty to disorderly conduct, to do community service and to get counseling. But he will avoid jail time. If he had been convicted at an assault trial for which jury selection was to begin yesterday, he could have faced a year or more in jail.
''I'm just happy it's over with, and I'm going to continue to live my life,'' said Mr. Tyson, pushing through a small knot of reporters who had come to record the latest chapter in his tangled story. His history includes a rape conviction in 1992, an assault charge in 1998 and the incident involving biting off a piece of Evander Holyfield's ear during a title fight in 1997.
Under the plea deal, Mr. Tyson, 37, is to do 100 hours of work with children, sometimes at the legendary Gleason's boxing gym in Brooklyn. He is also to remain in counseling for six months. The three misdemeanor charges that he faces, including assault, would then be dropped. He would plead guilty to disorderly conduct, a violation that carries a maximum penalty of 15 days in prison.
The deal followed months of jockeying over the possible plea, with lawyers on each side waiting for the other to flinch.
Mr. Tyson's lawyer, Mel A. Sachs, insisted until minutes before the deal was announced that Mr. Tyson was going to trial. Although much of the brawl between Mr. Tyson and the two men was captured by video cameras in the lobby of the Marriott hotel in Downtown Brooklyn, Mr. Sachs said he was planning to argue that Mr. Tyson was justified in defending himself. The tape showed Mr. Tyson beating the men, pausing to remove his jacket, and then continuing with the fight. Prosecutors said they also had 11 witnesses.
But the prosecutors have said the men, Nestor Alvarez-Ramos, 24, and Samuel Velez, 31, both from Reading, Pa., were aggressive. They are awaiting trial on charges of menacing Mr. Tyson. According to Mr. Tyson's lawyers, after the brief meeting about 5:30 a.m. on June 21 turned ugly, the men said to Mr. Tyson: ''You got fists. We got guns.''
Yesterday, the prosecutor, John P. O'Mara, said, ''This was not an unprovoked attack.''
Mr. Sachs said Mr. Tyson was willing to make the deal because the charge would be reduced from a misdemeanor to a violation. As for the community service and the counseling, he said, ''Mike Tyson is also doing things he very much wants to do, and he looks forward to giving his time to the community.''
A centerpiece of the negotiations that continued through lunch yesterday was a battle over exactly what admissions Mr. Tyson would make.
After a hallway meeting with his lawyers and a small group of advisers, Mr. Tyson entered the courtroom fidgeting with a yellow sheet that had his statement written out in large blue letters. Mr. Tyson turned, flashed a gold-toothed smile at someone in the audience and then studied the sheet.
''On June 21, 2003,'' he read in court a few minutes later, ''I was involved in a situation in the lobby of the Marriott hotel in which I, Mike Tyson's conduct was very disorderly.''
