A fake dermatologist's extended Costa Rican vacation came to an end yesterday, when the police found him drinking a beer in a swimming pool at a Pacific beach resort, the resort owner and officials in New York and Costa Rica said.
Investigators traced the fake doctor, Dean Faiello, to Central America from Newark, where they found the body last week of a missing Manhattan woman buried in concrete at Mr. Faiello's former home.
Mr. Faiello has not been charged in the death of the woman, an investment banker named Maria Cruz. But investigators said Ms. Cruz had an appointment with Mr. Faiello for treatment of a tongue lesion on the last day she was seen alive, April 13, 2003. They believe a botched illegal operation might have killed her, but the exact cause of death has yet to be determined by medical examiners.
Mr. Faiello, 44, fled the United States last September after pleading guilty to practicing medicine without a license and conspiracy to distribute narcotics, but before his sentencing. He entered Costa Rica on a three-month visa on Sept. 19, according to immigration officials there.
Early yesterday morning, two New York Police Department detectives arrived in Costa Rica, joining two investigators from the state attorney general's office who conducted the investigation into Mr. Faiello's medical practice.
Investigators soon learned that Mr. Faiello had used his credit card at the Villas Playa Samara, a resort in Guanacaste, in the northeast of the country. Also yesterday, Costa Rica's major newspapers ran photographs of Mr. Faiello, and investigators received tips from people who saw him at the resort, officials said.
Mr. Faiello checked into the resort on Wednesday, the owner, Louis Brisson, said. He was staying in a villa that cost $500 a night, and he had paid in cash. Yesterday morning, the manager called Mr. Brisson to tell him that the fugitive who was in all the papers was there. ''We decided to do something very quiet,'' Mr. Brisson said.
When the officers arrived to arrest him, he was in the swimming pool. They flashed their badges, Mr. Brisson said. ''He got out, and he got a lawyer,'' Mr. Brisson said.
Mr. Faiello was initially arrested for overstaying his visa, Brad Maione, a spokesman for the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, said. Meanwhile, New York agents asked for a warrant to arrest Mr. Faiello on the previous charges of practicing without a license and conspiracy, for which he faces up to five years in prison if convicted. A Costa Rican judge signed the warrant yesterday.
It was unclear last night whether Mr. Faiello would be immediately deported to the United States for overstaying his visa or whether he would be put through the extradition process, which he could fight in court.
A lawyer for Mr. Faiello, Moises Vincenzi, said last night that he did not know how his client would choose to proceed if faced with extradition.
Mr. Vincenzi said he had called the police on behalf of Mr. Faiello and told them that his client wanted to turn himself in. But the hotel's general manager, Max Navarro, said Mr. Faiello seemed surprised and nervous when the police arrived.
After he was arrested, Mr. Faiello was taken to San José, Costa Rica's capital, in a red police pickup truck. As he was led out of the truck into the police station, Mr. Faiello walked with his head down, and did not reply to any questions from journalists.
Several people who had encountered Mr. Faiello in Costa Rica said he checked in to hotels using his real name and made no attempt to conceal his identity. ''The guy was living like he was on vacation,'' said a hotel manager in San José. He said Mr. Faiello had stayed at that hotel for about a month last fall.
Mr. Faiello had no friends or family in Costa Rica, according to Mr. Vincenzi. Mr. Navarro said he had spoken with Mr. Faiello several times and that he had always been friendly.
Another man who said he had met Mr. Faiello said they dined together several times, and that Mr. Faiello had been the host at a large party in Guanacaste that the man had attended. Mr. Faiello often said he planned to open a hotel and was getting his scuba-diving certification at a club on the Pacific Coast.
Both men said that Mr. Faiello, who sold his Newark house last May for about half a million dollars, spent money prodigiously. Both were interviewed before Mr. Faiello was arrested and spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The owner of Pucho's, a gay bar in San José, denied news reports that Mr. Faiello had worked for him as a go-go dancer. ''I would never hire anyone over the age of 25,'' the owner, Alfredo Jimenez, said.
Correction:  March 1, 2004, Monday  An article on Friday about the arrest of a fake dermatologist wanted for questioning in the death of a New York woman misstated the location of Guanacaste in Costa Rica, where he was staying at a Pacific resort. It is in the country's northwest, not northeast.
