Wide receiver Terrell Owens will not be an unrestricted free agent on Wednesday after all. The N.F.L. informed the San Francisco 49ers yesterday that Owens would not be on the list of free agents because Owens and his agent, David Joseph, had missed the deadline to file the paperwork to void the final three years of Owens's contract with the 49ers.
As a result, Owens, a four-time Pro Bowl selection, remains under contract with the 49ers through 2006. But the 49ers, who have been unhappy with Owens and had expected to lose him to free agency, are now in a position to try to trade him.
''I have spoken to the N.F.L. Management Council and they have confirmed that Terrell Owens will not be among the players listed as an unrestricted free agent,'' Terry Donahue, the 49ers' general manager, said.
Joseph said in a telephone interview that he would file a grievance. He said he had not been aware that the N.F.L. had moved up the deadline to Feb. 21, and filed the papers for Owens's free agency after it.
Joseph said he had not wanted to exercise the escape clause in Owens's contract and void the deal too early out of fear that the 49ers would designate Owens as the team's franchise player. Had Owens been named the franchise player, the 49ers could have kept him for a season by paying him the average of the top five salaries for wide receivers.
The deadline was moved up 10 days for players, like Owens, who signed contracts before the 2001 collective bargaining agreement went into effect. A letter sent out by the N.F.L. noted the new deadline and listed Owens and others as players who could be tagged franchise players. Joseph said he was not notified in time by the league or the union.
The 49ers told the N.F.L. that Owens had not filed by the Feb. 21 deadline, and they received the confirmation yesterday that he would not be a free agent. On Monday, Donahue applied the franchise player designation to the Pro Bowl linebacker Julian Peterson, securing Peterson for the 49ers and guaranteeing him a one-year salary of $5.8 million to $7 million.
Owens was not the only player who lost his free agency yesterday. Cleveland Browns wide receiver Dennis Northcutt and his agent, Jerome Stanley, missed a Feb. 19 deadline to void the final three years of Northcutt's seven-year contract.
Northcutt, who was also listed in the N.F.L.'s letter to the union, led the Browns with 62 catches for 729 yards last season.
Last season Owens, 30, had 80 catches -- his lowest total since 1999 -- for 1,102 yards and 9 touchdowns. He missed the final game with a broken left clavicle.
The 6-foot-3, 226-pound Owens has caught 51 touchdown passes the last four seasons, the most in the N.F.L., and was the league's highest-paid receiver last season at $6 million, according to the players association.
Owens has talked publicly about signing with Philadelphia, Baltimore or Atlanta, and the 49ers were willing to let him leave.
He had run-ins with the former San Francisco coach Steve Mariucci and the offensive coordinator Greg Knapp, criticized quarterback Jeff Garcia and alienated team officials and teammates. In a game at Dallas in 2000, he danced on the star at midfield after scoring a touchdown, and during a Monday night game in Seattle in 2002 he pulled out a pen to sign a ball on the field after scoring.
Owens is scheduled to make $17.7 million over the next three years. He was reportedly seeking close to $20 million as a signing bonus from his new team, in addition to his salary.
In other moves yesterday, the 49ers released its starting left tackle, Derrick Deese, running back Garrison Hearst and defensive lineman Sean Moran. The 49ers saved $1.5 million against the salary cap by releasing Hearst and $1.2 million by releasing Deese, The Associated Press reported.
The 49ers are financially strapped and may have to waive Garcia by Wednesday, when a bonus of $500,000 kicks in. Garcia and Donahue are not close to agreeing on a restructuring of his contract, which calls for Garcia to make $10 million next season.
PRO FOOTBALL
