REPORT FROM A PARISIAN PARADISE  Essays From France, 1925-1939  By Joseph Roth  Translation and introduction by Michael Hofmann. Illustrated. 301 pages. W. W. Norton. $24.95.
When Joseph Roth first began reporting from France in 1925, the dispatches he mailed back to his German newspaper, Frankfurter Zeitung, resembled letters home, full of surprise, affection and enthusiasm for a land that he had long admired from afar. By 1939, shortly before his death at 45 from alcoholism, Roth had gone from near-tourist to near-refugee and was reduced to writing almost for himself. At most, he was putting messages into bottles and sending them into the future.
Happily, his writings -- novels, reporting and diaries -- were again found, compiled and reprinted, first in German, then also in English. Today, the Austrian-born Roth is probably best known for ''The Radetsky March,'' his novel about the dying Austro-Hungarian Empire, but he also recorded the crumbling of Germany's Weimar Republic and the rise of Nazism and, later from Paris, Western Europe's unwillingness to confront Hitler. A Jew, Roth wrote as early as 1934 that the Third Reich would enjoy just one victory: ''against the Jews.'' He died in June 1939 without knowing how prescient he was.
The latest book to join the swelling Roth canon is ''Report From a Parisian Paradise: Essays From France, 1925-1939,'' which has been beautifully translated by Michael Hofmann. A compilation of reports, book and movie reviews, anecdotes and essays, it tracks both the darkening of Europe and the darkening of Roth's own soul. But first there is optimism. In an introduction Mr. Hofmann quotes a May 1925 letter in which Roth tells his Frankfurt editor ''that Paris is the capital of the world and that you must come here.'' He then heads for the blue skies of Provence and the ''white cities'' of his dreams.
The towns and cities he visits -- Lyon, Marseille, Nice, Avignon, Nîmes, Arles, Vienne and others -- have of course all changed beyond recognition. Roth's skill is to take the reader back to his time. And because his writing is personal, lyrical and highly perceptive, it is as if we join him on his wanderings and share his discoveries. The novelist in him is never far away. As he notes at one point, he can immerse himself so far in his dreams ''that they become a second, an alternative reality.''
This adds to the delight of accompanying him. He is pleased to attend a silent movie show in the open-air Roman arena in Nîmes ''as long as you look at the sky, rather than the screen.'' When he returns to the arena for a bullfight, he is disgusted by the crowd's ''howling and laughing'' and wishes he could help the bull. In nearby Vienne, finding a town in which everyone is either silent or asleep, he concludes that ''everything has already happened'' centuries ago.
Roth finds prosperous Nice a tad unreal for his taste: ''Here are people who were originally a literary creation, and were then copied out in flesh and blood.'' Marseille is more to his liking, a gateway to both land and sea where ''the continuous mixing of races and peoples is palpable, visible, physical and immediate.'' And he adds approvingly: ''This isn't France anymore. It's Europe, Asia, Africa, America. It's white, black, red, yellow.''
Once Roth settled in Paris, his writing became more philosophical. He still offered portraits of favorite bars or nightclubs, and he wrote an effusive letter in 1926 telling his readers to ''come, and come soon'' to France, but opinions gradually took over from descriptions. That same year he saw a very different France when he visited the World War I battlefields of the Somme. He, too, had fought in the trenches, and he was dismayed by the sight of French villages still devastated.
Interestingly, his first impression of the life of Jews in France -- in the main Eastern Jews -- was positive. He acknowledged anti-Semitism promoted by the right-wing Action Française. ''But it is not one hundred proof,'' he wrote. ''Eastern Jews, accustomed to a far stronger, cruder, more brutal anti-Semitism, are perfectly happy with the French version.'' More alarmingly, he noted in 1931 that ''anti-Semitism is making great strides in Germany.''
From early 1933, when Hitler became chancellor, Roth could no longer be published in Germany and was reduced to writing mainly for exile newspapers. His essays grew pessimistic and increasingly anti-German. Already in 1933, horrified at a pre-Hitler Franco-German student exchange program, he warned that French children would learn ''to throw hand grenades, to spit at Jews, to despise Latin peoples (to despise their own people), to respect brutality, injustice, and illegitimacy.''
Five years later he recounted meeting an Austrian Jewish boy, a refugee in France. By then Roth had abandoned hope that France or Britain would move against Hitler. He recalled a photograph of ''a sweet little English girl'' thanking the British prime minister, Neville Chamberlain, for traveling to Munich for peace talks with Hitler. ''God grant that she never comes into the sort of knowledge that the 8-year-old son of my Austrian shoemaker has come into,'' Roth wrote.
By 1939, with most of his books banned or forgotten, Roth was ill, impoverished, often hungry and above all desperate about the state of Europe. Yet his words somehow survived his death. He would have been surprised. Years earlier he wrote: ''What I take a thousand words to describe is a tiny drop in the sea of everything that goes on, too small to be seen by the naked eye, hanging trembling on the point of my pen.''
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
