FOR investors, the dream of internationally comparable accounting systems seems to be closer than ever before, and yet tantalizingly far away.
Within a few weeks, the International Accounting Standards Board will finish revisions of its most controversial standard, the one on accounting for derivatives. The board has made compromises to win backers for the rule, which would force companies to report profits and losses based on the changing values of derivative securities they own. But some financial institutions, notably French banks, are still angry and want the European Commission to refuse to endorse that rule.
As much of the international accounting establishment gathered in London this week for a meeting of the board's standards advisory council, there was cautious optimism that the commission will, in the end, accede to the rule. But whatever happens on that front, the I.A.S.B. has made remarkable progress in the four years since it was reorganized, both in adopting good standards and in moving with the United States Financial Accounting Standards Board to coordinate the rules of the two organizations.
''They've done a great job,'' said Arthur Levitt, the former Securities and Exchange Commission chairman who helped shape the new board. ''They've shown a lot of spine.''
When the international board set out its priorities, no one thought derivatives rule would be the critical one. But with the European Union planning to require adherence to international standards in 2005, some financial institutions complained that rigorous accounting would create needless volatility and could hurt profits just when the banks needed to be able to make loans. Some banking regulators joined in the criticism.
The I.A.S.B. is on the verge of proposing its final changes, which would make it harder for companies to use supposed market values in ridiculous ways, as Enron did. Arnold Schilder, executive director of the Dutch central bank and the chairman of the accounting task force of the Basel Committee, the central bank group working on revising bank capital rules, said that would satisfy regulators. But many opponents of the derivatives rule remain determined to block it.
Europe would put itself in a weak position if it blocked the rule, Mr. Schilder said, adding, ''A strong Europe needs a set of comprehensive accounting standards.'' David Damant, the chairman of the accounting committee of a British association of analysts, forecast that many companies would simply adopt American accounting rules.
But another result is possible. Regulatory requirements in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, passed after a series of accounting scandals, have left many international businesses eager for an alternative to American rules. Some might choose to report under the international rules and obey the derivatives regulation even though the politicians of the European Commission ruled that was unnecessary.
Then investors could have their say. ''The markets will decide if the standards are right,'' said W. Peter Day, the chief financial officer of Amcor Ltd. and formerly head of Australia's accounting standards board.
In the bubble years, there was a Gresham's Law in accounting, with bad accounting driving out good as companies assumed investors could not tell the difference.
Perhaps that could be reversed, if investors were to penalize banks that failed to comply with the derivatives rule, raising their cost of capital on the suspicion that those who did not do so were trying to hide something.
The reason high-quality and consistent accounting standards are desirable is to aid in the efficient allocation of capital in globalized markets. It would be fitting if markets forced companies to improve their accounting.
Floyd Norris
