A former member of Prime Minister Tony Blair's cabinet asserted Thursday that British intelligence services conducted electronic surveillance of the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, in the weeks before the Iraq war.
The former minister, Clare Short, who is still a member of Parliament, received a harsh rebuke from Mr. Blair, who told a news conference later in the day that he would not comment on any espionage operations. But he accused Ms. Short, who was the international development secretary, of endangering Britain's national security with ''totally irresponsible'' remarks.
At the United Nations, Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said in a news conference that the secretary general believed that it would be illegal to conduct bugging operations on the premises of the United Nations, and that he would be disappointed if Britain had done so.
Mr. Eckhard said efforts were under way to ensure the security of Mr. Annan's confidential conversations, but he refused to say whether any bugging devices had been found during ''sweeps'' of Mr. Annan's office.
''We're throwing down a red flag and saying that if this is true, please stop it,'' Mr. Eckhard said.
The news conference in New York added to the diplomatic embarrassment for Mr. Blair, who was said to be outraged that a member of his own Labor Party had spoken publicly about one of the most sensitive types of espionage in the diplomatic arena.
Most governments have spy agencies, and nearly all conduct espionage on friends as well as foes, but spy operations against friendly forces are rarely acknowledged.
Ms. Short's blunt disclosure demonstrated how difficult it has been for Mr. Blair to lay to rest the continuing public anger in Britain about the war in Iraq, despite an earlier report by Lord Hutton that cleared Mr. Blair and his aides of accusations that they manipulated intelligence to amplify the threat of Iraq's unconventional weapons. It also exposed the bitterness between Mr. Blair and a sizable group of rebels within his own party.
Michael Howard, the Tory opposition leader, called Thursday's developments ''a complete mess'' for Britain.
The diplomatic tempest began when Ms. Short, who initially supported the war but later resigned from the cabinet after the fall of Baghdad, told a BBC radio interviewer on Thursday morning that transcripts of Mr. Annan's private conversations circulated last year among Mr. Blair's cabinet members.
''I read some of the transcripts of the accounts of his conversations,'' she said, asserting that Mr. Annan's office had been bugged. ''These things are done, and in the case of Kofi's office, it's been done for some time.''
She said she was so certain of the surveillance that she recalled ''having conversations with Kofi in the run-up to war, thinking, 'Oh dear, there will be a transcript of this and people will see what he and I are saying.' ''
A number of experts said Ms. Short's statement violated Britain's Official Secrets Act. Her remarks reflected the continued hemorrhaging of secrets related to espionage conducted during the bitter political debate at the United Nations in March 2003 as the Bush administration and Mr. Blair's government sought to overcome resistance from France, Germany, Russia and a number of smaller countries that opposed a resolution authorizing war.
A resolution in November 2002 gave Saddam Hussein a final opportunity to comply with demands to disarm, but some Security Council members asserted that the resolution carried no automatic authorization for war if Iraq did not comply.
A second resolution, favored by Britain and the United States, failed, but British and American officials maintained that previous United Nations resolutions gave them the authority to invade Iraq under international law.
The revelation of espionage in the executive suites of the United Nations building -- physically in New York City, but legally the organization's own territory -- came a day after Mr. Blair's government declined to prosecute a 29-year-old government linguist, Katharine Gun, who admitted leaking details of another bugging operation, also targeted at the United Nations, during the war debate last year. In her comments, Ms. Short drew no connection between the bugging of Mr. Annan's office and the surveillance that had been undertaken in the Gun case.
Ms. Gun worked for the intelligence agency known as General Communications Headquarters, or GCHQ, which intercepts and decodes communications. She said she had been ''shocked'' when she received a copy of a top secret message from the United States National Security Agency requesting British assistance in conducting electronic surveillance against the diplomats of swing nations -- Angola, Cameroon, Guinea, Chile, Mexico and Pakistan -- whose votes were critical to passing a war resolution.
She leaked the message to The London Observer and turned herself in for arrest.
Ms. Gun's lawyers were preparing a defense that she felt it was necessary to expose what she believed was espionage activity that fell outside international law. As part of that strategy, they were going to insist on seeing the full private assessment of Lord Goldsmith, the attorney general, on whether Britain could go to war without specific authorization from the Security Council.
Government reaction to these disclosures sharply contrasted with the era of the cold war, when significant breaches of secrecy like Ms. Gun's and Ms. Short's most often resulted in immediate censure and prosecution.
Mr. Blair said Thursday that major threats still existed, but he offered no coherent explanation on why the government was not prosecuting these violations of the Official Secrets Act, except to say that the act perhaps needed to be reviewed.
A number of political analysts pointed out that the prosecution of Ms. Gun, who said she had acted out of conscience to expose what she considered illegal espionage activities, would have reignited the debate over the war when Mr. Blair was trying to move the country on to a new agenda of domestic reforms.
On Thursday Mr. Blair accused his critics of using conspiracy theories and allegations of government lying and wrongdoing as ''cover for people who want to have a debate about the rightness or wrongness of the conflict, and we should have that.''
''It is actually a debate on was it right to remove Saddam Hussein the way you did or should you have waited and given the inspectors more time,'' Mr. Blair said, adding, ''That is the heart of the debate.''
