WHO -- Frederick Fulmer, 53, painter and yoga/Pilates instructor, and James Berg, 47, screenwriter  WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  WHERE -- Joshua Tree, Calif.
James: About five years ago we were looking for a getaway property because city life -- even though Venice, Calif., seems idyllic -- gets pretty high energy. We had been camping in Joshua Tree National Park for many years and decided that would be the perfect place to go, so we ventured out one weekend and chanced upon this dilapidated halfway house on five acres.
The guy was asking $25,000 for this huge place and all this beautiful acreage, a 360-degree panoramic view of mountains, and we looked at each other, took about a two-second beat and said, ''We'll take it.'' We knocked out a lot of the walls and created big, wide, open light-filled spaces. Since another thing we like to do is go to garage sales, we were able to find, for next to nothing, just amazing furniture and lamps.
Frederick: One of the reasons we like the desert is the spaciousness of it, the quiet. You are able to get away and really hear yourselves think. I love the light, the color; you have the most incredible sunrises, sunsets. And the abundance of stars: we have this panoramic view of the sky lit up at night.
James: It's like a Disney movie around our property. Little ground squirrels and bunny rabbits hopping and roadrunners stopping and looking in at us, and then in the distance we'll see little packs of coyotes.
Frederick: We usually go out every weekend. I can't wait until it turns Friday. It's about a two-and-a-half-hour drive. It's very meditative for me to go out there and feel a connection with the environment. That's how I can be a yoga instructor; I try to translate that into something we can use in L.A.
As told to Seth Kugel
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by owners or listing companies.
WHERE -- St. George, Utah  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $650,000  St. George, a small town at the edge of the Mojave Desert in southwestern Utah, was named as one of eight great places to retire by Money Magazine last year. This half-acre property is near Zion National Park and about 120 miles from Las Vegas. The house, stucco with a tile roof, is 4,200 square feet, all on one floor, and has custom-built maple cabinets, granite countertops, a central vacuum system, a gas fireplace and four and a half bathrooms. Agent: John Houston, ERA Brokers Consolidated, (800) 372-2765; www.johnsellsutah.com.
WHERE -- Burns, Ore.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $133,900  This 1,880-square-foot house is on 79.93 acres of sagebrush-covered land in the high desert country of eastern Oregon. The house is 14 miles outside Burns, with views of Steens Mountain. It has walk-in closets in all bedrooms; alder cabinets, an island and pantry in the kitchen; and two bathrooms. The property has a federally approved airstrip and a metal building of 41 feet by 48 feet that can be used as a hangar. Agent: Mary Jo Scrivner, F. H. Garland Real Estate, (541) 573-3639; www.fhgarlandrealestate.com.
WHERE -- Las Cruces, N.M.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $449,900  This Southwestern-contemporary house is in the Chihuahuan Desert just outside the city limits of Las Cruces in southern New Mexico about 45 minutes from El Paso, Tex. The house has ceramic tile, custom cabinets, two and a half bathrooms, a three-car garage as well as a free-standing garage that is 20 feet by 40 feet. It is on an acre and has a swimming pool. Las Cruces is in the high desert, with cool evenings and very little rain. Agent: Becky Mitchener, Steinborn Inc. Realtor GMAC Real Estate, (505) 644-5666; www.beckym.com.
WHERE -- Las Vegas  WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $375,000  This is among about 40 homes currently on the market in Sun City Summerlin, a 7,800-house retirement community where buyers must be at least 55 years old and not have children under 19. The community receives about four inches of rain a year, has three golf courses, four recreation centers and five pools. This 1,800-square-foot house has Corian counters, plantation shutters, vaulted ceilings, ceiling fans, a covered patio and two bathrooms. Brokers: Karen and Hugh Newkirk, Newkirk Realty, (800) 574-1909; www.newkirkrealty.com.
WHERE -- Palm Desert, Calif.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $1.3 million  This Southwestern-contemporary house is the least expensive property currently on the market in the Bighorn golf community, which includes two golf courses. The house is just under 3,000 square feet, with a small pool built into a mountainside. Palm Desert is in the Coachella Valley of the Mojave Desert, in an area with many date groves. Agent: Cynthia Stockwell, KSL Real Estate, (760) 774-0241; www.kslrealestate.com.
WHERE -- Phoenix  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $699,000  This 3,362-square-foot house with two and a half bathrooms is on three quiet acres near the top of a hill in the high Sonoran Desert, about 20 miles from downtown Phoenix. It has views of the mountains, the desert and the city lights and backs up to state land. The property, some of which can be subdivided, has a swimming pool and several varieties of cactus, including saguaro, ocotillo and jumping cholla. Agent: Jenny Pradler, Realty Executives, (866) 207-3141; www.jennypradler.com.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
