How many serial killer movies have there been in which a homicidal sicko confronts the detective who is pursuing him and hisses, ''You're just like me,'' or ''I'm just like you,'' or something similar? It's an honest question; I've long since lost count. Whatever number you arrive at, please add one more: Philip Kaufman's ''Twisted,'' which opens today nationwide.
As the title suggests, though, this variation on the weary theme of symbiosis between hunter and hunted comes with -- ready? -- a twist. If the end of that sentence surprised you, so will the end of this laborious and nonsensical psychological thriller, a mediocre piece of studio hackwork unredeemed by a first-rate director. In this case, Jessica Shepard (Ashley Judd), a San Francisco police officer newly promoted to homicide inspector, tracks a killer who may be more than just like her. The killer, whose victims are all men she has slept with, may actually be Jessica.
Either that, or someone is carefully setting things up to look that way. Someone, that is, besides the screenwriter, Sarah Thorp, who supplies an abundance of psychological back story to make Jessica both a plausible suspect and a sympathetic figure. When she was a child, her father, also a San Francisco cop, went on a rampage that ended when he killed his wife and himself, and Jessica spends a lot of time gazing at the old crime-scene photographs as she drinks red wine until she passes out. (When her cellphone awakens her the next morning, it is usually with the news that another bludgeoned body, with a cigarette burn on one hand, has been found.)
Jessica was raised by her father's old partner, John Mills (Samuel L. Jackson), who has risen to become the city's police commissioner and has been Jessica's professional mentor as well as her surrogate father. Even as the bodies of her casual sex partners begin to pile up, Mills quashes any talk of pulling his protégée from the case, her first homicide investigation.
As is customary in movies of this kind, Jessica is surrounded by protectors, friends and colleagues who take turns moonlighting as potential suspects. Their possible guilt is teasingly explored even as evidence of Jessica's own guilt becomes ever more compelling. There are the ex-boyfriend (Mark Pellegrino), a fellow officer still bitter over their breakup; the grizzled, enigmatic partner (Andy Garcia); the soft-spoken, skeptical shrink (David Strathairn).
Mr. Kaufman also serves up quite a few teasing, counterfeit scares and atmospheric red herrings, culminating in the final series of twists and countertwists in which the killer is revealed and given a chance to explain everything.
I suppose someone has to, though I'm not sure anyone can clear up the mystery of why Mr. Kaufman, who has made movies as various and interesting as ''The Right Stuff,'' ''The Unbearable Lightness of Being'' and ''Quills,'' took on the dreary labor of ''Twisted.'' The suggestion that the movie's title may refer to its main character as well as its plot might have generated a creepy, intimate picture of Jessica's precarious mental state, but Ms. Judd is not an actress well suited to such explorations.
When she tries to show torment, she manages only to look peeved and grouchy, and her natural perkiness makes it hard to believe that Jessica is a hard-drinking, reckless loner, much less an unhinged serial killer. Ms. Judd tries to show the disparate sides of the character's personality -- her sexual voracity, her steely professionalism, her vulnerability and confusion -- but what results is a performance as incoherent as the film itself.
With ''Twisted,'' Ms. Judd is trying both to extend her string of professional-woman-in-distress thrillers (''Kiss the Girls'' and ''High Crimes,'' which featured Jim Caviezel, the actor currently known as Jesus) and to complicate the formula by darkening her customarily cheery and capable screen persona. (Until she was sidelined by an injury last week, she was also starring on Broadway as Maggie in ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'') She struggles to convince us that she might have a dark side, but she succeeds only in tying herself up in knots.
''Twisted'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has profanity, gruesome violence and a few brief sex scenes.
TWISTED
Directed by Philip Kaufman; written by Sarah Thorp; director of photography, Peter Deming; edited by Peter Boyle; music by Mark Isham; production designer, Dennis Washington; produced by Arnold Kopelson, Anne Kopelson, Barry Baeres and Linne Radmin; released by Paramount Pictures. Running time: 97 minutes. This film is rated R.
WITH: Ashley Judd (Jessica Shepard), Samuel L. Jackson (John Mills), Andy Garcia (Mike Delmarco), David Strathairn (Dr. Melvin Frank), Russell Wong (Lieutenant Tong) and Mark Pellegrino (Jimmy Schmidt).
FILM REVIEW
