THE HAVANA ROOM  By Colin Harrison  385 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
With ''Bodies Electric'' (1993), ''Manhattan Nocturne'' (1996), ''Afterburn'' (2000) and now ''The Havana Room,'' Colin Harrison is trying to do for New York what Raymond Chandler and James Ellroy have done for Los Angeles: map the sinister underbelly of the city, the nexus of greed and lust and ambition that metastasizes there and its dark spawn of larceny and murder.
The streets in his fiction aren't just mean: they're spattered with blood and other bodily fluids. As for the city's corporate towers, cushy penthouses and gilded restaurants, they're just more glittering backdrops for what he called in one novel ''mayhem, scandal, murder, and doom.''
Because Mr. Harrison also wants to give the reader a panoramic, Tom Wolfe-ian view of the city and explicate its byzantine workings of money and power, his heroes are not traditional detectives. Jack Whitman in ''Bodies Electric'' is an executive at a media conglomerate; Porter Wren in ''Manhattan Nocturne'' is a tabloid columnist; Charlie Ravich in ''Afterburn'' is the head of a multinational telecommuncations company; and Bill Wyeth in ''The Havana Room'' is a partner in a high-powered law firm.
Bill's tumble from the top and his subsequent adventures with a nefarious assortment of demimonde characters make for gripping, if sometimes bumpy, reading: not as viscerally satisfying as ''Manhattan Nocturne,'' but not as hokey and gratuitously violent as ''Afterburn'' either. Though at least two of the novel's last-act revelations can be seen coming a mile off, Mr. Harrison's emotionally detailed portrait of his narrator and his penchant for seeding his narrative with intriguing digressions -- about everything from Manhattan real estate to the perils of eating the deadly fugu fish -- combine to create a consistently entertaining story.
Like so many of Mr. Harrison's heroes, Bill Wyeth is an ordinary enough man who loses everything that is important to him through a combination of bad luck, random circumstance and momentary lapses in judgment. When we first meet him he is riding high. He may not be one of the masters of the universe, but in serving those movers and shakers he's done very well for himself. He and his avaricious wife, Judith (one of the more poorly drawn subsidiary characters in this novel), live in a posh apartment on the Upper East Side; they spend $100,000 a year on child care alone, and they are planning -- or hoping -- to one day buy a big summer place on Nantucket.
At 39 Bill is drifting into the complaisancies of middle age, but he takes pride in being a dependable lawyer and good earner. In retrospect he will look back on this former self as ''a sofa or a minivan'': ''He has never lost or gained very much. Just dents and unidentified stains. His griefs are thus far minor, his risks utterly safe, his passions unremarkable, his accomplishments incremental.''
The night of his son's eighth birthday, all that abruptly changes. Although Bill had planned to come home early from a business trip and surprise his family, his plane is delayed and by the time he gets home everyone in the house -- including the boys Tim has invited to sleep over -- is sound asleep. Bill orders himself some takeout Thai food and settles down to watch television, when one of Timothy's friends wakes up and asks for something to drink. Bill gives him a glass of milk. The next morning the boy fails to wake up: some peanut oil from Bill's takeout food had found its way into the glass of milk, and the boy, who had a severe peanut allergy, has died.
From there, Bill's fall is frighteningly fast. A huge scandal erupts. The boy's rich and powerful father sues Bill and gets him fired. The Wyeths become social pariahs, and Bill, who is paralyzed with guilt, finds himself unable (or unwilling) to find another job. Judith soon leaves, taking Timothy with her, and moves to San Francisco.
All this happens in the opening pages of ''The Havana Room,'' but Bill has much farther to fall. The catalyst for his descent from purgatory into hell is -- as it was for Porter Wren in ''Manhattan Nocturne'' -- a beautiful woman. In this case she is a restaurant manager named Allison, and it's not long before Bill is thoroughly smitten. The restaurant is a Midtown steakhouse -- think of a gothic version of Sparks, crossed with Keens -- and it becomes Bill's regular hangout. Soon, he is obsessed not only with Allison, but also with a private lounge in the restaurant -- known at the Havana Room -- where, it is rumored, mysterious, possibly illicit activities take place among a chosen elite.
One evening Allison asks Bill to do a favor for the man she is dating, a big, wheezy character named Jay, who needs to close a real estate deal before midnight that night. Though all of Bill's lawyerly instincts tell him that there is something very fishy about this deal, he perversely signs on as Jay's lawyer for the night, partly to please Allison, partly to please Jay, partly to prove that he still has his chops as a lawyer.
From there it's a swift descent into chaos. Bill is soon being threatened by a South American vineyard owner and by a hip-hop club owner and his posse. A dead body turns up on the Long Island land that Jay just sold, and a teenage girl is abducted. None of these events, on their own, are terribly plausible, and some developments in ''The Havana Room'' are downright absurd, crudely stage-managed set pieces that feel like out-takes from a B-movie.
But never mind. Though there's plenty of suspense in this novel, we don't keep reading because of plot pyrotechnics, but because we've come to care about what happens to poor Bill Wyeth, and because Mr. Harrison is a master of mood and atmosphere, and he gives us in these pages a noirish New York that's at once recognizable as the day-lighted city we all work in, and as frightening as the nightmare place we all dread.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
