The trade group for the mutual fund industry will release another volley today in its continuing campaign to prove that the New York State attorney general, Elliot Spitzer, is wrong in saying that funds pay more than they should for money management services.
The new study, by Sean Collins, a senior economist at the trade group, the Investment Company Institute, supports the conclusions of a brief report the group issued in November. That report found near parity in the advisory fees paid by public pension funds and the so-called subadviser fees that mutual fund managers pay when they farm out the management of a portion of their portfolios to another investment adviser.
Both studies found that those fees, on average, are about the same for each  dollar under management -- 28 basis points for public pension plans and 31 basis points for subadvised mutual funds. A basis point is one-hundredth of 1 percent, so a fee of 28 basis points results in a $28 fee for every $10,000 invested.
But a draft copy of the new report marshals more extensive arguments in an effort to rebut an academic study that Mr. Spitzer has cited in his complaints about fund management fees. The study, which appeared almost three years ago in the Journal of Corporation Law, was written by John P. Freeman, a professor of legal and business ethics at the University of South Carolina, and Stewart L. Brown, a finance professor at Florida State University.
In ''Mutual Fund Advisory Fees: The Cost of Conflict of Interest,'' the professors argued that fund investors were paying more for investment advice than they should because fund boards with conflicts had failed to negotiate better money management deals for shareholders.
Both studies rely on public pension funds as the benchmark for investment advisory fees paid by mutual funds. The Freeman-Brown study found that public pension funds paid just 21 basis points for investment advice on the management of large-capitalization stock funds, compared with 52 basis points paid by investors in similar mutual funds.
Pension funds paid 42 basis points for the management of midsize-capitalization funds and 58 basis points for small-capitalization funds, while mutual funds paid 71 basis points in both cases, that study showed.
The new Investment Company Institute study echoes the argument that the fees paid by mutual funds cover a broader assortment of services than those paid by pension funds and that their fees cannot therefore be fairly compared. But the new study concludes that operational differences between public pension funds and mutual funds have a significant effect on management fees.
For example, the average mutual fund complex has ''vastly more accounts'' than the average pension plan, the study reports. It argues that, if operational efficiency is measured in terms of costs for each account, instead of costs for each dollar of assets, pension funds do not look as good. Pension funds pay $335 in expenses for each individual pension account, compared with $148 in expenses for each mutual fund account, the study showed.
Other differences between mutual funds and pension plans could skew fee comparisons, the study argues. The average mutual fund account is much smaller than the average pension fund account; pension funds rely far more on low-cost index funds than mutual fund investors do; and mutual funds are required by law to be much more liquid than pension plans, which may make managing them more challenging.
Professor Freeman, in a telephone interview yesterday, said he was unimpressed by those arguments, as low-cost fund complexes like Vanguard are able to negotiate for management fees that are much lower than the average industry fee despite those circumstances.
The real issue for the fund industry will be whether the report is persuasive to Mr. Spitzer, who has already forced one big fund complex, Alliance Capital, to reduce its future management fees.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Spitzer said yesterday that the attorney general did not wish to comment on the new findings until he had studied them. In Congressional testimony in November, though, he called on fund companies to charge the mutual funds they sponsor no more than they charge pension funds for similar money management services.
--------------------
Putnam Imposes Fee
BOSTON, Jan. 5, (AP) -- Putnam Investments, a unit of Marsh &amp; McLennan, said Monday that trustees approved a 2 percent redemption fee on fund shares exchanged or sold within five days of purchase, a move intended to discourage short-term market- timing trades.
Previously, Putnam imposed 1 percent redemption fees on global and international funds exchanged or sold within 90 days on some accounts, and in December expanded that policy to cover all Putnam-administered 401(k) plans and taxable high-yield funds.
The Investment Company Institute has asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to impose a 2 percent redemption fee on short-term transactions across the industry, a request the commission is expected to consider next month.
