Last month, a couple of days after Southern California found itself left out of the Bowl Championship Series title game, the chief architect of college football's controversial bowl system sketched the worst-case scenario.
''Instead of having 100 kids raising their fingers and saying they're No. 1, we might have 200 of them claiming they are the national champions,'' said Roy Kramer, the former Southeastern Conference commissioner.
''What's wrong with that?''
Split titles have occurred before in college football, 11 of them in fact, the most recent in 1997.
It happened a 12th time yesterday when Southern California (12-1) claimed the No. 1 ranking in the Associated Press news media poll on the strength of a 28-14 victory over Michigan while Louisiana State (13-1) took home the B.C.S. championship, the crystal football that goes with it and the final top ranking of the USA Today/ESPN coaches poll.
In the bowels of the Superdome here, after the Tigers outlasted Oklahoma, 21-14, in the Sugar Bowl on Sunday night, the 100 L.S.U. players agreed with Kramer.
Yes, the B.C.S. system of combining the human polls with computer rankings deprived college football of a U.S.C. versus L.S.U. matchup that would have pitted the teams that finished No. 1 and No. 2 in the human polls at the end of the regular season. The Tigers, however, insisted that college football is only a game, though this final one in New Orleans meant a great deal to them.
''Do they deserve to share the title?'' L.S.U. defensive tackle Chad Lavalais asked rhetorically of the Trojans. ''Yeah. But when I tell my friends, I'm going to say we're national champions.
''In this part of the country, we are national champions.''
Lavalais, an all-American, likened the situation to another once-in-a-lifetime position.
''It's like winning the lottery, but you have to share the Powerball with another person,'' he said. ''It's still a good deal.''
College football fans can bemoan the lack of a playoff, but only college presidents can remedy that by ending their opposition to a tournament. Until then, bar-stool debates and software skirmishes will rage over whether, if one more game were played, L.S.U.'s swarming defense would have slowed down U.S.C.'s swift and stylish passing offense.
Here is fodder for argument: the New York Times computer ranking awarded the Trojans its final No. 1 ranking, with the Tigers No. 2.
But a well-prepared L.S.U. defense grounded an Oklahoma offense that had averaged more than 45 points a game and, in the process, made the Heisman Trophy winner, quarterback Jason White, look ordinary. After being compared to some of the greatest college teams in history, Oklahoma (12-2) ended its season with consecutive losses to Kansas State, in the Big 12 Conference championship game, and L.S.U.
''I wouldn't say we lost our swagger, guys just weren't making the plays they usually do,'' Oklahoma's all-American defensive back Derrick Strait said.
L.S.U.'s front seven blitzed and bull-rushed White, sacking him five times and picking him off twice, with the last one intercepted by defensive end Marcus Spears and returned for what proved to be the winning touchdown.
But the Tigers' secondary had as much to do with White's ineffective numbers.
He went 13 of 37 for 102 yards as the Tigers pressed the Oklahoma receivers with smothering man-to-man coverage.
''We kind of questioned what he could do checking at the line,'' safety Jack Hunt said. ''This was probably one of the most well-prepared games we have had. Based on how they lined up and the motions they ran, we almost knew the routes they were going to run. It was a great job, and they couldn't do anything about it.''
The Tigers' offense simply did enough. Justin Vincent, a true freshman who was named the most valuable player of the Sugar Bowl, rushed for a 117 yards, broke tackles and wore down Oklahoma. Quarterback Matt Mauck eluded the Sooners' rush with short scrambles and kept drives alive. He did throw two interceptions and fumbled away a snap on the Oklahoma 1.
But Mauck moved the Tigers 80 yards for a touchdown in the second quarter moments after Oklahoma blocked a punt that led to a score and a 7-7 tie.
''Our defense played just lights out and just put us in so many opportunities to be successful,'' offensive tackle Rodney Reed said. ''It was a team win, and I'm just proud as heck at everybody who was involved in it.''
As the final seconds ticked off on their hard-fought victory, no one on the L.S.U. sideline was worrying about a split championship or how a team that won its first national title since 1958 might be remembered.
Lavalais had tears streaming down his face. He is 24 and an almost certain high pick in this year's N.F.L. draft. But Lavalais is most proud of the fact that, after needing two years to qualify for admission to L.S.U., he is on track to graduate this summer with a degree in education.
Nick Saban, the normally stoic L.S.U. coach, allowed himself a smile. But he certainly was not thinking about U.S.C., at least not for this season. ''You don't really want to know what I'm thinking, because what I'm thinking is, 'How are we going to do this again next year?' '' Saban said. ''This year's accomplishments are next year's expectations.''
And maybe it is not so bad if this split national championship allows two teams and 200 more young people to thrust those index fingers in the air and claim they are No. 1.
FOOTBALL
