The Yankees' starting rotation has been anything but stable in the last month, but the team assured itself of at least a degree of continuity yesterday by agreeing with Javier Vazquez on a four-year, $45 million contract, avoiding arbitration this off-season and free agency next winter.
''I think we have the arms to get another world championship with the Yankees,'' Vazquez said on a conference call with reporters.
After the World Series, when Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman set out to design his rotation for next season, he had already calculated at least one loss, the retirement of Roger Clemens. On Dec. 4, Cashman replaced the 41-year-old Clemens by acquiring Vazquez, another right-hander but one who is 14 years younger and at the peak of his career.
Then Andy Pettitte chose to sign with the Houston Astros, saying he wanted to be closer to his family, and Cashman was suddenly assembling an almost entirely new rotation. In another blow last week, David Wells reneged on an oral agreement to pitch for the Yankees, agreeing to a contract with the San Diego Padres.
''I had no choice,'' Cashman said of his rebuilding job. ''I had one guy retire, one guy back out, and one guy chose to go home.''
Vazquez will be in the rotation with Mike Mussina, the lone incumbent; Kevin Brown, an ace acquired from the Los Angeles Dodgers; José Contreras, a reliever turned starter; and Jon Lieber, who has not pitched in the major leagues since having reconstructive elbow surgery in 2002. Wells's change of mind leaves the Yankees without proven insurance for the rotation and without a left-handed starter.
Vazquez, 27, went 13-12 with a 3.24 earned run average for the Montreal Expos last season. He was traded for first baseman Nick Johnson, outfielder Juan Rivera and reliever Randy Choate. He has a 64-68 record and a 4.16 E.R.A. in six seasons with Montreal.
Cashman said he made the trade for Vazquez wanting to sign him to a long-term deal, especially having surrendered Johnson, one of the few young prospects in the organization. Cashman acknowledged the uncertainty of committing to Vazquez without seeing him tested in New York's caldron.
''That's an issue that's going to come up often, whether he can make a transition from Montreal to the American League and the Bronx,'' Cashman said.
Vazquez said: ''Obviously, pitching in Montreal is not the same as pitching for the Yankees, where everything is winning. I'm the kind of the person that's looking forward to pitching in New York.''
Cashman is still seeking more pitching, although not necessarily left-handers, noting that there were more quality right-handers on the market. He has been working on signing Tony Clark to be a backup at first base for Jason Giambi, and he spoke briefly yesterday with the agent for second baseman Alfonso Soriano, one of two arbitration-eligible players left on the Yankees. The left-handed reliever Gabe White is the other.
BASEBALL
