The notion of the painter Walter Anderson as a ''mad genius'' has been celebrated along Mississippi's Gulf Coast since his death from lung cancer in 1965. In his hometown, Ocean Springs, he is treated almost as a deity. But he eluded national attention.
Then last September, to mark the centennial of his birth, the Smithsonian Institution in Washington opened a retrospective exhibition, ''Walter Inglis Anderson: Everything I See Is New and Strange,'' which runs through Jan. 11 at the Arts and Industries Building. It has some 180 pieces, including watercolors, ceramics, pencil drawings, oil paintings and linoleum block prints. The University Press of Mississippi has recently published a full-scale biography of Anderson's eccentric life (''Fortune's Favorite Child'' by Christopher Maurer) and a catalog of varied work (''The Art of Walter Anderson,'' edited by Patricia Pinson). And Art in America magazine is portraying him as the abstract inheritor of Audubon, praising the flamboyant way he painted birds and animals.
Born in New Orleans and trained at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts, Anderson saw no medium as off limits. Imbued with a spiritualist streak that translated into wanderlust, he drew his inspiration from such varied sources as Leif Erikson, Albert Einstein, G. I. Gurdjieff and cave paintings. Using Ocean Springs as his base, he also made outlandish clay figures called widgets for Shearwater Pottery, the family business. A self-styled bohemian, he preferred to call himself a designer, not a painter. But it is his more than 5,000 wildlife watercolors, painted from 1950 to 1965, that have led some critics to compare him to Charles Burchfield and Georgia O'Keeffe.
One can only wonder what the hermitlike Anderson, who often lived for months at a time as a castaway on unpopulated gulf islands, would think.
''He didn't care about the art market,'' his son John Anderson said here. ''Decades ago, when the Brooklyn Museum wanted to show his works, he fled to China. He was process oriented. He intensified experiences by painting them. When he read a book, he would illustrate it while reading. By drawing he became a participant in the prose.''
It was this participatory approach that led Anderson to become part of Horn Island, 10 miles off Mississippi and equidistant from the Beau Rivage Casino in Biloxi and the Ingalls Shipyard in Pascagoula. It became a sanctuary for Anderson, who had severe bouts of depression.
He started spending solitary months on Horn Island in 1948. He would go to the island in a wooden skiff, taking a garbage can full of provisions and art supplies. When it was windy, he used his umbrella as his sail. He would sleep in golden grasses under the stars or under his beached boat, depending on the weather. Sand dunes and canebrakes were his living room. His mission was straightforward: he would paint all the marine life he encountered, dead or alive, in a bright shower of detail.
The pristine island was home to such wildlife as red-winged blackbirds, wild hogs and Portuguese men-of-war. ''I wonder how long it will be before nature and man accept each other again,'' he once lamented. ''There is no precedent. All things exist in themselves, have integrity of their own, the grass and the little animals that move through the grass.''
Anderson kept voluminous diaries -- a quarter of them were published in 1985 as ''The Horn Island Logs of Walter Inglis Anderson'' (University Press of Mississippi) -- recounting everything from sea turtles laying eggs to Hurricane Betsy. His best friend was a raccoon he named Inky. He communicated directly with pelicans as if he were Dr. Doolittle. He held private funerals for dead animals, believing that painting them affirmed their life spirit. His modus operandi was to become one with nature. His mystical animal drawings were, in fact, almost self-portraits.
In the 1950's Anderson was a lonely environmental foot soldier, saying that Providence could be found in a gecko or crab. ''Such a sky -- such water and Horn Island between, with me walking it -- the back of Moby-Dick, the white whale, the magic carpet, surrounded by inhabited space,'' he wrote. ''Strange, inhabited space.''
Collectors of Anderson's Horn Island watercolors -- most done on typing paper -- have often learned a story to go along with their acquisition. A burn mark on the edges, for example, means it was painted too close to a driftwood fire. A mud thumb mark indicates there was a drizzle that day. Some watercolors even show an unintentional claw scratch or webbed foot imprint.
''Painting Horn Island wasn't a job, it was a mental health imperative,'' Tim Foley, an art dealer who represents the Anderson family, said. ''The animals are what kept him alive.''
It was only after he died that his wife, Agnes Grinstead, was allowed into his private Ocean Springs cottage studio. What she found astonished her. The pine wallboards, now moved to the Walter Anderson Museum of Art here as ''The Little Room'' exhibit, were all brightly painted, depicting the animals he so loved. The Mississippi River, which he had traveled by canoe, was portrayed as a ''Blue Goddess.'' She also found 90 handwritten logs of Horn Island excursions. Disorganized boxes of watercolors and sculptured wood were scattered about.
These findings attested to what the Smithsonian Institution catalog calls Anderson's ''psychotic closeness to nature.'' That might be true. But some people feel nourished by his art. In December an Anderson oil painting sold for $162,000 in New Orleans, his all-time high.
''Anderson would have been bemused,'' Mr. Maurer, his biographer, said when told of the sales figure. ''He always turned a deaf ear to adulation and a blind eye to money.''
