Back when Gov. John G. Rowland was still a representative from Connecticut in the 1980's, he bought a tiny apartment in Washington to use when Congress was in session.
But by June 1997, having just purchased the weekend cottage that has since become the center of an ethics scandal, Governor Rowland was looking to sell the old apartment. He found a buyer who paid him $68,500, considerably more than the $30,000 to $50,000 that other units in the same building sold for at that time.
And two years later, when the buyer, Wayne E. Pratt, a Connecticut antiques dealer with showrooms in Woodbury, Conn., and Nantucket, Mass., no longer wanted to hold on to the apartment, he sold it for $30,000 less than what he had paid, property records show.
Mr. Rowland's profitable real estate transaction attracted no attention at the time, and probably would be of little interest today if not for the political and legal crises arising out of other aspects of his financial affairs. But the sale, and the involvement of a multimillionaire real estate investor, Robert V. Matthews, who helped Mr. Rowland first lease and then sell the apartment, could make the sale another troublesome issue for a governor who has been criticized for personal financial transactions with people heavily involved in state business.
Mr. Rowland has admitted giving a false account about free work performed on his cottage by aides and government contractors, paid an ethics fine for discounted vacations he accepted from people doing business with his administration, and acknowledged joining a real estate partnership with a state paving contractor while governor.
Mr. Matthews, a longtime friend of Mr. Rowland's who has received at least $5 million in economic development loans and loan guarantees and $7.5 million more in lease payments during Mr. Rowland's tenure, said that his involvement with the apartment was simply done for a friend, and that he reaped no benefit.
But at a time when the governor cannot afford any more controversy, the apartment transaction is likely to get close scrutiny.
Mr. Rowland continued to hold on to the apartment after becoming governor in 1994. But within two years, he began renting it to a niece of Mr. Matthews.
''She was going to Georgetown,'' Mr. Matthews said of his niece, ''and needed a place to stay, and I knew he had an empty apartment and I e-mailed her. Basically all I did was tell her about the apartment and that was it, and she leased it on her own.''
In an interview last night, Mr. Matthews said his niece paid Mr. Rowland about $1,000 a month until June 1997, when the governor sold the apartment to Mr. Pratt, a close friend of Mr. Matthews.
Asked what role he played in helping Mr. Rowland sell the apartment to Mr. Pratt, Mr. Matthews said:
''I'm sure Wayne had to find out from me or the governor, but probably through me because my niece was leasing it and we were good friends. I'm sure I said, 'John is selling his apartment. Do you want to buy it?' ''
Washington property records reflect sales of 13 other apartments in the same building between 1996 and 1999, ranging in price from $10,000 to $54,000. Last year, the city's tax assessor estimated that the market value of Mr. Rowland's former apartment was $54,400, still far below the $68,500 selling price in 1997.
A spokesman for Mr. Rowland said last night that the governor's office would have no comment on the apartment sale.
Mr. Pratt, in a brief interview last month at his Woodbury antiques store, would say only that his purchase of Mr. Rowland's apartment was ''an investment opportunity that was presented to me.'' He added that he does not know the governor and has no business dealings with the state.
In 1997, the same year that Mr. Rowland sold his apartment, his administration awarded economic development loans and loan guarantees totaling $4.7 million to companies owned by Mr. Matthews. Mr. Matthews is a longtime friend of the governor, who during his divorce lived briefly in one of Mr. Matthews's homes. Mr. Matthews also owns the Palm Beach vacation getaway that was a subject of Mr. Rowland's ethics fine.
Mr. Pratt would not talk about Mr. Matthews, who was once described in a Hartford Courant story as his best friend. Mr. Matthews would sometimes go on buying trips with Mr. Pratt, who helped Mr. Matthews and his wife furnish their Nantucket estate. In 2000, the two men invested $200,000 together to purchase an original draft copy of the Bill of Rights that had surfaced on the antiques market.
That investment led to a falling out between the pair when it turned out that the document had been stolen from North Carolina during the Civil War, and federal authorities stepped in to seize it from Mr. Pratt last year as he was preparing to sell it. Mr. Pratt relinquished his claim on the parchment, but Mr. Matthews chose to fight, and is suing both the federal government and his former friend, Mr. Pratt.
Mr. Matthews has owned a number of companies and properties that have benefited from state economic development assistance, as well as state office leases that date to the administration of Mr. Rowland's predecessor, Lowell P. Weicker Jr.
One of his companies, Fabricated Metal Products, received a $3.6 million loan guarantee from the Connecticut Development Authority in 1997, which at the time was one of the largest awarded by the Rowland administration. That same year another Matthews company, New Haven Manufacturing, received a $1.1 million loan from the authority.
The state during Mr. Rowland's tenure also has paid more than $7 million to lease office space in a New Haven building owned by Mr. Matthews.
Last year, Mr. Matthews surfaced in an ethics controversy involving the governor, in which Mr. Rowland paid almost $9,000 to settle a State Ethics Commission complaint about his acceptance of discounted vacation rentals from wealthy businessmen who had dealings with the state.
One of those businessmen was Mr. Matthews, who let Mr. Rowland stay for free, for five days in 2001, at a luxury home he owns in Palm Beach. Other homes in Florida and Vermont that Mr. Rowland admitted staying at are owned by members of the Tomasso family, whose construction companies are at the center of a wide-ranging investigation of possible bid-rigging and bribery by state officials.
Mr. Matthews's friendship with Mr. Rowland dates to when they were neighbors in Middlebury, Conn., in the 1980s. After Mr. Rowland separated from his wife in 1992, he stayed for a time in a carriage house on Mr. Matthews's property.
As part of his divorce, Mr. Rowland gave up his interest in most of the assets he shared with his former wife, including their Middlebury home. However, he retained ownership of the Washington apartment, at 637 Third Street. N.E., a 278-square-foot unit he bought in the late 1980s for about $57,000.
In May 1997, two and half years after becoming governor, Mr. Rowland and his second wife, Patricia, bought a weekend cottage in Litchfield, Conn., for $110,000. A month later, Mr. Rowland sold his Washington apartment to Mr. Pratt.
