The Knicks and the Nets might both be using each other's old point guards soon.
After the Knicks traded for Stephon Marbury on Monday, two Eastern Conference officials said the Nets were interested in acquiring Charlie Ward and indicated that the club would probably pursue him if he is waived by the Phoenix Suns.
Ward was sent to Phoenix as part of the eight-player trade, but the Suns are expected to waive him this week before his contract becomes guaranteed. Officials believe multiple teams will be interested in Ward when he passes through waivers.
The Nets are over the salary cap, so they would be able to offer Ward only a minimum guaranteed contract, but they have one clear advantage over the competition -- Ward lives in Connecticut and would not have to uproot his family if he signed with the Nets.
For the past two years, the Nets have searched for a backup to Jason Kidd and recently settled on Robert Pack, who is averaging 1.7 points and 1.1 assists. Ward has plenty of playoff experience and would improve the team's perimeter shooting. He is averaging a career-high 8.7 points and 4.9 assists this season.
Marbury was once advertised as the player who could turn around the Nets, but ever since they dealt him to the Suns in 2001, they have been savoring the fruits of that move. Although Marbury continued to prove his individual merit in Phoenix, Kidd has led the Nets to consecutive Eastern Conference championships with his unselfish style.
Perhaps the Nets should have been celebrating Monday. In effect, the Suns officially conceded they lost out on a trade made two years ago. Nevertheless, the Nets know their cross-river rivalry with the Knicks is about to get significantly more intriguing. When Marbury was in Phoenix, the Nets only had to see him twice a season. Now they will face him four times every season and could meet in the playoffs.
Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, who was hailed after trading Marbury for Kidd, said Monday he believed that the Knicks have become a playoff contender. ''Stephon is a terrific player and he will certainly help the Knicks,'' Thorn said. ''It will be entertaining. It's pretty ironic that he would end up back here.''
Thorn remembers how Marbury used to relish trips to Madison Square Garden and played some of his best games there. The same is true of Kidd, who scored 35 points at the Garden on Sunday, leading the Nets to their 10th victory in 11 games against the Knicks. In this series, the Nets have recently been the only team on the court with a pure point guard. That is about to change. Kidd is getting some much-needed competition.
''Steph is one of the top point guards in this league,'' Kidd said. ''You know you'll always get the best out of him. Now that he's back home, he'll probably be happy. He's always dreamt of playing for the Knicks.''
Since they were traded for each other, Kidd and Marbury have admittedly failed to distinguish themselves in head-to-head matchups. Coach Byron Scott said they tried too hard and wound up forcing the action. The stakes will be raised, but the Nets insist they feel no added pressure.
PRO BASKETBALL
