After denying for 14 years that he had bet on baseball, Pete Rose admits in a new book that he did, thus setting in motion a process that may win him reinstatement to baseball and election to the Hall of Fame.
Rose, major league baseball's career leader in base hits, makes the admission in a 322-page autobiography entitled ''My Prison Without Bars'' (Rodale Press), in which he also acknowledges betting on his own team, the Cincinnati Reds, although never against them.
Whether the admission will be enough to persuade Commissioner Bud Selig to let Rose back into baseball remains to be seen. Selig has told associates that he is looking for contrition as well as a confession from Rose, and while Rose does say in the book that it is time for him to take responsibility for his actions, the apologetic words stretch only so far and are, at times, overshadowed by the feistiness for which he was famous as a player.
''I'm sure that I'm supposed to act all sorry or sad or guilty now that I've accepted that I've done something wrong,'' he says in the epilogue of the book, a copy of which was purchased yesterday in a Chicago bookstore; it is scheduled to be released on Thursday. ''But you see, I'm just not built that way. Sure, there's probably some real emotion buried somewhere deep inside. And maybe I'd be a better person if I let that side of my personality come out. But it just doesn't surface too often. So let's leave it like this. . . . I'm sorry it happened, and I'm sorry for all the people, fans and family that it hurt. Let's move on.''
At another point in the book, Rose says that he refuses to ''beg your forgiveness like a TV preacher,'' and that he does not want sympathy.
Selig declined to comment about Rose yesterday because he is, in essence, the judge in the case, but he has let it be known that there is no imminent plan for reinstating Rose. One baseball official who has spoken with Selig said yesterday that Selig's main concern, in weighing reinstatement, is not Rose and the Hall of Fame, in part because Selig, as commissioner, would not be voting on Rose's candidacy. If Rose is restored to baseball, the decision on whether to admit him to Cooperstown will be left to either a committee of baseball writers, who vote annually, or to members of baseball's Veterans Committee, an 85-member group of whom about two-thirds are members of the Hall.
What concerns Selig, the official said, is whether it is in the best interest of baseball to allow Rose to hold a job in the sport again, after he had lied for so long about betting on games. And, the official said, Selig also wonders if he can trust a longtime gambler who had lied to uphold whatever agreement they make regarding reinstatement.
''The biggest thing on his mind is if he can let this guy back on the field in uniform again,'' said the official, who insisted on anonymity. ''How does he know he won't gamble again?''
Rose's admission in the book that he bet on baseball while managing the Reds in the second half of the 1980's will not surprise Selig, who elicited a similar confession from Rose when they met in Milwaukee in November 2002.
In the book, Rose describes the meeting, and says he told Selig, ''Yes sir, I did bet on baseball.''
When Selig asked Rose how often, Rose responded: ''Four or five times a week. But I never bet against my own team, and I never made any bets from the clubhouse.''
When Selig asked Rose why he broke one of baseball's most sacred rules by betting on games, Rose said, ''I didn't think I'd get caught.''
Rose agreed to a lifetime ban from baseball in August 1989 under an agreement in which he was ousted for illegal gambling without baseball being specified. But the investigative report that led to his ouster -- compiled by a Washington lawyer, John Dowd -- left little doubt that Rose had bet on baseball and on the Reds. And at a news conference announcing the banishment, A. Bartlett Giamatti, then baseball's commissioner, reinforced that assessment.
Eight years later, Rose applied for reinstatement in baseball, but Selig has essentially shunned that request for five years, although he clearly took note of the ovations Rose received in the rare moments that he was allowed on a baseball field during various commercial promotions. Players have until 20 years after they retire to be elected into the Hall by the committee of baseball writers, so Rose, who stopped playing in 1986, has watched the bulk of his eligibility evaporate without his name ever being on the ballot.
If the 20 years elapse without a player being selected, his name is referred to the Veterans Committee, and any number of Hall of Famers in that group have already expressed vehement opposition to admitting Rose. So Rose's best chance to be elected to the Hall appears to rest with the writers, and he has only two more chances with them -- on the ballots of December 2004 and December 2005. In that regard, the timing of the book -- and its clear purpose of getting him back in baseball and on the Hall of Fame ballot -- is not considered coincidental.
Even if Rose is reinstated, Selig has spoken internally about a probationary period for him. The baseball official who spoke to Selig said the commissioner had not seen the book before it was published, and he said the fact that Rose was receiving an estimated $1 million advance for a book containing a confession that he himself acknowledges is 14 years late was viewed with disdain by major league's hierarchy.
In the book, Rose says that he once sought counseling from a psychiatrist for his gambling. He says that he still bets legally at racetracks, but he notes that he turned down $2 million to lend his name to a Web site that promotes gambling. He addresses the issue this way: ''I know what you're thinking: If we let you back into baseball, Pete, what's to stop you from gambling again? Listen: There hasn't been a day in my life when I didn't regret making those bets. I wish I could take it all back, but I can't. What's done is done.''
He adds: ''My actions, which I thought were benign, call the integrity of the game into question. And there's no excuse for that, but there's also no reason to punish me forever.''
Rose, in the book, questions why his gambling problem was treated so severely, arguing that if he ''had been an alcoholic or a drug addict, baseball would have suspended me for six weeks and paid for my rehabilitation.''
Rose adds that there should have been a way for him to get help, but baseball ''had no fancy rehab for gamblers like they do for drug addicts.''
In the book, Rose does not recall the first time he bet on baseball, but explains how gambling became part of his life as a teenager when he would accompany his father to the racetrack.
Dowd concluded in his report in 1989 that Rose, as a player-manager and as a manager, made 412 wagers on baseball from April 8, 1985, to July 5, 1987, including 52 on the Reds to win. Rose, who wrote a book in 1989 claiming that he had not bet on baseball, says in the new book that he never allowed his wagers ''to influence my baseball decisions.''
''I would rather die than lose a baseball game,'' Rose says in the book. ''I hate to lose. There is no temptation on earth that could get me to fix a game.''
Rose's book is to released to stores on Thursday, while this year's selections to the Hall of Fame are to be announced today. But the details of Rose's confession were already threatening to obscure who will be going to Cooperstown. Who knows whether that will annoy Selig, whom Rose describes in the book as a fair man ''and a good commissioner'' who has given him hope.
BASEBALL
