I am the world's worst stick-in-the-mud. I always stay at the same hotel, request the same room, go to the same restaurants, travel with the same clothes. My mind-set when traveling is to try to feel like I'm at home when I'm not. The world of fashion is like a tornado that I want swirling around my island of calm.
In Paris, my colleagues stay at the grandest hotels. I've been staying at the same tiny hotel on the Left Bank since 1969. It started as a hidden-away, charming, family-owned hotel in the shadow of Notre-Dame. Over the years I've seen it fall into shambles. It was traded up and now is full of chic tourists -- and me. I always request Room 41 because I was born in 1941 on the 14th of March. (At my hotel in Milan, I always ask for Room 414.) I figure I have stayed in that room in Paris six times a year since 1969; you can do the math.
When the hotel was closed for renovations, I felt as displaced as a lost lamb. I'm trying to remember where I stayed; it was so upsetting, I've blocked it.
You'd think I'd love going to trendy restaurants, but that's work; I end up registering what everyone is wearing, why they are wearing it, where they bought it and how much they paid, because that's my job. I make two or three trips a month, doing trend presentations and analyzing fashion shows for retailers, designers and fashion-image consultants.
I've traveled regularly on the fashion circuit to Paris, Florence, Milan, London and Los Angeles. I have my favorite little restaurants that I don't tell anyone about because the fashion crowd would start going.
I always pack a dark suit, two dress shirts, three sweaters, two pairs of casual pants. I never wear underwear on the plane. It's very good travel advice: be comfortable and bring close to nothing. In the 70's, when I was married and living in London, a fiber company there came out with a polyester wash-and-wear pantsuit. You were supposed to be able to take a trip with no luggage, just the clothes on your back, which you'd wash every night in your hotel. I volunteered that my wife and I would go from London to Paris. We each were given a jacket with wide lapels and hipster pants with enormous bells. After we washed the outfits and hung them to dry, all the water accumulated in the hems of the bell bottoms. They were soaked. So as we walked the Champs-Élysées, with every step our cuffs sprayed passers-by.
It seems crazy to me to have so much luggage that you can't keep track of it or lift it. I have traveled with enough editors and other fashion ladies that I have seen madness in the form of a Louis Vuitton steamer trunk coming around the carousel.
My first job was for a small department store in Ashtabula, Ohio, near Mentor, the little town where I grew up. I had wheedled my way into being the store's fashion coordinator at age 19 and went on my first buying trip to New York. It was 1960. On the plane, which had propellers, women were wearing hats and gloves and pumps; I felt like I was in a Doris Day movie.
Frequent Flier
