A young woman fell from the 10th floor of a building in Times Square onto scaffolding below, after she was detained by employees of a clothing showroom who believed that she had stolen money there, the police said.
The woman, 19, was rescued by the police from within a scaffolding frame on the building, at 1466 Broadway, at 42nd Street. She was then arrested and taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, where she was listed in critical but stable condition.
People who had been working inside the building said the woman, dressed in a winter coat and wearing a red bandanna, went past the security guard in the lobby to a 10th-floor showroom for clothing lines by the rap musicians Eminem and Jay-Z. Workers on the floor who thought she was trying to steal money caught her, the police said.
She was then held in a room while employees called the police around 4:50 p.m. But the woman, who was not identified by the police, escaped through a window and climbed out onto a narrow ledge on the building's facade, the police and workers from the 10th floor said.
It is not clear how long the woman was on the ledge, but a crowd gathered on the street below. She apparently tried to grab the edge of a Gap sign on the east side of the building, but lost her balance and plunged eight floors into the two-story scaffolding below, witnesses said.
''People tried to call her in,'' said a worker from the 10th floor, who would not give his name. ''Please come in, come back,'' said the worker, referring to what the people inside the showroom were saying.
''She tried to get out,'' said a woman who identified herself as an employee of Nesi Apparel Group, the tenant in the showroom.''She was trying to go down the stairs. She tried to go out the elevator, but she couldn't. So she tried to get out the window.''
Nesi Apparel Group did not return phone calls requesting comment last night. Joey Lionetti, 30, owner of Select Agency, a fashion design company on the 12th floor, said the building is ordinarily difficult to enter.
