The discovery of 30,000-year-old stone tools and ivory spear shafts in the northern reaches of Siberia has more than doubled the earliest known time for human occupation of the Asian Arctic, Russian scientists reported last week.
The research is especially intriguing to archaeologists because, if there were people in northern Siberia that early, it could provide new clues to the peopling of the Americas.
In the depths of the last ice age, Stone Age hunters somehow survived the frigid Yana River Valley, which is 300 miles north of the Arctic Circle.
Archaeologists said they were at a loss to explain why humans had ventured so far north or how they could have managed to withstand the bitter cold.
Yet there they were, some 16,000 years earlier than the previously oldest known occupation site in the Asian Arctic.
The dates are corrected estimates of dates based on radiocarbon analysis, which gives increasingly lower than true calendar values at earlier ages.
The discovery, made in the summers of 1991 and 1992, was reported in the journal Science by a team of scientists led by Dr. Vladimir Pitulko of the Institute for the History of Material Culture in St. Petersburg, Russia.
Dr. Donald K. Grayson, a paleoanthropologist at the University of Washington, said he was surprised that people could live under such a harsh climate that long ago.
But in an accompanying article, Dr. Grayson praised the discovery of ''an extremely important site.''
The Yana site, in the basin of one of northeast Asia's largest rivers, is not the oldest evidence of human advances into Arctic lands. Two years ago, Russian and Norwegian archaeologists described finding artifacts establishing a human presence in the Arctic of European Russia perhaps as early as 40,000 years ago.
But Dr. Pitulko's team was struck by similarities between the Yana spear shafts, made of mammoth tusks and rhinoceros horn, and shafts made by the Clovis people, thought to be the earliest migrants from Asia into North America, about 13,000 years ago.
Archaeologists have long been puzzled by the lack of evidence of a human presence at the right time on the Asian side of the land bridge that connected Siberia and Alaska during the ice age.
Other researchers cautioned that it is premature speculation to link the Yana artifacts to the settlement of America.
''Although a direct connection remains tenuous,'' the Russian researchers wrote, ''the Yana site indicates that humans extended deep into the Arctic during colder Pleistocene times.''
