THE world of reality television, an oxymoron if ever there was one, takes a distinctly New York turn this week with a new NBC series called ''The Apprentice.''
According to its advance billing, the show centers on the struggles of 16 young men and women who want nothing more than to work for Donald Trump. Only one of them can win. Presumably, the entertainment lies in watching people claw their way to the middle, only to have Mr. Trump tell the losers that they are fired. It sounds like the most fun on television since ''My Mother the Car.''
This is not the first reality series to train its lens on New York. Last year, for example, there was ''The Restaurant,'' about a chef who creates his own place in the Flatiron district.
And there is the popular ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' in which five fantabulously hip gay men go shopping in New York with a heterosexual man who desperately needs a makeover. On the show broadcast two nights ago, the straight guy was so clueless that you almost wondered why he didn't have a keeper.
The success of ''Queer Eye'' raises a question of how far television may go with blatant stereotyping that passes as entertainment. If it is O.K. to have fun with the hoary cliché of stylish gays and slovenly straights, why not expand the premise to other groups? A city as diverse as New York provides no shortage of potential programs based on stereotypes long recognized as crude.
You could have ''Black Rhythm for the White Klutz,'' with five talented African-Americans teaching an uncoordinated Caucasian how to dance. In ''Yiddishe Brains for the Goyishe Guy,'' five Jewish financial advisers provide a gentile man with investment tips. Pick any ethnic group and surely you can find a stereotype as unacceptable, or as offensive, as the one that propels ''Queer Eye.''
Another question that comes to mind with the professed reality programs is whether they reveal New York any more faithfully than shows that make no pretense of being ''real.'' No doubt, some Americans take television comedies and dramas at face value.
They are led to believe that young New Yorkers on modest incomes actually live in apartments as large as the ones on ''Friends'' or ''Mad About You.'' Who knows how many young women think that ''Sex and the City'' is a survival manual for the Manhattan Sinbad (Single Income, No Boyfriend, Absolutely Desperate) who doesn't want to be stuck with a Lombard (Lots of Money but a Real Dope)?
If New York-based reality shows are going to be around for a while, their producers might consider alternative formats that would reflect life as people in the city truly experience it.
In this, the country's publishing capital, ''The Novel'' would be a series focused on a dozen talented young writers. Their challenge would be to squeeze advances greater than four digits from book publishers who have poured nearly all their money into the latest political screed denouncing liberals as traitors or conservatives as fatheads.
A FOLLOW-UP to ''The Restaurant'' would turn not on the travails of a chef but rather on the agony of middle-income New Yorkers with no fancy connections who want to dine at a reasonable hour in a hot new establishment. The winner is the first person who scores a reservation later than 5:30 p.m. and earlier than 10 p.m. Extra points for anyone managing to accomplish this on a Saturday.
''The Drug Store'' would send contestants into Duane Reade outlets in a search for a clerk who is both pleasant and knowledgeable.
The unfortunately named ''Death Wish'' would require New Yorkers to step off the curb with the light but without looking in both directions. Their goal is to cross the street without being hit by a bicycle messenger or a deliveryman riding the wrong way.
Another show with a transportation theme would be ''The Local.'' This is a train that closes its doors as an express train pulls in across the platform. The local then reopens its doors for a split second. To win, contestants on that train must scamper to board the express before it closes its doors. Anyone who rides the subways understands the challenge.
Indeed, the programming possibilities are limitless. One idea for the politically minded is a series called ''The Ledge.'' Legislators in Albany compete to pass timely budgets and bills that help New York City. On second thought, scrap that one. It sounds less like a reality show than a sequel to ''Fantasy Island.''
NYC
