Pilots unions and some transportation officials across Europe are balking at the Department of Homeland Security's demand that flights into the United States carry armed sky marshals, refusing to let guns on planes in some cases or to fly aboard flights needing sky marshals.
Government authorities in Denmark, Sweden and Portugal have said in recent days that they will not let armed guards on planes at this time, though they may change their minds in the future. Some pilots unions, meanwhile, have condemned the order, saying it should never have been issued without agreement from other aviation authorities.
''In principle, our regulations do not allow any sort of firearms on board, and therefore, for now, we have no plans to put air marshals on planes flown by Portuguese carriers,'' Joaquim Carvalho, head of security for the country's civil aviation body, INAC, said in a telephone interview from Lisbon. Instead, the agency would prefer to increase security measures on the ground before considering air marshals or canceling flights, Mr. Carvalho said.
The Swedish Civil Aviation Administration has agreed to cancel flights that the United States authorities see as being enough of a security risk to require an armed guard, said Jan Lindqvist, an agency spokesman in a telephone interview from Stockholm. Denmark's transport minister, Flemming Hansen, said he would negotiate with the United States authorities about additional security measures at airports, but that he would not authorize armed guards. That is ''a very bad idea,'' he told The Copenhagen Post.
In Britain, where handguns are illegal and even most police officers are not armed, the idea has been particularly unpopular. British pilots seemed to have cemented an agreement with British Airways during a meeting on Monday that could thwart the United States demand on the country's largest airline. The union was ''pleased to note that it remains B.A.'s intention not to operate a flight where there is a cause for concern,'' the union's general secretary, Jim McAuslan, said in a statement after the meeting. The British government has previously said that it will allow a sky marshal on a flight only when there is a specific threat.
On Tuesday, the British union will meet with Alistair Darling, Britain's transport secretary, to discuss the sky marshal plan.
The International Federation of Airline Pilots' Association, a global union for pilots, has been another critic. The Department of Homeland Security's demand is ''is an unacceptable use of government authority,'' the union said in a statement on Sunday. The union said the decision was ill-thought out, insensitive to local attitudes toward firearms, and potentially counterproductive.
Unions are particularly concerned that undercover sky marshals could be put on planes without their knowledge, and that planes' captains would no longer have authority during flights. They are asking that pilots and crews be given the choice not to fly on planes that have marshals.
Some transportation officials who immediately opposed the measure said their attitudes could change in the future. ''Faced with a concrete situation of a heightened risk on a specific flight -- for example, a TAP flight from Lisbon to New York -- we would have to weigh the other two possibilities: cancellation or putting marshals on board,'' the Portuguese official, Mr. Carvalho, said. ''But we would have to ponder the risk very carefully.''
