The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating whether one or more employees of the investment banking division of Bank of America traded stocks in advance of ratings changes by research analysts, a person briefed on the matter said yesterday.
The S.E.C. is considering taking action against the bank unit for improperly storing documents sought by the regulators in connection with the investigation, this person said.
Bank of America acknowledged on Friday that its Banc of America Securities subsidiary had received a Wells notice from the S.E.C. The notice indicated that the commission staff was prepared to recommend that action be taken against the subsidiary for failure to comply with ''books and records retention laws by improperly storing certain documents relevant to an inquiry and not producing the requested documents in a timely manner.''
The bank now has a chance to refute any accusations.
A spokeswoman for the bank, Eloise Hale, would not confirm the nature of the investigation, but said that it was unrelated to a continuing inquiry by the S.E.C. and the New York attorney general into trading of mutual funds at Bank of America.
Bank of America is scheduled to close a $48 billion merger with FleetBoston Financial in the second quarter. Shares of Bank of America fell $1.34 on Friday after the bank's disclosure of the Wells notice. They rose 23 cents yesterday, to $79.32.
''In terms of the trading inquiry, the company has looked into the circumstances and we have not found any violation of the law,'' Ms. Hale said yesterday.
The nature of the S.E.C.'s investigation into trading was reported yesterday by TheStreet.com.
Bank of America said in its statement on Friday that the S.E.C. investigation was initiated more than two years ago, and related to trading at its San Francisco office.
The bank also said its unit was ''cooperating fully with the inquiry and is submitting reasons why it does not believe an action should be brought.''
A spokesman for the S.E.C., John Heine, declined to comment.
