So much for all the talk of a goaltender controversy. Jussi Markkanen's second consecutive start for the Rangers lasted all of a period at Madison Square Garden last night.
Markkanen, who had been pushing the Rangers' No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, for playing time, allowed 3 goals on 13 shots, before Coach Glen Sather pulled him in favor of Dunham, who proceeded to allow a goal on the first shot he faced to a player who had not scored in 87 games. Dunham later allowed a freakish goal, after he vacated his crease to play what he thought was a harmless dump-in.
The Rangers, who have pulled their goaltender three times in the last six games, were embarrassed by Calgary, 5-0. The Flames' Jamie McLennan made 36 saves.
''I hope we can find a way to get them going,'' Sather said of his goaltenders.
But it surely would not be a shock if Sather were in the market for some help in goal. The Rangers had gone 3-1 on the road, but the signs of a collapse were there. They did not play well in a 4-1 victory in Pittsburgh on Saturday, but the Penguins, the worst team in the league, offered little resistance.
''You could see us slipping in a lot of areas,'' Mark Messier said.
Asked to specify the problem areas, Messier said, ''Pretty much everything.''
With a chance to move into a tie with the Islanders for eighth place in the Eastern Conference, the Rangers dropped to 16-15-5-3. Calgary, which received a goal and two assists from Jarome Iginla in the first period, improved to 20-12-3-3.
The rout began at 6 minutes 48 seconds of the first, when Andrew Ference won a battle with Martin Rucinsky on the boards and pushed a pass to Iginla, who was left open in the slot by defensemen Tom Poti and Brian Leetch. Iginla whipped a shot between Markkanen's pads for his 13th goal this season, and his 11th on the road.
With Matthew Barnaby in the penalty box for high-sticking Toni Lydman midway through the first period, the Flames made it 2-0 with a power-play goal by Ference at 12:50. Calgary had scored once in its previous 50 power plays.
Matthew Lombardi made it 3-0 for Calgary with 18 seconds remaining in the first period, after he won a battle for a rebound with Messier behind the Rangers' goal. Earlier in the day, Messier, who turns 43 on Jan. 18, was named the league's offensive player of the week, the first time since 1996 that he had won the honor.
Markkanen finished the final 18 seconds of the period. For the second period, it was Dunham in goal. After yesterday morning's skate, Dunham watched videotapes with the Rangers' goaltender consultant, Sam St. Laurent. ''We're going to break down film and work on his positioning,'' St. Laurent said. ''We started talking about it yesterday. We're going to get back to basics.''
But it was more of the same for Dunham, whose 2.72 goals against average coming into the game ranked 42nd among the 51 goalies who have appeared in 10 or more games. Dunham never saw the first shot he faced. He was beaten from long range at 1:44 of the second period, giving Calgary defenseman Denis Gauthier his first goal since Nov. 23, 2002.
But the most embarrassing moment for the Rangers was yet to come. Ference scored again, at 7:22 of the third. From center ice, he shot the puck off the glass and into the Rangers' zone. Dunham anticipated the dump-in and skated behind his net to play the puck. There was a problem. The puck caromed off a stanchion and skipped straight into the vacated goal.
SLAP SHOTS
DAN LaCOUTURE received 12 stitches after losing his helmet during a fight with ROBYN REGEHR and hitting his head on the ice.
HOCKEY
