Hats off to NASA for breaking the jinx that has doomed so many space missions to Mars. One can only marvel at the fantastic precision of the computerized technologies that allowed the robotic Spirit rover to land near the center of its target area in a vast crater the size of Connecticut. Space is a very demanding environment where, even if thousands of things go right, a single mishap can doom the whole mission. Scientists were holding their collective breath late Saturday when the Spirit turned its heat shield downward, deployed its parachute, jettisoned the shield, fired its retrorockets, inflated its air bags, bounced high off the surface and rolled to a stop, upright and in a seemingly perfect position to study what is described as a ''scientific sweet spot.'' Yesterday scientists said they were thrilled at how well the instruments were checking out after all that shaking. They proudly displayed the first three-dimensional photographs from the surface.
What a welcome change after a number of discouraging failures over the past several decades! All told, more than half of all Mars probes launched by Earth's spacefaring nations have ended in disaster, either blowing up in Earth orbit, losing their way in space or crashing or conking out on the Martian surface. The Russians have had the most misfires, but even the United States lost two orbiters and a lander because of malfunctions and human error. In the latest forays, a Japanese spacecraft failed to reach Mars orbit, while a British landing craft appears to have been lost on the surface. It is no wonder that Mars has been dubbed the dark planet for space vehicles.
Soon, if all goes well, the Spirit and a twin craft, scheduled to land on the far side of Mars on Jan. 24, will begin three months of exploration, traveling across the surface at the plodding speed of giant tortoises. Their goal is to determine whether water, indispensable to sustaining life as we know it, has been present on Mars in the past. The rovers will not be looking for direct evidence of life -- the stationary British craft had intended to do that -- but they could help resolve a lively debate over the role of water in Martian geology.
