Prime Minister Ariel Sharon was showered with catcalls on Monday from his own right-wing party during a speech in which he said he would take down some Jewish settlements and permit the formation of a Palestinian state if the two sides reached a peace agreement.
But Mr. Sharon again warned that he was prepared to set a security line unilaterally that would separate Israelis and Palestinians if they could not make progress under the current peace plan, which is stalled.
Mr. Sharon first outlined a disengagement plan on Dec. 18, and his address on Monday to 3,000 members of the Likud Party's central committee in Tel Aviv emphasized the same themes. ''If the Palestinian Authority proceeds with democratic reforms and puts an end to terrorism and incitement to violence, the State of Israel will meet its obligations and allow the creation of a Palestinian state,'' he said, drawing boos.
Under such a deal, Israel would have to give up some Jewish settlements, he added, prompting even more heckling.
But if Palestinian violence continues, ''we will diplomatically and physically separate from them until they change their ways,'' he said. ''We will mark a security line that will prevent any entrance to our grounds.''
Mr. Sharon has not divulged details of a unilateral plan, but any security line is likely to be based on the barrier that Israel is building in the West Bank. Under the route currently approved by the government, about 15 percent of the West Bank would be on the Israeli side of the barrier, according to calculations by the United Nations.
Palestinians reiterated their opposition to any unilateral Israeli moves. ''Israel keeps building the settlements and keeps building the wall,'' said Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian negotiator. ''On the ground, it's the same. It's business as usual.''
The Israeli and Palestinian prime ministers have been trying to arrange a meeting for two months, but no date has been set, and the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, said he saw little prospect for meaningful discussions.
''I am sorry to say destruction continues, aggression continues, bombardment continues, and I don't think that in this situation, that any meeting will have significant results,'' Mr. Qurei said.
Still, Mr. Erekat said he was continuing his efforts to plan a meeting.
Violence continued Monday when Israeli troops shot dead a 17-year-old Palestinian in Nablus, on the West Bank, according to Palestinians. The Israeli military said soldiers were patrolling the city when they encountered stone-throwing youths, and shot a Palestinian who had a firebomb.
In the southern Gaza Strip, the army said, it uncovered two Palestinian tunnels in Rafah, along the border with Egypt. One was used to smuggle weapons across the border; the other traveled under a road used by military vehicles, which the Palestinians were presumably planning to attack, the Israeli Army said.
