What is historic about the World Trade Center site?
The reflexive answer, of course, is everything. But beginning today, government agencies, preservationists, planners, builders, neighbors and the relatives of those who died on Sept. 11, 2001, will try to forge an official response, one that will guide redevelopment of the site.
They will attempt to define the boundaries and features that would make ground zero eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places, in a process outlined by the National Historic Preservation Act. Then they will assess what adverse effects that reconstruction might have on the historic areas and, if there are any adverse effects, propose ways to avoid, lessen or soften these impacts.
Many groups will be represented as consulting parties in the first meeting today, at the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. But they will be there by invitation only. The meeting will otherwise be closed to the press and general public. The review process is expected to run at least until the summer.
Though the federal preservation act is 38 years old -- a product of an era in which interstate highways and urban renewal projects seemed to be obliterating the historical landscape -- it has rarely dealt with as unconventional a site as ground zero.
To begin with, the trade center site falls far short of the ordinary 50-year age requirement for registry eligibility. That, however, can be overcome with a finding that it possesses exceptional significance.
More challenging, the site is both a mass graveyard and a neighborhood in its own right, brimming with emotional resonance but almost devoid of the three-dimensional structures that once made it a global cynosure. It is now a raw-edged precinct in which every protrusion of steel or concrete can signify to many people the most memorable and painful day they will ever know.
In the review, for instance, a balance may have to be found between preserving the remnants of the towers' footprints, which are still partly visible as rusted steel column footings around the base of the site, and accommodating a permanent PATH terminal.
As another example, participants may find themselves weighing the loss of the last of the trade center garage, with levels that are still vibrantly color coded, against the construction of Freedom Tower.
No one expects this to be easy.
''In a difficult process of such high visibility, with so many interested parties, perhaps not everyone will be happy,'' said Bernadette Castro, New York State commissioner of parks, recreation and historic preservation, in what may prove to be a considerable understatement.
Ms. Castro is also vice chairwoman of the federal Advisory Council on Historic Preservation which oversees the review process. She said she might end up recusing herself from one of the two roles.
Ground zero is subject to review under Section 106 of the preservation act because the government is providing financing for the new PATH terminal, through the Federal Transit Administration; the reconstruction of West Street-Route 9A, through the Federal Highway Administration; and the activities of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, through the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Kevin M. Rampe, the president of the development corporation, said historical resources at the site would also be studied under a separate environmental review.
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which owns the trade center site and is developing the permanent PATH terminal, will probably be most directly affected by the review. Its cultural resources consultant is Dr. John A. Hotopp, senior vice president of the Louis Berger Group, which was involved in the recent disinterment and reburial of some 3,500 graves from a potter's field in Secaucus, N.J., to make way for a highway interchange.
In the trade center review, there are now 65 consulting parties, and the list may grow. They include the Alliance for Downtown New York, the Coalition of 9/11 Families, the Families of September 11, the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese, the Lower Manhattan Cultural Council, the Municipal Art Society, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the New-York Historical Society, the New York Landmarks Conservancy, Pace University, the Regional Plan Association, Silverstein Properties, the Van Alen Institute, Verizon, the World Monuments Fund and three members of Congress.
Achieving consensus or compromise in such a group may seem unlikely. But speaking generally about the process, Don L. Klima, the director of federal agency programs at the advisory council, said: ''Everyone is motivated to reach a memorandum of agreement. The agency wants to maintain control of the project, and the preservationists want to reach a memorandum of agreement because it's legally binding on the agency.''
