With his father murmuring encouragement, a little boy in a yellow polo shirt whacked at a golf ball in a practice sand trap. Nearby, his mother worked on her putting.
The family scene at the Phoenix Seagaia Resort's new golf academy here recently was a far cry from the old days two years ago when golfers, invariably upper-echelon businessmen, were met at the clubhouse by obsequious employees in tuxedos.
The difference reflects the metamorphosis that has changed a state-supported white elephant, which was sinking into a Pacific Ocean beach, into a world class resort owned and managed by Americans.
''Our vision is to create Japan's first international resort,'' said Michael F. Glennie, a former manager of the Waldorf Astoria in New York and now chief executive of Seagaia, which is owned by the private equity firm Ripplewood Holdings and is situated on the southern tip of Japan's main island chain.
In a turn of the wheel from more than a decade ago, when Japanese giants were buying American ski and golf properties, like Steamboat in Colorado and Pebble Beach in California, American companies have been aggressively buying bankrupt leisure ventures -- many of them golf properties -- in Japan, a nation sometimes seen as welcoming foreign investors with barbed wire.
The Goldman Sachs Group has become Japan's largest golf operator, with 70 courses. Not far behind is Lone Star, a Texas-based investment fund, which has snapped up 39 Japanese golf courses and plans to increase that number substantially.
Americans, far and away the dominant foreign investors in Japan -- they accounted for 190.9 billion yen of the 981.2 billion yen ($9.2 billion) in foreign direct investment in the six months ended in September -- have been buying the hotels, apartments, resorts and golf courses because they are for sale, they are cheap and the demographics are in their favor. Over the next decade, 10 million Japanese are expected to retire. Controlling as much as $500 billion in savings, Japanese over 60 tend to favor domestic travel as a primary leisure activity.
With Japan's heavily indebted central government cutting payments to local governments, more golf courses and resorts built with government guarantees, like Seagaia, are set to come on the market.
''You will probably see tons of stuff for sale,'' said Kunji Okue, a fiscal policy expert with Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein in Tokyo. ''It is going to be a garage sale. They have to sell, and that is it.''
In the fall of 2001, Ripplewood paid about $125 million for Seagaia, a 1,730-acre complex in this semitropical city on Kyushu Island. Managed by Starwood Resorts as a Sheraton, it includes 99 holes of golf; four hotels, including one with 45 floors and 753 rooms; two clubhouses; a convention center; and what is billed as the world's largest domed water park. In return for promises to invest another $125 million, Ripplewood won the cancellation of the resort's debt of about $3.5 billion.
Now, after $145 million of investments, Seagaia's golf is so popular that the peak-season greens fees this winter are rising to $300 a round. Its weddings and meetings business is so strong that the conference space is being expanded. Ripplewood officials forecast a profit next year.
Though American investors have been busy buying bits of Japan -- including, in November, Japan Telecom's fixed-line operations -- this is the only American-owned golf property in the country.
Seagaia, believed to have cost about $2 billion to build, is emblematic of the late 1980's bubble-era excess when the number of number of golf courses in Japan rose almost one-third, to 2,471 today.
Since 2000, 265 courses have gone broke, with total liabilities of $61 billion. And the country has a new law making bankruptcies easier.
''It is not clear whether it has peaked out,'' said Saturo Shinzuka, golf course analyst for Teikoku Databank, a private credit research firm that tracks bankruptcies in Japan.
When Ripplewood showed an interest in Seagaia, '' we were worried,'' recalled Shoichi Chuman, director of industry, commerce, tourism and labor for Miyazaki Prefecture. ''There is the image of the vulture fund that makes investments in failed Japanese businesses and then quickly sells them for profits. But now I find the management is making a mid- to long-term commitment to build a resort that stands out in the Asia-Pacific region. I think foreign capital is actually reconstructing the Japanese economy.''
Hitoshi Hirano, secretary general of Seagaia's union, agreed.
''First came only the hard stuff, the risutora,'' he said, using the Japanese word for restructuring, a process that reduced the payroll here to 1,400 employees from 2,400. (American investors here often say their new businesses are overstaffed.)
The union accepted the cuts because it knew that Seagaia was losing about $230 million a year and that there would be no government aid.
A union leader even joined a Seagaia marketing trip to South Korea last year. ''We made a big push at cutting costs, but the bottom line is that we should increase the sales,'' Mr. Hirano said. ''The trip was rather successful. We got many contracts.''
Seagaia's location far from Japan's center had been seen as a negative. But Kurt Michelsen, who directs golf operations at the resort, sees it at the hub of 20 million golfers residing within two-hour flights from Seoul, Shanghai, Taipei or Tokyo.
In early 2003, direct flights started between here and Seoul on Asiana Airlines. Now 10 percent of the golfers are from South Korea, a nation where five million golfers compete for tee times at just 168 courses.
The golf academy encourages women and children to join what used to be a businessman's sport. Beverage carts now circulate around the links. At the clubhouse, employees wear resort-style uniforms, a pine forest has been pruned to allow views of the Pacific, and a hall of fame has been created with memorabilia from past tournament players at Seagaia, including a golf bag signed by Tiger Woods.
To help smooth out the peaks and lows in hotel occupancies, Ripplewood is seeking to attract more women and elderly visitors, who can often travel off season and stay longer. It has decided to spend $30 million to build a luxury spa, a traditional bath complex and a new entrance to the high-rise hotel. The goal is to make Seagaia look more like a resort.
Then there is that water park dome. With its wave machine and retractable roof, the park can cost $25,000 a day to run. But on a recent Monday, a holiday here, only around 100 visitors had paid the $9 admission fee.
''The dome is the jaw dropper,'' Mr. Glennie said. ''We just looked at it, scratched our heads and said, 'What do we do with this?'''
Whatever the company decides, leaders of this city of 300,000 are very likely to cooperate. ''You hear a lot about red tape in Japan,'' Mr. Glennie said. ''But we have been able to get permits faster than in many localities in the United States.''
Mr. Chuman, the local economic development director, said that Miyazaki authorities were not giving any subsidies to Seagaia, and that Seagaia had not asked for any.
But Miyazaki has invested $7.3 million in Skynet Asia Airways, a small airline that started flying between here and Tokyo last year. With round-trip flights for about $350, the start-up has had a 76 percent occupancy rate for its six daily flights between here and Haneda, the main domestic airport for greater Tokyo.
Local officials financed the start-up to bring down air fares that were being kept high by the two national companies serving the route, Japan Airlines and All Nippon Airways. Those two have since dropped their prices.
Seagaia is not out of the woods yet. The complex includes a mothballed golf course clubhouse and 250-room hotel. But Ripplewood's initial success here is attracting competition.
Late in 2003, , Ripplewood bid on Huis Ten Bosch, a Japanese-owned Dutch-themed amusement park on Kyushu Island. The Americans believed that their success with Seagaia made their offer a natural. But when the bids were opened, the winner, with a $275 million offer, was Nomura Principal Finance, a unit of Japan's biggest brokerage firm, Nomura Holdings.
