With a soft rain falling as if on cue, Gov. James E. McGreevey on Monday announced new regulations on storm-water runoff that environmentalists said would create one of the strongest impediments to urban sprawl anywhere in the nation.
The regulations, which will prohibit most new construction within 300 feet of rivers, streams and reservoirs, are intended to reduce flooding and protect and improve the state's drinking water supply.
''These storm-water rules are the most comprehensive set of water protections in the nation,'' Mr. McGreevey said here on the banks of Anderson Brook, one of the tributaries of the Oradell Reservoir. ''No other state has required statewide 300-foot buffers around its high-quality waters. They will prove to be a critical tool in our fight against sprawl.''
The 300-foot buffer could prevent development of as much as 300,000 acres in the state along an estimated 6,000 miles of rivers and streams. Builders, especially those in the shore areas and the western and southern parts of the state, where open land is still available, had opposed the rules.
Mr. McGreevey made the announcement in an upscale community of Closter, in northeastern New Jersey near the Hudson River. Anderson Brook runs through a new housing development that would probably be affected by these rules if it were being proposed today.
Jeff Tittel, executive director of the New Jersey chapter of the Sierra Club, said the new rules were ''landmark regulations'' that would benefit future generations, but that took years of discussions because of the opposition from the powerful construction lobby and some politicians.
''We talked and talked and now it's reality and I have to really thank the governor for his leadership on this issue,'' Mr. Tittel said. ''These regulations will not only prevent future floods and help mitigate droughts, but more importantly it's going to protect the pristine streams and our drinking water.''
Maya van Rossum of the Delaware Riverkeeper Network, an environmental group, said that while many states have been working on ways to protect the waterways from overdevelopment, New Jersey has, with these rules, jumped ahead of other states in the region.
''The new storm-water rules being announced today are the most protective and effective storm-water regulations in the entire country, and Governor McGreevey is setting the standard for the entire nation on how to deal with storm-water runoff and damaging developments,'' she said.
In addition to restricting development near waterways, the rules will force municipalities and developers to find more natural ways of managing water runoff from communities. With current manufactured drainage systems, pollutants such as grease, fertilizers and pesticides make their way into streams and rivers.
Developers' groups have opposed the regulations during public hearings, and they are not happy with the final outcome. A report released by the New Jersey Builders Association last year suggested that the state's efforts to restrict growth would lead to higher housing prices and cost 14,000 jobs.
Richard S. Van Osten, executive vice president of the Builders League of South Jersey, said that by taking land out of development, the governor is shrinking the housing supply for the one million new residents expected to move into New Jersey in the next 10 to 20 years.
''Where are they going to live?'' he said on Monday. ''Clearly, by taking out more ground from development, you increase the cost of housing. The average worker isn't going to be able to afford to live in New Jersey.''
But the governor, who has made the issue of fighting urban sprawl a linchpin of his administration, said making way for new residents in a state that does not take care of its natural resources would not make good economic sense.
''For too long in New Jersey we've ignored our water supply,'' he said. ''During the course of the 1990's, nearly one-quarter of New Jersey's water supplies were degraded. Less than a third were swimmable. What we've done today is say that there is nothing more basic or precious for our families and for our children than the quality of our water.''
