Forlorn men around the world can breathe a collective sigh of relief. Britney Spears is one step closer to being available again.
Confirming reports that her marriage to a childhood friend early Saturday morning in Las Vegas might not last forever, a spokesman for the Clark County District Court in Nevada said yesterday that Ms. Spears had filed a request for an annulment that morning.
The request was made on the grounds that ''plaintiff Spears lacked understanding of her actions to the extent that she was incapable of agreeing to the marriage.''
It said that Ms. Spears and her husband, Jason Allan Alexander, ''did not know each others likes and dislikes, each others desires to have or not have children and each others desires as to State of residency.''
''Upon learning of each others desires,'' the request continued, ''they are so incompatible that there is a want of understanding of each others actions in entering into this marriage.''
A statement issued Sunday by Ms. Spears's record company, Jive, called the sudden union ''a joke that went too far.''
Mr. Alexander, a college student and aspiring football player, was back home in Kentwood, La., by Sunday night.
''It was just crazy, man,'' he told NBC's program ''Access Hollywood'' yesterday, according to The Associated Press. ''And we were just looking at each other and said: 'Let's do something wild, crazy. Let's go get married, just for the hell of it.' ''
Ms. Spears's publicists said they had no comment beyond the record company's statement.
Just five months after kissing Madonna in a mock wedding ceremony at MTV's annual Video Music Awards, Ms. Spears did it -- well, something like it -- again. She and Mr. Alexander, both 22, met in kindergarten. They were married at 5:30 a.m. Saturday after a long night of partying, according to press reports.
There is no word yet on whether her wedding ensemble -- a baseball cap and torn jeans -- was designed by Vera Wang. But by Saturday evening they were arranging for an annulment.
Ms. Spears's latest album, ''In the Zone,'' is currently No. 10 on the Billboard chart after starting at No. 1 in November.
Ever since rocketing to fame in the late 1990's with her platinum-selling debut album, ''Baby One More Time,'' she and her midriff have been ubiquitous.
A self-described innocent at the onset of her career, Ms. Spears, who once favored pigtails and Catholic schoolgirl skirts, espoused the virtues of saving virginity until marriage.
But with each album she has grown increasingly provocative. In an interview with W magazine last year she acknowledged that she had had sex with the singer Justin Timberlake, when they were dating.
Over the years her shirts have got tighter, her skirts shorter. She recently posed for the cover of Esquire in nothing more than sweater and pumps.
''I think this is a classic Britney move,'' said an MTV News correspondent, Su Chin Pak. ''She's always walked the line between good girl and bad girl. The craziest thing she allows herself is to get married to a perfectly sweet guy from Kentwood, La., that she's known all her life. It's not like we're pulling her out of rehab.'' Ms. Spears, she said, is not taking her sundered nuptials too seriously.
''She has a 10-minute video of the wedding that she's been showing to friends,'' Ms. Pak said. ''She thinks it's a big joke.''
