For a month, Packers Coach Mike Sherman has borne witness to each derring-do pass that has landed in a receiver's hands and to every astonishing twist that led to the Packers' improbable entry into the playoffs. And then on Sunday, he saw an interception returned for a touchdown that beat Seattle in overtime and propelled the Packers into the National Football Conference divisional game against the Eagles.
Many may be convinced that the emotion that has buoyed the Packers since the death of Brett Favre's father two weeks ago is morphing into magic.
But the reserved Sherman has no use for such romantic notions, even though the Packers played a nearly flawless game Sunday. When asked Monday about the Packers' dramatic drop in turnovers over the last five games, Sherman replied, ''I thought you were going to say it was magical, that word has been bandied about quite often.''
Five straight victories -- the longest winning streak of the four N.F.C. teams in the playoffs -- have little to do with pixie dust, Sherman believes. Instead, he credits the grit of a team that was on the edge after a loss on Thanksgiving, but pulled itself back despite a tumultuous month.
''I think you create your own magic with the chemistry that's on your team,'' Sherman said. ''It's like when you ask someone to marry you, you hope there's magic there. Well, we have a magical group of guys in there that care about one another. So from that standpoint, with what's in that locker room, yeah, I'd say there's great chemistry and that may create some magic.''
Whatever it is, the Packers will need more of it to overcome the odds against them advancing to the N.F.C. title game. Since the playoffs expanded to 12 teams in 1990, teams that played on the first weekend have gone 9-43 in divisional games.
The Packers (11-6) are seeded fourth in the conference, and, since 1990, no fourth-seeded team in the N.F.C. has won a divisional game. Moreover, N.F.C. teams at home in the divisional round are 24-2.
The Packers have already lost to Philadelphia this season, 17-14 on Nov. 10, in a game that convinced many that the Lambeau Field mystique was gone for good. The Eagles' Donovan McNabb secured the victory by throwing a 6-yard touchdown pass with 27 seconds left.
The Eagles and Packers have changed since then. The Eagles beat the Packers without safety Brian Dawkins and cornerback Bobby Taylor. They will play Sunday, but the Eagles have since lost two of their best players: Brian Westbrook, a running back and returner, and linebacker Carlos Emmons.
The loss to Philadelphia (12-4) devastated the Packers, who had beaten Minnesota the week before and had hoped to inch closer to the N.F.C. North lead. They then endured an embarrassing 22-14 loss to Detroit on Thanksgiving.
Sherman points to the Detroit loss and to the 41-7 victory over Oakland -- a game in which Favre had an iconic performance the day after his father died -- as reasons for the chemistry that has elevated the Packers.
''The Detroit game was certainly a game that galvanized us and put us on a mission to play better,'' Sherman said. ''The Oakland game crystallized us as a team, and it was like the glue you need to keep people together. The way the team responded to that game, the challenge that game presented, I thought they responded very well.''
Since then, the Packers have been the hottest team in the N.F.C. Carolina has won four in a row, St. Louis lost its regular-season finale and Philadelphia lost its next to last game.
''This team is unique,'' wide receiver Javon Walker said. ''We've been through a lot of things and hopefully we can ride it on out. I think we're blessed with something now. We've just got to keep believing and stick with it.''
FOOTBALL
