FOR a woman built along broomstick proportions -- make that whisk broom -- there's a ludicrously gargantuan pair of green boxing gloves atop Caroline Miller's desk at New York magazine, where she has presided, by most accounts without resorting to fisticuffs, since 1996. This designates her, in the recession-racked, ego-driven piranha pool that is New York City's magazine business, as a certified survivor. For now.
Last month, New York magazine was sold for $55 million in just plain cash to the Wall Street mogul Bruce Wasserstein, head of Lazard and a principal owner of several less glamorous publications like The American Lawyer, The New York Law Journal, and The Deal, a trade bible for high-wire, deep-pocketed deal-lovers like himself.
The transaction is to be completed later this week; the editor in chief, scribbling away at transition plans that include an immediate expansion of the writing staff but no immediate renovation of the editorial overview, presumes she's part of the package. Then again, never assume: that's what she learned 25 years ago in her first reporting stint at The Ithaca Journal, a spot where, after she moaned about the shoddy editing of her pieces, her boss dared her to become an editor herself if she thought she could do better. Some promotion. But it stuck. As she hopes this job will.
''I know all bets are off anytime anything is sold,'' says Ms. Miller, 55, a mother of three and the wife and occasional collaborator of Eric Himmel, editor in chief at Harry N. Abrams, an art book publisher.
Their photo book, ''September 11, 2001,'' raised $250,000 for the September 11 Fund. ''I knew when I walked in here in 1996 that I could be fired any day,'' she said. ''Editing New York, you're in a fishbowl, and speculation about your demise is practically a spectator sport.''
Unmindful of potential wrinkles to her svelte black Armani jacket, she thrusts her arm elbow-deep into a boxing glove and gives her inquisitor a spirited jab to the bicep, then another, harder one. The second hit produces the desired effect: these are Incredible Hulk gloves, and they emit belligerent grunts whenever sufficiently serious body contact is made. Next she elucidates the link between those gaudy green gloves and the glossy magazine she edits: ''Here at New York, we're tougher than we look,'' she asserts, tossing her blond pageboy around.
Message received: New York magazine is a scrappy team sport. Why else would Ms. Miller and assorted colleagues be here on the day after New Year's, an anticlimactic day when the magazine's soon-to-be-ex-parent company, Primedia Inc., is officially closed. But what about her? Is she tougher than she looks?
''It has been said,'' she retorts with a blip of a grin. ''This is a job that gives you nerves of steel.'' Ms. Miller drops her glove, retrieves a cup of Starbucks black brew (she says the more caffeinated she gets, the smarter she feels), and rests her black-booted feet on a glass coffee table.
She describes herself as no more or less gossip-obsessed than the rest of the staff. She participated in, indeed starred in, the gallows humor wafting through the office pre-and-post sale. But she seems optimistic that Mr. Wasserstein will do something Primedia didn't: pump some dough into the editorial coffers.
''We're already great on social trends, on sexual politics, on reconstructing murders and scandals, and with an infusion of capital, we'll be able to work on the gravitas,'' she predicts. She endorses Mr. Wasserstein's intention to bump up their business coverage. So is she about to surrender her voice to his in order to hang onto a job she deems coveted by every magazine editor in New York City?
''I've been on a mission to keep this magazine alive, smart and compelling in very difficult times,'' she says, of its profit plunge to $1 million in 2002 from $8 million in the mid-90's, ''and I don't think he bought it because he thinks he can reinvent it. Bruce Wasserstein didn't buy the magazine so he could make it more about what he's interested in; that's a mistake many people make, but I'm gonna stick my neck out and say that's not a mistake he's going to make.''
Ms. Miller grew up in Seattle, where her father was an executive at Boeing. Though she wanted to attend college in New York, her parents forbade it. She wound up at Stanford, where her political and feminist consciousness was raised. After her first husband drew No. 66 in the Vietnam War draft, he got conscientious objector status and they moved to Oregon; she went to graduate school at Reed College, taught, and then moved to upstate New York.
THE marriage didn't last, but her journalism career germinated in Ithaca. From there, she moved with her daughter to New York City, and held editorial positions at New York Newsday, Lear's, Variety and Seventeen before succeeding Kurt Andersen at New York.
Ms. Miller, who keeps a low profile on the dinner party circuit and gardens on Fire Island when she feels the need to disconnect from publishing, insists New York's present sensibility, including its bevy of ''best of'' service articles, is not so different from the template that Clay Felker and Milton Glaser invented in 1968.
''I don't think there's any need to apologize for what we do,'' she says. ''In the Felker era, in the same issue you'd have, say, Tom Wolfe on radical chic and Gael Greene on the best bagel; we still take both of these things very seriously.''
PUBLIC LIVES
