Did the American underwriters who sold Parmalat bonds commit fraud?
That is a question the Securities and Exchange Commission has indicated it is looking into, and some securities law experts say the commission could file a civil case even if no evidence emerges that the banks knew of the fraud.
''In Parmalat, you may be able to allege that the due-diligence procedures of the firms were reckless either in the way they were designed, or the way they were carried out,'' said Joel Seligman, the dean of Washington University School of Law in St. Louis and the author of a history of the S.E.C.
Parmalat, the Italian food company, has conceded that a huge fraud occurred, and Italian prosecutors have arrested former Parmalat officials, as well as two auditors from Grant Thornton, which audited the books of the Parmalat subsidiary where the fraud was concentrated.
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan district attorney, yesterday confirmed that his office searched the New York office and home of Gian Paolo Zini, a lawyer for Parmalat who is under arrest in Italy. Mr. Morgenthau said his office would be seeking information in addition to the records already seized.
In a telephone interview, Mr. Morgenthau said that he had acted at the request of Italian authorities, as relayed to him by the S.E.C.
''I don't know where this is going to go,'' he said. ''We're assisting the S.E.C. and the Italian authorities. Of course, if a crime jumps out we're not going to walk away from it.''
Mr. Morgenthau said his office had seized documents that contained references to Parmalat. He said it was now seeking documents relating to shell companies, some of them involving Mr. Zini.
The S.E.C. has only civil jurisdiction, although it can refer matters to criminal prosecutors. It has already filed a civil suit against Parmalat, contending fraud.
Were the commission to choose to act against investment bankers, it would probably bring a civil suit under Section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, Mr. Seligman said. That section does not require the offering to have been a public one, as do some other sections of the law. All the Parmalat sales in the United States were private placements, generally under Rule 144a, which allows sales to institutional investors and some wealthy individuals.
There is no legal reason the commission could not bring such a case, said David M. Becker, a former general counsel of the commission who is now a partner at the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton. ''But it strikes me as kind of a tough case under the facts that are public,'' he added.
He also said that he thought ''the facts would have to be pretty egregious'' for the commission to act.
At a minimum, it appears that the commission will examine what the banks knew and whether they made adequate efforts to learn more.
Mr. Seligman said investigators might also seek evidence of other relationships between the investment banks and Parmalat that could be viewed as conflicts of interest that arguably would have reduced the incentives for the banks to do due diligence.
''What documents did they review?'' Mr. Seligman said the commission would ask of the bankers. ''Were there red flags and, if so, did they follow up on them?''
He noted that e-mail messages would probably be reviewed, with the commission looking for evidence that bankers had some suspicions they did not follow up.
One advantage of Section 17(a) is that court rulings indicate fraud can be shown under two parts if an underwriter is only negligent, a lesser standard than the reckless standard that is needed for the third part.
In cases over negligence, the typical argument is what the defendant should have known, whether the due diligence met the standards of ordinary care.
The banks no doubt would say that they were entitled to rely on Parmalat's audited financial statements, which showed large cash reserves, and had no reason to suspect the cash did not exist. Grant Thornton has said it relied on a Bank of America confirmation of a 3.95 million euro account -- then worth $4.1 billion -- but that confirmation was fraudulent.
In retrospect, it can be argued that there was no reason for a company with so much to be issuing so many bonds, and the fact that Parmalat maneuvered to keep Grant Thornton as the auditor for its fraudulent operations should have raised another red flag. Italian law required Parmalat to rotate its principal auditing firm after nine years, and in 1999 it replaced Grant Thornton with Deloitte &amp; Touche. But Deloitte ended up relying on Grant Thornton audits of the subsidiaries where the fraud appears to have occurred.
While Section 17(a) covers private placements as well as public offerings, Mr. Becker said that underwriters might argue that it is reasonable to expect the buyers of a private placement to do their own due diligence alongside the underwriters.
An S.E.C. case could result in something as mild as a cease-and-desist order, or a variety of other measures, including an injunction against further violations of securities laws and fines.
But any successful S.E.C. case could also make private litigation far more likely. It is clear that many investors were damaged by fraud at Parmalat, but it is also clear that Parmalat is in no position to pay big damage awards. ''The big question for underwriters is private litigation,'' Mr. Seligman said.
Market Place
