Brandon Stokley's game is speed  raw and functional speed. He exhibited it in the Baltimore Ravens' Super Bowl victory three years ago when he snatched a 38-yard touchdown pass and swooshed past the Giants.
Last season, his fourth in Baltimore, Stokley was hobbled by an injured left foot that sidelined him for nearly half the season. Afterward, the Ravens decided it was time for a split. As an unrestricted free agent, Stokley talked with Carolina, St. Louis and Indianapolis.
When he came to visit the Colts, he was on crutches.
Imagine that -- a speed guy hobbling around selling his services.
''That's a tough sell,'' Stokley said. ''I was flattered any team still had interest in me. Indianapolis was different. They pursued me. In fact, as soon as my plane landed from my visit to St. Louis, Coach Tony Dungy called me and said they were going to wait for me to decide before they made any other major additions on offense. I was trying to sell them; that sold me.''
Stokley signed with the Colts but missed all of their minicamps because of his foot injury. He practiced only five days in training camp and played in just the last two preseason games. He then labored through most of the first half of the season after injuring a hamstring and sustaining a concussion.
The Colts kept waiting. And by the end of the regular season, Stokley began to show them flashes of why the wait was worth it.
The big payoff came Sunday, when Stokley scored the game's first points on a 31-yard touchdown pass from Peyton Manning. In the second quarter, he added an 87-yard touchdown catch. Free from pain, healed in mind and spirit, Stokley surfaced as a big-game producer with a career-high 144 receiving yards in helping lead the Colts to their 41-10 playoff victory over Denver. Up next is Kansas City on Sunday.
Stokley, 5 feet 11 inches and 197 pounds, has become a key complement to Marvin Harrison, the Colts' marvelous receiver. But if Stokley, 27, can maintain his current drive, he will become much more than a complement.
''When you have an offense with the line we have, with the quarterback in Peyton we have, with Edgerrin James at running back and Marvin at receiver and Reggie Wayne, too, and toss in all the other ingredients, it is an offense that allows for different guys to be able to make big plays,'' said Stokley, who was a fourth-round pick by Baltimore, the 105th over all, in the 1999 draft.
Manning knows Stokley's value.
''You add a guy like Brandon to what we already have,'' Manning said, ''and what quarterback wouldn't love that? He's just getting started.''
And the Colts have just begun to find ways to use him.
On his first touchdown catch against Denver, Stokley drew single coverage on an 18-yard crossing route, while Harrison was being double-covered on a post pattern across the opposite side of the field. Stokley sped inside his defender, made the catch and easily outran the rest of the Denver defense the final few yards.
On his long touchdown, the Colts ran comeback routes on the outside and Stokley ran a post pattern and split the Denver safeties.
''Peyton and I talked about it,'' Stokley said. ''Their middle linebacker was not dropping back very far in pass coverage, and we felt we could hit it over his head and I could outrun the last defenders. It worked.''
At the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Stokley averaged 100.5 receiving yards a game and routinely ran 40 yards in 4.35 seconds. Despite his recent injuries, he appears just as quick and fast.
He said he had been warmly accepted by his new teammates.
''We've got a camaraderie that all good teams have,'' Stokley said. ''It's fun to come to work, and when it isn't, you don't win games.
''I would like to think that this is my permanent new home.''
Having played in Baltimore with running back Priest Holmes, now with Kansas City, Stokley said he knew what to expect from Holmes and the Chiefs' offense. He said he and his teammates also knew what to expect leaving their dome and playing outdoors at Kansas City.
''It's a big challenge,'' Stokley said. ''We need to execute and we'll be all right. Everyone saw that against Denver.''
PRO FOOTBALL
