A spare section of steel subway rail that was supposed to be nailed to the track bed came loose during the morning rush yesterday and tore through the bottom of the lead car of an uptown No. 2 train carrying hundreds of commuters.
No one was hurt, but transit officials investigating the accident, which occurred just north of the 96th Street station, are focusing on whether workers had properly secured the spare section of rail, a spokesman for New York City Transit said.
About 9 a.m., passengers suddenly heard a loud ''boom'' as the 16-foot piece of steel pierced the car's undercarriage, then ripped a gash in the car's floor, said the spokesman, Charles F. Seaton.
The train jerked to a stop as the emergency brakes were triggered, Mr. Seaton said. About a foot of rail jutted up through the floor beneath a row of seats, he said.
Transit officials said there were about 400 passengers on the train. One of them said it had felt like ''something hit the train.'' She told NY1 News that people were falling out of their seats.
Other commuters expressed frustration, saying that they had not known what was happening or why they were stranded between stations for so long.
Passengers were marooned between the stations at 96th Street and Broadway and 110th Street and Lenox Avenue for about an hour as workers moved two other uptown trains that were behind the disabled train.
Shaken but unhurt, the passengers in the first five cars of the disabled train were escorted to the rear five cars.
Workers then separated those cars from the rest of the train and backed them up to the 96th Street station, where the passengers got off.
The accident delayed the morning commute for thousands of subway riders as No. 2 and 3 service in both directions between Times Square and 148th Street was shut down. The No. 2 line was temporarily rerouted under Lexington Avenue before normal service was restored at 2 p.m.
Storing sections of rail on the track bed between the rails used by trains is common, according to John Samuelsen, head of the track division for Local 100 of the Transport Workers Union. Transit officials said that normally, spare or discarded rail sections are nailed down with the same spikes used to secure the regular tracks.
The practice is part of daily track replacement work, Mr. Samuelsen said. Periodically, workers run tests to see if the tracks are structurally sound, because they take a heavy beating, Mr. Samuelsen said. If a section of rail is found to be weak, workers will either bring out a new section of rail to replace it or use a spare rail that happens to be secured nearby. The discarded rail is then nailed down on the track bed until another crew can haul it out.
Initially, Mr. Samuelsen theorized that a discarded section of rail had somehow broken and pierced the car. These weakened sections often break as workers lift them off the tracks with cranes, although he said he had never heard one breaking from the vibrations of trains.
But, transit officials said, the section of rail that pierced the train was actually part of a 39-foot piece of new rail that workers recently brought in to replace an old section. They left behind a section they did not need for pickup later. Somehow, the piece bounced up and was driven like a spear into the car's underbelly.
Officials said that they could not recall another incident like this.
