Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta reassigned a captain and five other firefighters yesterday as part of a widening investigation into a New Year's Eve assault in a Staten Island firehouse and a suspected cover-up that followed.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said he asked the city's Department of Investigation to lead an inquiry into whether fire officers or firefighters tried to obstruct the investigation of the incident, in which one firefighter critically injured another by hitting him in the face with a metal chair. Mr. Bloomberg said the agency would work with the Fire Department and the office of the Staten Island district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr.
In the New Year's Eve altercation, Michael R. Silvestri, 41, was accused of attacking a fellow firefighter, Robert Walsh, after they exchanged insults in the firehouse kitchen.
The incident was not reported to the police for nearly nine hours, and firefighters initially lied to their superiors and doctors about what caused the injuries.
''There is no room in the Fire Department or anyplace for assault, if that's what happened,'' Mr. Bloomberg said in the Blue Room at City Hall. ''There's an investigation going on, a criminal investigation. And there is no room for cover-up; I don't know whether that happened or not.''
Among those transferred was Capt. Terrence M. Sweeney, who heads Ladder Company 76 in Tottenville, Staten Island. He and the other men -- three lieutenants and two firefighters -- will be reassigned to administrative duties pending the outcome of the criminal and administrative investigations, said one senior official, adding that it was likely that most of the men would be disciplined as a result of the incident.
Mr. Bloomberg said he had asked the Department of Investigation to lead the inquiry so there would be no question that it was independent.
''The Fire Department could have conducted an independent investigation, but I thought it was in the Fire Department's interest to preserve their reputation to make sure the investigation is independent,'' he said.
The department, which is conducting its own administrative review of the case, said it had postponed interviews of several firefighters and fire officers who were involved in the incident or might have witnessed it. The decision was announced after Mr. Scoppetta consulted with Mr. Donovan and the commissioner of the Department of Investigation, Rose Gill Hearn.
They were concerned that any responses in the administrative interviews might interfere with the criminal inquiry. They feared that lawyers could argue later that since the statements were compelled, they should not be used against the firefighters in the criminal investigation.
The Department of Investigation inquiry will focus on the actions in the firehouse after, officials say, Firefighter Silvestri smashed the metal chair into the face of Firefighter Walsh, 40, who suffered facial fractures and a partly severed nose. He was initially in a medically induced coma and remains heavily sedated at the north campus of Staten Island University Hospital, a Fire Department official said.
Firefighter Silvestri, who had served as a union delegate and had run for Staten Island trustee and lost, was arrested and charged with assault and suspended for 30 days.
One fire official said Captain Sweeney lied to superiors about how the injury happened and allowed Firefighter Walsh to be taken from the firehouse without an ambulance, which is against department protocol.
Another said that the captain had taken Firefighter Walsh to the hospital himself, and that men in the firehouse helped Firefighter Walsh change out of his uniform before leaving for the hospital.
Firefighters also cleaned up after the incident by wiping up blood, a fire official said. A police official said that the chair was cleaned, but that the police had been able to find traces of blood on it nevertheless.
A fire official said that one of the suspended lieutenants had made a false entry in the company journal, a log kept in the firehouse, indicating that Firefighter Walsh suffered his injuries falling down the steps.
In addition to Captain Sweeney, those reassigned included Lt. Raymond Kane of Ladder 76, Lt. Daniel Kenny of Engine 151, and Lt. Gregory McFarland of Battalion 32; and Firefighters David P. Johnsen of Engine 151 and Joseph Spitalieri of Ladder 76.
