Riding a 12-game winning streak and holding home-field advantage for the duration of the playoffs, the top-seeded New England Patriots are favored to reach the Super Bowl.
Around New England, some fans are gearing up for a run similar to the one two seasons ago, when the Patriots shimmied through the playoffs and upset the St. Louis Rams in the Super Bowl.
New England Coach Bill Belichick, however, treated talk about his team's favored status and 14-2 season with the same dour attitude he had when addressing questions about winning the N.F.L.'s coach of the year award.
''It doesn't mean anything now,'' Belichick said.
The Patriots play host to Tennessee in an American Football Conference playoff game Saturday night at Gillette Stadium, where New England is 8-0 and its opponents have averaged 8.5 points this season. It is the first playoff game in Foxboro since the famous Saturday night snow game when the Patriots beat Oakland on Jan. 19, 2002.
The only team that has scored more than 16 points against the Patriots this season at Gillette is Tennessee, which lost, 38-30, on Oct. 5.
Much as he had done all season, Belichick strapped on his blinders, not looking past the next opponent or putting too much credence on past performances.
''This game against the Titans will play a lot differently than the last one did,'' Belichick said, ''even though the teams are the same.''
The Titans will enter the game a bit hobbled, as tailback Eddie George dislocated his left shoulder in the 20-17 victory over the Ravens and Steve McNair has a strained right calf muscle and a sprained left ankle with a cracked bone spur.
Belichick said that he expected them to play and that Tennessee's injury report would not factor into the Patriots' game plan.
''You can take that injury report and put whatever you want on it, probable, doubtful, questionable, maybe, definitely in, definitely out,'' Belichick said. ''They're going to be there.''
McNair, the league's co-most valuable player this season, missed two of the Titans' final three regular-season games because of his injuries and threw three interceptions in Saturday's victory against the Ravens.
George injured his shoulder attempting to make a tackle after a Ravens interception. There is no structural damage in the shoulder, but George may wear a harness in the game. He rushed for 88 yards on 25 carries against the Ravens.
''Just watch them play,'' Belichick said. ''Eddie George, he's running over everyone against Baltimore. He left the game in the second quarter and came back and ran over everyone in the second half. Whatever is wrong with him, give me some of it.''
Though the Patriots' running game has struggled all season, they had success against the Titans on Oct. 5.
Tennessee finished the regular season with the N.F.L.'s best rush defense, yielding 80.9 yards a game, and New England ranked 27th in rushing offense, gaining 100.4.
But in that game, New England ran for 161 yards and 3 touchdowns. The reserve tailback Mike Cloud, who was playing in his first game for New England, rushed for 73 yards and scored 2 touchdowns.
Belichick dismissed his team's performance that day and talked more about the Titans' dominating 20-11 victory in Nashville last season.
''They beat us every which way,'' Belichick said.
Belichick said the Patriots were required by the National Football League to resod the worn-out turf at Gillette Stadium before Saturday's game, and it may become one of the game's intriguing subplots.
Considering the Patriots' poor running game and a passing offense ranked No. 9 in the league, slow footing on the tattered field had played to New England's advantage by slowing the opposition's ground game and pass rush.
''It was mandated by the league, so, that's really that,'' Belichick said. ''I thought that the field played well and really hadn't had too many problems with it in player safety and cutting and consistent footing and all that.''
FOOTBALL
