Beluga caviar, pearly black and $1,500 a pound, goes well with Champagne. But next year, connoisseurs may have to do with farmed American caviar or lesser Caspian species if the United States Fish and Wildlife Service decides to ban imports.
At issue is the number of beluga sturgeon in the Caspian Sea. Some researchers say the sturgeon, a 200-million-year-old species, is in serious trouble. But in September, the Geneva-based Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna, known as Cites, announced that numbers of beluga sturgeon rose to 11.6 million from 9.3 million from 2001 to 2002, 25 percent. The figures were supplied to Cites by Russia's Caspian Fisheries Research Institute in Astrakhan, once the country's caviar capital.
The Fish and Wildlife Service is considering these figures as it decides this month whether to impose an import ban. The numbers have been challenged by a number of marine scientists, in and out of Russia, who say that some 90 percent of the species has been fished out in the last two decades. They also say that the rate of increase is biologically impossible because the sturgeon take 15 years to reach reproductive age.
The controversy has focused attention on whether Cites can rely on data supplied by member countries that have an interest in overstating the population of the species.
''Cites is expecting us to believe that they have performed a miracle,'' said Dr. Vadim Birstein, a Russian-born sturgeon specialist who was instrumental in having Cites regulate the caviar trade. ''Corrupt Russian officials are distorting the data to get bigger export quotas,'' he added in a telephone interview from New York.
In Moscow, a Caspian specialist, Dr. Anatoli Tarasov, agreed and said it was ''very profitable'' for the Russian fisheries institute to inflate the number of sturgeon because even shrunken exports are lucrative.
Here in Atyrau, on the muddy banks of the Ural River in Kazakhstan, which holds the beluga's last spawning grounds, and in Astrakhan, many scientists and fishermen agree that the beluga are getting scarcer.
''Now we are catching very few beluga,'' said Sanat Tlepbergenov, the chairman of a local fishing cooperative and a member of the Atyrau city council who last year proposed a beluga moratorium.
Cites's numbers clash with the 2002 Fish and Wildlife Service proposal to list beluga sturgeon as an endangered species because, the agency says, its population is declining at ''an alarming rate.''
An agency decision, due by Jan. 31, could result in restrictions or an outright ban on beluga caviar for the world's biggest importer.
Dr. Mark Karpiuk, director of the Caspian Fisheries Research Institute, and Dr. Jim Armstrong, deputy secretary general of Cites, have signed and submitted several papers to the Fish and Wildlife Service opposing the proposed ban.
Cites, which does not have scientists verify data submitted by member states, based its conclusions on numbers supplied by Dr. Karpiuk's institute, which managed the scientific monitoring of the Caspian Sea during the Soviet period with branches in Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan.
In a telephone interview from Geneva, Dr. Armstrong said the beluga's decline had been reversed since Cites started intervening in the fisheries in 1998. But he minimized the importance of the 11.6 million figure, saying, ''The point here is the trend, not the numbers.''
Dr. Karpiuk declined repeated requests for an interview in Astrakhan.
But his predecessor, Dr. Vladimir P. Ivanov, has been warning for years that the Caspian sturgeon in general and the beluga in particular were being vastly overfished.
''It's not right to say the beluga population has increased over two years,'' he said in an interview. ''It's not possible. I think they should ban the fishing of beluga for at least a couple of years.''
In Atyrau, Kazakhstan's national fisheries research institute, which is independent of Dr. Karpiuk's, estimates that the number of spawning belugas going up the Ural River had steadily declined to 2,500 in 2002 from 3,900 in 1994.
Four American and Canadian fisheries specialists were asked to look at the Russian numbers and the studies they were based on. They found that the methods were flawed and that the study populations were too small.
They said the estimate of 11.6 million beluga in 2002 was based on a scientific study at sea in which only 56 fish were caught; only a few fish were adults, and all of these were young adults. The scientists said these numbers were far too small to be significant, and they took exception to the stated assumption that only one beluga was caught for every 25 in the trawl's path, a low level of what is called catchability.
''The catchabilities assumed for these sturgeons are crazy, much too low,'' said Dr. Daniel Pauly of the University of British Columbia. ''I have worked extensively on trawl fisheries, and on this very issue of catchability, and have never encountered anyone using such low catchabilities for large benthic fishes.''
Dr. Steve Martell of the University of Maryland, Dr. Jeff Hutchings of Dalhousie University in Canada and Dr. Ray Hilborn of the University of Washington were the other three scientists who criticized the evidence offered by Cites that the current fishery was sustainable.
Four other fisheries experts consulted last year by the Fish and Wildlife Service also found the Cites data were lacking and unconvincing. The agency's final statement on the proposed rule said the ''preferred action'' was to list the beluga as endangered.
Still, Dr. Armstrong defended the Russian numbers as ''peer-reviewed, sound science.''
Sturgeons, one of the oldest species on earth, were common in North America and Europe until the 20th century, when they were fished to near extinction, but nowhere were there more species and more individuals than in the Caspian Sea, the world's largest inland body of water.
The Caspian population, which includes six species, suffered several periods of overfishing. It was saved by the outbreaks of World War I and II. After dams on the Volga cut off the sturgeon from most of their spawning grounds in 1960, it became the subject of the world's largest restocking program. Tens of millions of fingerlings were released every year, but the results were unclear.
Overfishing resumed in the late 1970's and culminated in an explosion of poaching, wiping out most of the adult population, in the decade after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
Three years ago, the Natural Resources Defense Council, the Wildlife Conservation Society and SeaWeb petitioned the Fish and Wildlife Service to list the beluga, the rarest of three commercial species, under the Endangered Species Act.
Iran, Russia, Kazakhstan and Cites opposed the proposed ban, but Azerbaijan endorsed it. ''If commercial catch is continued on the same level, there simply may not be enough mature beluga sturgeon remaining in the Caspian Sea to support a fishery in the future,'' wrote Gussein Bagirov, Azerbaijan's minister of ecology and natural resources.
Sagiden Yerbulekov, director of one of Atyrau's two hatcheries, said that many of the female belugas netted last spring as they swam up the Ural River weighed less than 150 pounds and were not fully mature, yielding eggs of poor quality. The females who produce the most viable eggs weigh 300 to 400 pounds, he said.
Alexander Kitanov of the Bios hatchery on the Volga, where beluga are much scarcer, said he was unable to catch enough mature females to produce his quota of fingerlings and now had to rely on adults he had been housing for just this purpose.
He and others have noted that the immense hatcheries program set up in the 1960's had released hundreds of millions of fingerlings into Caspian rivers but failed to determine scientifically how many of these fish survived to return and spawn.
Lev Salnikov, a former researcher at the Astrakhan fisheries institute, said the Soviets never engaged in the large-scale fish-tagging program that could have provided a clear indication of how many hatchery fingerlings survived to spawn.
Not far from Mr. Salnikov's apartment, in Astrakhan's dusty city museum, lies a testimony to the species' past grandeur: a stuffed beluga that is nearly 20 feet long and weighed over 3,000 pounds. ''I don't think we'll ever see another one like that,'' said Ivan Golovachev, the museum's long-bearded taxidermist.
