County executives and legislators in both political parties opened a coordinated statewide campaign on Monday to pressure Albany to rein in the rising costs of Medicaid.
Local officials held news conferences at 11 a.m. in four counties around the state, asking that Gov. George E. Pataki and state lawmakers ease the amounts local governments pay for Medicaid.
The local officials have been more and more vocal about the rising costs of Medicaid, which counties share with the state and federal governments. As local property taxes have risen at double-digit rates over the last three years, in part to cover those costs, county officials are hoping the state will eventually absorb more of the Medicaid bill. Short of that, they would like Albany to effectively cap the program's growth.
''We are united, right here, in the notion that the cost of Medicaid should be borne by the state,'' said Michael Breslin, a Democrat who is the county executive of Albany County. Speaking at a news conference in the county courthouse, he said the program's expenses should be capped immediately to prevent ''annual increases of real property taxes.'' He added that the state should ultimately take over ''the entire cost, because the management is with the state.''
Similar pleas were made in Onondaga, Livingston and Nassau Counties. The New York State Association of Counties said four more news conferences would be held on Tuesday in White Plains, Elmira, Buffalo and Plattsburgh.
Local officials have been trying to force the Medicaid issue to the forefront of the state agenda. Despite a state budget gap that is projected at nearly $6 billion for the fiscal year beginning April 1, the officials want the state to take the local tax burden into consideration when drawing up the state budget.
The county officials point out that New York's state and county governments pay $7,646 for each Medicaid beneficiary, nearly twice the national average. Further, the bulk of the costs are driven up by a small number of recipients.
In the past, Governor Pataki has been open to the idea of some sort of state takeover of Medicaid costs, and last year he proposed that the state fully assume the cost of prescription drugs, a fast-growing component of Medicaid. He has also created a task force improving the program.
A spokesman, Kevin C. Quinn, said Monday, ''Under the governor's leadership we have enacted Medicaid cost-saving measures that have saved local governments more than $2.8 billion since 1995.''
Several county executives, including Thomas R. Suozzi, a Democrat from Nassau County, have said it is wrong for the State Legislature to take credit for popular programs, such as Family Health Plus, without taking responsibility for the tax increases needed to pay for them. Speaking in Garden City on Monday, Mr. Suozzi said the counties' message to the state was: ''You have got to take responsibility for the laws that you pass.''
At the same time, the county officials themselves were vague about whether programs or eligibility should be cut, though they said cost containments could be achieved.
The Senate proposed steps last month to revise Medicaid, including making it difficult for people to hide assets to qualify for nursing-home care and restricting access to some prescription drugs. County officials praised the Senate's move but said changes must go further.
A spokesman for the state Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, said the Senate plan would yield $2.5 billion in savings over five years, most of which would be given back to the counties through a state takeover of the Family Health Plus program.
Eileen Larrabee, a spokeswoman for Sheldon Silver, the Democratic Assembly speaker, said the Assembly was ''looking to see how the governor will address the issues raised by the counties.''
JoEllen Gardner, a spokeswoman for the association of counties, said one way to limit local costs would be to have the state assume full responsibility for the aged, blind and disabled, a group that represents 30 percent of the total Medicaid population but 70 percent of the costs. She said putting them into a managed-care program, with services paid for and monitored by the state, could improve care, relieve county taxpayers and enable the state to save money.
