Now that ephedra is to be banned, the millions of people who have been taking the supplement to lose weight or control it may find themselves looking for an alternative. But weight-loss and nutrition experts nationwide say that no other over-the-counter supplements advertised as weight-loss aids are as effective as ephedra.
''I'm not pushing ephedra, and I wouldn't recommend it to anybody, but several very good studies have shown that ephedra combined with caffeine promotes weight loss,'' said Dr. Ken Fujioka, director of the Nutrition and Metabolic Research Center at the Scripps Clinic in San Diego. ''I don't know of any other over-the-counter preparation that has shown that kind of consistent effect.''
Claims that other supplements -- from bitter orange to green tea extract to herbal laxatives -- can promote weight loss are not backed up by long-term studies in humans.
''There are no over-the-counter dietary supplements, including herbal supplements, that lead to any significant amount of sustained weight loss,'' said Dr. Donald Hensrud of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn.
The Food and Drug Administration announced the ban on ephedra last Tuesday, after a review of 16,000 reports of adverse reactions that included heart attack, stroke and sudden death. Ephedrine, the active ingredient in ephedra, a plant also known as ma huang, is a stimulant that can increase heart rate, raise blood pressure and speed up brain activity.
Ephedra, which has been used in China for centuries to treat asthma and other breathing problems, has been promoted in the United States for its ability to enhance sports performance and increase energy. Little evidence exists to support those claims.
But studies have indicated that it can help people lose about two pounds a month more than is lost by people taking placebos, according to a recent analysis of dozens of studies conducted for the F.D.A. by the RAND Corporation.
Ephedra is especially effective when it is combined with caffeine, Dr. Fujioka said. Over the course of several months, the two agents can help people lose 5 to 10 percent of their body weight, he said. The only other weight-loss aids known to be that effective are prescription drugs.
Doctors generally frown on the use of ephedra, not only because it can have dangerous side effects but because supplements are unregulated by any government agency, so consumers cannot be sure that pills actually contain the amount of ephedra described on the label.
Yet millions of Americans consume ephedra products, according to the American Herbal Products Association, a trade organization. Some consumers have stopped taking the supplement as news of its adverse side effects has spread. But others are reportedly stocking up on supplies before the ban, which will take effect 60 days after the F.D.A. publishes a regulation stating its reasons for withdrawing ephedra from the market.
Justin Varuzzo of Lagrangeville, N.Y., buys ephedra products online because he cannot get them in his home state. (New York, Illinois and California banned ephedra sales earlier.) After Tuesday's announcement, Mr. Varuzzo had trouble finding a Web site that was not sold out of his preferred brand of ephedra products. ''I have a pretty good supply for now,'' he said. ''After the ban, I will just try to find alternative methods of getting it.''
Mr. Varuzzo, 23, has been taking ephedra on and off for six years.
''I've yet to read anything that really suggests this stuff is dangerous if you take it according to the directions,'' Mr. Varuzzo said. He said that he was healthy and did not have high blood pressure and that he took the supplement only for three months at a time. ''The only side effect I've ever had is a little bit of a speedy feeling,'' he said, ''the same feeling you'd get from drinking three cups of coffee.''
On Tuesday, the F.D.A. advised consumers to stop taking ephedra supplements immediately.
Quitting abruptly is safe and does not bring on withdrawal symptoms. But people who have used the supplement to lose weight may see the pounds return
''Ephedra suppresses appetite, and when someone goes off it, it's likely their appetite will increase and they will regain the weight they lost,'' said Dr. Jonathan Waitman, an internist at the Comprehensive Weight Control Program at New York Weill Cornell Center.
Ephedra users who look to supplement shelves for alternatives may find, for example, bitter orange, which is used in many products now advertised as ''ephedra-free.'' The active ingredient in bitter orange is synephrine, a stimulant with pharmacological properties similar to those of ephedrine. ''Like ephedrine, it leads to constriction of blood vessels,'' said Dr. Stephen Bent, a physician at the University of California at San Francisco, who has studied the health risks of ephedra. ''But there have been very few investigations into whether it's safe.''
Bitter orange, like ephedra, is often combined with caffeine. ''The goal of these products is to increase metabolic rate, to burn more calories,'' Dr. Bent said. ''But just about anything that increases metabolic rate is going to raise heart rate, blood pressure and temperature. In people with obesity who may have diabetes or high blood pressure or vascular disease, these products are potentially dangerous, and should be studied.''
A few studies of bitter orange have been conducted on laboratory animals, but these do not demonstrate that it causes weight loss in humans, said Dr. Richard J. Ko, a research scientist for the California Department of Health Services. Comparisons of synephrine's chemical structure with that of ephedrine suggest that synephrine may not be as strong, Dr. Ko said. ''But nobody has studied this,'' he added.
Green tea extract, another weight-loss supplement, has been studied in humans. In one investigation, the substance was given to 10 young men. Researchers found that it could boost a person's energy expenditure over 24 hours by 4 percent. But whether that can lead to weight loss is unknown.
''What patients have told me is that ephedra had been more stimulating,'' said Dr. Waitman. ''They didn't feel as much of an effect with green tea.''
Green tea extract appears to have no adverse side effects, Dr. Waitman said, but long-term studies have yet to be done.
Still another plant substance, extracted from the fruit of the Garcinia cambogia tree, from Indonesia, is said to help people lose weight. The fruit contains hydroxycitric acid, or HCA, which is said to interfere with the synthesis of fat cells. But so far, studies in humans suggest it is ineffective, Dr. Ko said.
A variety of herbal laxatives typically sold in the form of tea, including senna, cascara, aloe and rhubarb root, are said to promote weight loss. But these cause the body to lose water only. ''We have not recommended laxatives or diuretics for years and years,'' Dr. Hensrud said. ''You don't lose fat, and they have the potential to cause electrolyte imbalances.''
In draining water from the body, laxatives also draw out calcium and potassium. Potassium deficiency can cause heart problems, which are potentially fatal. For that reason, in California, laxative teas containing senna carry a warning label.
Chitosan, a product made from the shells of shrimp and crabs, is said to be able to prevent the absorption of fat in the digestive tract, but no evidence exists to back up that claim, Dr. Ko said. ''There is some evidence to show there are side effects, including nausea and vomiting,'' he said.
Chromium and vanadium are two heavy metals that are advertised for their ability to help people use blood sugar more efficiently. But here again, said Dr. Ko, ''there is absolutely no study I'm aware of that shows they are useful in weight loss.''
Ginseng and ginkgo are also used in some herbal weight-loss preparations, but these, too, appear to be useless for weight loss, Dr. Ko said.
A few prescription drugs are used for weight loss. Phentermine (brand name Ionamin), for example, suppresses appetite. The F.D.A. advises that this drug, which is sold under various brand names, be used no longer than 12 weeks at a time because few long-term studies of its safety and effectiveness have been done. But doctors can prescribe the drug for longer periods. Studies of people who have taken phentermine for six months suggest that they can lose from 4 to 20 pounds more than people who take placebo pills.
Phentermine, a stimulant, raises blood pressure. Side effects include insomnia, dry mouth, constipation, palpitations and high blood pressure.
Sibutramine (sold as Meridia by Abbott Laboratories) acts somewhat like an antidepressant: it keeps the chemicals serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine active in the brain's synapses longer than usual. ''It's not an appetite suppressant,'' said Madelyn H. Fernstrom, director of the weight management center at the University of Pittsburgh, ''but it increases a person's sense of fullness on less food.
Sibutramine can also raise blood pressure, Dr. Hensrud said.
Sibutramine costs from $2.98 to $3.68 a day, depending on where it is bought, according to a recent review of diet drugs in The New England Journal of Medicine.
Orlistat (brand name Xenical, made by Roche) is a diet drug that works not on the brain but on the digestive tract. It blocks the absorption of one-third of the fat a person eats. For this reason, it works best for people who eat a lot of fat.
''What you have to look out for when using this medication is what happens to the fat that is not absorbed,'' Dr. Waitman said. ''It goes through your gastrointestinal tract rapidly, so people have diarrhea or oily discharge.''
That effect alone can discourage people from eating as much fat as they may be accustomed to. It also can lead to loss of fat-soluble vitamins, so doctors typically prescribe a daily multivitamin to patients who take orlistat. The cost of orlistat is about $3.56 a day. Both sibutramine and orlistat have been shown to help people lose 5 to 9 percent of their body weight in a year.
Some drugs not specifically designed for dieting can also help people lose weight. The anti-seizure medication topiramate (brand name Topamax, made by Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical, a unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson), for example, has been found to reduce bingeing behavior. ''It decreases obsessional thinking about food and helps people control their eating,'' Dr. Waitman said.
Side effects from topiramate include sleep problems, mood changes and difficulty with memory, concentration and attention -- results that cause some weight-loss doctors to avoid prescribing it. ''Skilled weight-loss specialists will use this medication, but I think the field is divided,'' Dr. Fernstrom said. ''I am with the group that says this drug's side effect profile is too significant to use for weight loss when there are so many other options.''
Lesley Fishman, a spokeswoman for Ortho-McNeil, maker of Topamax, noted that the drug was now approved by the F.D.A. only for treating epilepsy and migraine headaches. The company is looking into creating a controlled-release form of the drug for obesity treatment, but it has not yet started clinical trials.
Bupropion (Wellbutrin), the antidepressant made by GlaxoSmithKline, can also help some patients lose weight. ''It's effective for people with low mood and a preoccupation with food,'' Dr. Fernstrom said.
Metformin (Glucophage, made by Bristol-Myers Squibb), a drug that is used to treat diabetes, can help people lose weight even if they are not diabetic but still have high insulin levels. Metformin lowers insulin levels and helps keep the body's blood sugar and insulin balance stable, and that can reduce a person's food cravings, Dr. Fernstrom said.
No weight-loss pill can be expected to work well by itself, doctors say.
''Medications can be good tools,'' said Dr. Fernstrom, ''but they don't replace the person's need to learn to manage hunger and fullness. There will never be a drug that will permanently suppress the drive to eat. That's something that has to be managed.''
Correction:  January 14, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Science Times on Jan. 6 about alternatives to the banned weight-loss supplement ephedra referred incorrectly to approved uses for another drug, topiramate (sold by Ortho-McNeil as Topamax). The Food and Drug Administration has approved it as an add-on treatment for epilepsy. Approval to treat migraine headaches or as a single treatment for epilepsy is pending.
The article also misstated Ortho-McNeil's plans to test a controlled-release form of topiramate. The company plans to test its potential to treat people with obesity who also have Type 2 diabetes, not just those with obesity.
The article also referred imprecisely to the government role in regulating such supplements. The Food and Drug Administration indeed exercises some regulatory oversight, by requiring that the products contain the ingredients listed on the labels. But it does not require approval before sales (as it does for prescription drugs), nor does it require manufacturers to prove the products are safe and effective before sale.
