A bill authorizing research using stem cells from human embryos, signed into law on Sunday by Gov. James E. McGreevey, will help make New Jersey a center for scientists and biotechnology companies in the rapidly developing field, medical researchers and patient advocates said on Monday.
New Jersey is the second state -- California was the first -- to give official approval to such research, which supporters say holds the promise of new treatments for those with certain degenerative diseases, like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's, and spinal cord injuries.
''This will be a marvelous impetus to research, to attracting researchers who know they are in a supportive environment,'' said Dr. Ira Black, the chairman of the neurosciences department at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
But Roman Catholic and anti-abortion groups expressed bitter disappointment over the legislation, which they fought for a year before it was approved by the Assembly on Dec. 15. The opponents contend that it will permit the development of human clones from stem cells.
Stem cells are created in the first few days after fertilization, and can be induced to grow into different types of tissue. Many researchers believe that they could transform medicine by allowing scientists to grow new cells to treat many injuries and illnesses. But critics of the research object that the cells are harvested by destroying embryos, which come from in vitro fertilization clinics.
The New Jersey Catholic Conference, in a statement issued on Monday, said it was ''deeply distressed'' by the law and added, ''Research that relies on the destruction of some defenseless human being for the possible benefit to others is morally unacceptable.''
The law does not explicitly authorize practices that were not already legal, but it gives assurance to researchers who have been hesitant since President Bush announced in 2001 that federal funds could be used only for projects using cells from several dozen colonies, called lines, that had already been developed from donated embryos.
Legislation to forbid embryonic stem-cell research has been introduced in several states and in Congress.
''If you were a biotech, would you invest millions of dollars and jobs in a state that might outlaw what you're doing?'' asked Michael Manganiello, the vice president for government relations at the Christopher Reeve Paralysis Foundation, named for the actor, who lobbied intensely for the legislation.
Dr. Black said that when California enacted its law more than a year ago, several prominent researchers moved there from other states.
The New Jersey law does not provide any state funds for stem-cell research, but researchers expect it to encourage private investment. Soon after California's law was enacted, Stanford University received an infusion of private funds for a major stem-cell research center.
Researchers say that New Jersey, the center of the nation's pharmaceutical industry, had already drawn the kind of smaller biotechnology companies that are likely to undertake stem-cell research.
Dr. Bill Stevenson, a Drexel University medical school administrator who until recently was the vice president for research at the University of Medicine and Dentistry, said big drug companies ''would be less substantial players in this than the smaller biotech companies, which are better poised to move quickly.''
The new law also explicitly approves a process known as therapeutic cloning, in which DNA from an adult cell is transferred to an unfertilized egg and is replicated in the stem cells that are generated. Scientists believe that such cells will prove more effective than other stem cells in treating disease because they can generate tissue matching the donor's.
But abortion opponents say that the law does not limit the uses of the new embryos or forbid their implantation.
''Instead of closing the door to reproductive cloning, it actually opens the door.'' said Marie Tasy, the legislative director of New Jersey Right to Life.
Ms. Tasy said the bill was ''pushed through in a lame-duck session just before the holidays, when no one would notice,'' at the behest of the biotechnology industry.
''There's big money to be made there,'' she said.
