FOULING off pitch after pitch with the same feral intensity he showed as a batter, Pete Rose waited until most people were weary of mind and arm.
Now he has uncoiled from his crouch, driving yet another base hit into the corner. But he still needs somebody to drive him home.
Pete's extra-base hit comes in the form of his dreadfully overdue admission that he bet on baseball games while he was managing the Cincinnati Reds in the late 1980's.
Never mind that gambling on games is blatantly illegal under baseball rules. Rose now wants the public to pay for the book in which he makes these admissions. What a guy.
As the former commissioner Fay Vincent recently pointed out on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times, Rose knows he has two years left in the care of the softies from the baseball writers, many of whom covered Rose's incessant drive for hits. Rose prefers to take his chances with the writers rather than risk the judgment of hard-liners on the Veterans Committee.
Having been in a spring-training park in Florida in 1963 when the fat cats Mickey Mantle and Whitey Ford laughed at Rose, then an energetic rookie, I confess to having a soft spot for Charlie Hustle, as the Yankees named him.
Although writers at The Times do not vote for the Hall of Fame, it is my belief that Rose never went against his team when he was a self-centered and winning player. He had 4,256 hits and played in 6 World Series in a career that deserves to be honored in the Baseball Hall of Fame.
He has been juiced up by the cheers from fans, who would probably cheer scalawag mayors and con-man corporate executives and even Jesse James making his getaway from a mail train -- at least until they wised up that it was their own money being purloined. Let's face it, most of us are suckers for rogues, including yours truly.
In his new book, Rose says he began gambling on baseball games at the end of his playing career, when he was managing the Reds. He said his appetites got the better of him. He always wanted more. That sounds like the Pete Rose we all know.
But Rose got himself behind in the count in 1989, when he stonewalled solid evidence that he had bet on baseball. He was barred from the sport as well as from consideration for the Hall of Fame, and that lifetime ban became even more formidable when the commissioner, A. Bartlett Giamatti, died of a heart attack within days of banishing Rose.
Most powerful people in baseball could not help but link Rose with the death of their admired leader. But Rose had nothing but time on his hands, so he dug in at his perennial home plate, and started wasting the high, hard ones of the baseball establishment, first Vincent and now Bud Selig.
The man has nothing if not chutzpah. He suggests he would have been reinstated years ago except that baseball had programs for alcoholics and drug addicts but, boo-hoo, not for gamblers like himself.
Meanwhile, Selig and the new order have waited 14 years for Rose to demonstrate ''contrition,'' to show up with a new best friend from Gamblers Anonymous, to go public with his major gambling jones for various gambling devices dogs, horses and even two-legged competitors.
Pete does not do contrition. He wakes up every morning looking for action. He keeps insisting he never bet against his own team, skipping over the fact that he sent a clear message to gamblers on days he did not have confidence in his team.
There is still no sign that Rose sees his conduct as destructive to himself, his family, his teammates, his employers, the public. He is clueless. Charming in his own way -- great copy for the news media -- but clueless. And he still faces even worse ruination ahead of him, unless he gets help.
But does his defiant mug belong on the wall in Cooperstown in recognition of those 3,562 games, those headfirst slides, the games he won, the people he entertained? Yes. Selig and his associates should rule that Rose can never be trusted to manage or coach or run a team, but they should give him his plaque.
If Bob Feller and some of the other old-timers walk out during Rose's induction, that would be their prerogative. A lifetime of probation and lingering scorn is worth the price of admission to the Hall. Rose is apparently not a very good gambler, but he's got the odds figured on this one.
Sports of The Times
