It was a cold February night in 2003. Jacob Hoye, publishing director of MTV Books, was riding the A train home to Brooklyn when he saw a tall, bespectacled young man walking through the subway car selling books. Normally, Mr. Hoye said, he ignores such people, but this one had a charming delivery.
''I'm a young writer,'' he recalled the young man saying, ''and I've just published my first novel, 'A Hip-Hop Story.' It doesn't cost a thing to take a look. Just a glimpse? A glance? A peek? This is going to be the No. 1 book in the country. One year from now, No. 1 in the world. You see me here today. Tomorrow you see me on 'Oprah.' ''
The young man's name was Heru Ptah. Mr. Hoye bought the last copy he had on him, for $10. That night he read the 350-page novel, a fable of the music industry involving two battling rappers named Hannibal and Flawless, a corrupt record label, sex, violence and ambition. At 3:30 a.m., Mr. Hoye left a message on the answering machine at his boss's office: MTV had to buy it.
MTV did, in partnership with Pocket Books, giving him an advance in ''the mid-five figures,'' Mr. Ptah said. Today the book is in its second printing, with about 25,000 copies in circulation. And a third printing is planned.
How Mr. Ptah, 23, came to write a novel that he says sold more than 10,000 copies on the streets and subways before it was republished in September by MTV is another story.
Mr. Ptah (his full name is pronounced Heh-ROO peh-TAH) said he was born in Jamaica and lives in Cambria Heights, Queens, with his mother, Venice Henry, in a house he and his sisters helped buy. (Disclosing his real name, he said with a smile, ''would be like revealing Batman's identity.'') His mother holds two full-time jobs as a nurse's aide, he said, and a sister, Judith, is a medical student at the State University of New York Downstate Medical Center. Mr. Ptah's father, Anthony Richards, lives in Jamaica, he said, ''just chillin' down there.''
After graduating from Midwood High School in Brooklyn, Mr. Ptah said, he relied on grants and loans to go to SUNY College at Oswego, with plans to become an artist. But then something unplanned happened. Freshman year, he began going blind. One doctor's diagnosis was Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy, a rare genetic disorder, but tests were inconclusive, Mr. Ptah said. Then his vision improved on its own, and he declined treatment.
''I wasn't going to have someone experiment on something they weren't sure about,'' he said.
Today he can read and write but cannot drive. And despite having health care workers in his family, he said, he hasn't seen a doctor since 1998.
It was while his sight was going, he recalled, that ''the words started coming to me.'' He began composing poetry.
He started a partnership with another poet who goes by the pseudonym Tehut-Nine, who had been a fellow student, and they formed a self-publishing company, SunRASon Productions. With a $2,000 tuition refund, Mr. Ptah financed his first book of poetry, ''Love, God and Revolution,'' in 2000. Tehut-Nine, who is 25, published two books, ''The Fire in Me'' and ''Mental Eye-roglyphics.''
The two hawked their work at poetry slams, on the streets, in the subway and in beauty parlors and delis in African-American and Latino neighborhoods. Mr. Ptah said people there were not surprised to see that sort of street peddling because they were ''used to a direct sales culture.'' Over a year, Mr. Ptah said, he sold some 2,000 books, earning close to $20,000. (His costs, he said, were about $3,000). Using the Internet and parlaying one contact into another, he said, he and Tehut-Nine also managed a trip to Europe, performing their work at slams.
But Mr. Ptah had bigger ambitions -- to be a novelist. He began writing ''A Hip-Hop Story.'' The plot was influenced by ''West Side Story'' -- the ''one musical I could stand'' as a child, he said. Mr. Ptah is also a Shakespeare buff, and his favorite play is ''Romeo and Juliet.'' The warring families in that work and the rival street gangs of ''West Side Story'' (also modeled on ''Romeo and Juliet'') inspired the two factions in his book.
Mr. Ptah also drew on the real-life feud between the rappers Jay-Z and Nas. To research the inner workings of the rap business, he said, he consulted a rapper friend, M-1, of the group Dead Prez.
In Mr. Ptah's novel, the rappers are always surrounded by beautiful women. ''She was breathtaking,'' he writes of one woman who he said was based on his real-life girlfriend, Monifa Powell, ''wearing a slinky fitting black dress that was cut to be a mini and expose the thigh.'' The rappers are also highly accessorized. A rap party is described as ''a world of techno fantasy, with a wide array of the most expensive Palm Pilots, two-way pagers and cellphones.''
And: ''Wherever they were, they were forever online, hooked, like a new form of addict.''
There is plenty of violence, as in a scene involving a mobster character named Jacobin. ''Aiming at the pink flesh in his eye, Jacobin again pulled back his right hand and arched his back for one quick blow,'' Mr. Ptah writes of a confrontation with a character named Bull. ''Then he looked at Bull and smiled. 'Now this is really going to hurt.' ''
Mr. Ptah said he tried for complexity in his characters. Hannibal is not only a drug dealer obsessed by Hannibal Lecter of ''Silence of the Lambs'' but also a dreamer with a Christian background who undergoes a moral transformation in the end. His rival, Flawless, is a dutiful son and brother but becomes disillusioned by success and is torn by his ambitions.
Mr. Ptah's prose is interspersed with his rap compositions. In one he writes, ''One man's madman is another man's martyr/ But murder is murder; slaughter is slaughter/ Too many mothers and sons/ Lost to politics and perspective.''
Mr. Ptah said that one of those who encouraged his literary efforts was Mumia Abu-Jamal, who was convicted in 1982 of killing a Philadelphia police officer. Mr. Ptah had written poems about Mr. Abu-Jamal and became friendly with him after visiting him on death row at the Pennsylvania Correctional Institution at Greene, in Waynesboro. Mr. Abu-Jamal, whose death sentence attracted worldwide opposition, wrote a preface for Mr. Ptah's first book of poems and edited an early draft of his novel. ''He said, 'I see potential, but you got mad work to do,' '' Mr. Ptah said.
Mr. Ptah persevered. In November 2002 he finished the book and, he said, ''I hit the trains.''
''I've been on the 2, 3, 4 and 5, the A, the C, D, the E,'' he said. ''I've done the F. I don't think I've been on the 7 or the Q or the W.'' Selling on the subway is ''slightly illegal,'' he said, and he has been given summonses.
''We didn't focus on bookstores,'' said Tehut-Nine, who sometimes helped his partner sell the book. ''If you don't have the name or leverage, your book will sit in bookstores for months and months gathering dust.''
Between November 2002 and July 2003, Mr. Ptah says, he sold more than 10,000 copies on the street, the subway and at readings that he and Tehut-Nine had set up. That adds up to nearly $100,000 -- an astonishing figure for such a self-financed venture. But he said that close to $50,000 of that went to the costs of printing and promotion, including stickers and posters that he and Tehut-Nine made and a commercial that they made for cable television.
''Some people go to work to make $500 in a week,'' Mr. Ptah said. ''We make that in a day.''
MTV says it has an option on his second novel, which Mr. Ptah said would involve Michael Jackson. ''I don't want to give away too much,'' Mr. Ptah said. ''He's not the character, but a common thread.''
Maybe this time Mr. Ptah will get to stay out of the subway.
