Investors yesterday sued top executives at Parmalat, the Italian dairy company embroiled in a huge fraud investigation, and its accountants and lawyers, in what may be the first of an avalanche of civil claims.
The lawsuit, which relies largely on revelations of recent weeks about the nature of potential fraud at Parmalat, asserts that the company's executives, auditors and other advisers participated in ''the most shocking corporate financial fraud in history.''
Milberg Weiss Bershad Hynes &amp; Lerach filed the lawsuit, which seeks class-action status, on behalf of the Southern Alaska Carpenters Pension Fund in federal court in Manhattan. The suit names Calisto Tanzi, Parmalat's founder and former chairman, and Fausto Tonna, a former chief financial officer, as well as its current auditor in Italy, Deloitte &amp; Touche, and its former auditor there, Grant Thornton. The suit also names Citigroup and a law firm that advised Parmalat, Zini &amp; Associates, which has offices in New York and elsewhere.
Representatives of the defendants said last night that they had not had a chance to review the complaint.
According to the complaint, the defendants ''engaged in a practice of manipulating Parmalat's balance sheet, overstating Parmalat's assets by more than $8 billion, understating Parmalat's liabilities by more than $3.6 billion and booking nonexistent sales to overstate Parmalat's earnings and meet profit expectations.''
One way that the company did this, according to the complaint, was by means of a disguised loan from Citigroup through a Delaware company set up for the purpose.
A Citigroup spokeswoman said that the bank, which has asserted that the transaction was proper, had not had time to review the complaint.
The suit contends that both Deloitte and Grant Thornton ''issued materially false reports on Parmalat's 1998-2002 year-end financial statements.'' Deloitte, which took over as Parmalat's primary auditor in 1999, deliberately failed to verify reports from Grant Thornton on the assets held by a Parmalat subsidiary, according to the complaint.
The suit also asserts that ''on at least eight occasions,'' Grant Thornton ''failed to send third-party confirmation request letters in connection with its audits of Parmalat's subsidiaries.''
Further, it asserts, the firm ''failed to conduct independent audits on the 17 Parmalat subsidiaries which it was engaged to audit'' from 1999 to 2003, ''but rather participated in the falsification of audit confirmation documents.''
In a statement issued before the lawsuit was filed and unrelated to its assertions, Ed Nusbaum, the chief executive of the United States firm in the Grant Thornton network, said that the network was investigating the conduct of its Italian affiliate.
A spokeswoman for Deloitte said that the complaint had not been reviewed. ''We haven't seen it yet and we don't have any comment on it,'' she said.
Jennifer H. Arlen, a law professor at New York University, said an accounting firm might be liable if it issued audited financial statements that the firm knows were false.
''Plaintiffs are going into court against the accounting firms with these cases,'' Ms. Arlen said, ''claiming that the accounting firm is primarily liable as the drafter of the document.''
Taking issue with Citigroup may be difficult but it is not surprising that the suit does so, said Michael Young, a lawyer at Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher who has often represented accounting firms in securities cases. ''In this post-Enron environment,'' he said, ''plaintiffs' lawyers are testing the outer limits of liability in order to cast as wide a net as possible.''
