Purdue Pharma, the maker of the highly profitable painkiller OxyContin, deliberately misled federal officials to win patents protecting its drug, a federal judge ruled yesterday. The ruling helps clear the way for a cheaper generic version and could lead to more lawsuits.
The decision by Judge Sidney H. Stein of Federal District Court in Manhattan came in response to a suit brought by Purdue against Endo Pharmaceuticals Holdings, which had filed an application to sell a generic version of OxyContin. Robin Hogen, a Purdue Pharma spokesman, said the company was ''surprised and disappointed'' by the ruling and planned to appeal.
The ruling spells trouble for Purdue, which derives more than 70 percent of its $1.8 billion in annual revenue from OxyContin. Generic pills often grab 80 percent of a branded drug's sales within just a few months. When Endo introduces its pill, much of Purdue's business could disappear. And two more generic companies are waiting to introduce their versions of the pill.
But that is not the end of problems for Purdue, which is a closely held company based in Stamford, Conn. Judge Stein's finding that Purdue deliberately misled the United States Patent Office could lead to lawsuits from state attorneys general and consumer groups contending that Purdue's actions cost American consumers billions of dollars. Mr. Hogen of Purdue denied that the company had misled the Patent Office.
Steve Berman, a lawyer for the Prescription Access Litigation Project, said that Judge Stein's summary of the OxyContin patent case described ''a classic situation that I'm sure will result in litigation in the imminent future.''
''P.A.L.'s whole mission is to spot these kinds of cases and institute litigation on behalf of consumers,'' Mr. Berman added.
In a similar case, the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company agreed a year ago to pay $670 million to settle claims that it improperly stymied generic versions of two medicines. Purdue's introduction of OxyContin is based on the simple idea that patients suffering from chronic pain like to get a full night's sleep. Oxycodone, a popular and powerful narcotic, is effective for only four to five hours. OxyContin delivers a steady stream of oxycodone over 12 hours. The Food and Drug Administration approved the drug in December 1995.
Sales took off in part because Purdue marketed the medicine aggressively. It was soon immensely popular with addicts, who found that snorting crushed pills delivered the full 12-hour dose instantly.
By the late 1990's, OxyContin abuse was rampant in Appalachia and other areas where prescription drug abuse is common. It became known as ''hillbilly heroin.'' Some critics have attributed scores of deaths to abuse of the pill, although Purdue disputes those contentions.
Just as the controversy surrounding OxyContin peaked, Endo filed an application to sell a generic version of the medicine in July 2000. Purdue sued Endo, and the case has been percolating since.
Endo said that Purdue's many patents on OxyContin were invalid. To win its patents, Purdue told the patent office that OxyContin was unique because 90 percent of patients taking the medicine got pain relief by taking very little medicine -- from 10 milligrams to 40 milligrams.
But during the course of the trial, Dr. Robert F. Kaiko, OxyContin's inventor, acknowledged that he had done no clinical studies and had no evidence to support this claim. Purdue admitted that Dr. Kaiko's ''discovery'' was made solely in his head but that it was valid even though the company was unable to prove it to be true.
Internal company documents from 1993 show that Purdue executives concluded that the claims that the company were making for OxyContin ''weren't anywhere close'' to being proved and were ''clearly Bob Kaiko's vision.''
In his ruling, Judge Stein wrote that ''Purdue made a deliberate decision to misrepresent to the P.T.O. a 'theoretical argument' and an 'expectation' as a precisely quantified 'result' or 'discovery.'''
The F.D.A. grants five years of exclusive selling rights to any drug that wins its approval. After that, companies generally rely on patents to maintain the monopolies that allow them to charge high prices. Purdue's initial five years of exclusive selling rights ended in 2000. Since then, it has been able to continue charging high prices for OxyContin because of its patents -- patents that were won fraudulently, Judge Stein ruled.
Caroline Manogue, a spokeswoman for Endo, said that her company might wait for an appeals court ruling before introducing its version of the drug, a process that could take more than a year. After Endo sells its version for six months, other companies can enter the market. Teva Pharmaceuticals and Impax Laboratories both have tentative approval from federal regulators to introduce versions of the pill then.
Separately, Endo accused Purdue of antitrust violations, contending its patents were illegal. Judge Stein's opinion ''opens the way for the antitrust claims to move forward,'' she said.
