HIGHLIGHTS
HONORS FOR MIKE NICHOLS -- Mike Nichols, below, has been chosen by the Directors Guild of America to receive its Lifetime Achievement Award, the organization's highest honor. The accolade, announced yesterday in Los Angeles by Michael Apted, the president of the guild, will be presented at the 56th annual D.G.A. Awards on Feb. 7. ''There is hardly an entertainment medium that Mike Nichols hasn't pioneered and mastered,'' Mr. Apted said in announcing the award. ''You can put any of these in front of his name with the word winner: Oscar, Emmy, Tony, Grammy. But it's the absolute brilliance that he brought to feature film directing from Day One -- with his debut of 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' followed a year later by his D.G.A.- and Oscar Award-winning direction of 'The Graduate' that propels us to honor his legacy in motion pictures.'' The Lifetime Achievement Award winner is selected by the president and past presidents of the guild, and in the organization's 68-year history only 30 directors have been so recognized. Among them are Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg, Francis Ford Coppola, Stanley Kubrick, Woody Allen, Billy Wilder, Orson Welles, Alfred Hitchcock, Frank Capra and John Ford. Mr. Nichols's credits include ''Catch-22,'' ''Carnal Knowledge'' ''Working Girl'' and ''Silkwood.'' His most recent project was the HBO television film ''Angels in America.''
DENVER: NAMING AN OPERA HOUSE -- She's known as Denver's first lady of opera, and yesterday evening Eleanor Newman Caulkins, known to family and friends as Ellie, got a surprise. The 2,400-seat lyric opera house, to open in the fall of 2005 when renovations of the Newton Auditorium in Denver are completed, will be named the Ellie Caulkins Opera House. The announcement was made when Mayor John W. Hickenlooper and other dignitaries joined Mrs. Caulkins, her husband, George, and members of the Caulkins family to announce that they had pledged $7 million toward the opera house and other public spaces being constructed inside the auditorium. Mrs. Caulkins has been a leading member of the board of Opera Colorado since its inception more than 20 years ago, has been chairwoman, has occasionally performed as a member of the company's chorus and holds the title of Opera Colorado's Lifetime Honorary Chair. Mrs. Caulkins is also a member of the board of the Metropolitan Opera Association in New York. Besides the opera house, the completed auditorium will house the 300-seat Studio Theater, a Founder's Room with a stage for small performances and rehearsal and meeting rooms.
NEW ORLEANS: KINKS CO-FOUNDER SHOT -- Days after he was made a Commander of the British Empire on Queen Elizabeth II's New Year's honors list, Ray Davies, 59, right, the lead singer and songwriter who was a founder of the 1960's British rock band the Kinks, was shot in New Orleans on Sunday night while chasing a thief who snatched a purse from his companion. He was not seriously injured, The Associated Press reported. The police said the couple were walking in the French Quarter around 8:30 p.m. when the theft and shooting took place. Mr. Davies was treated and released at a hospital, Capt. Marlon Defillo, a police spokesman, said. One suspect was captured and another was being sought. The Kinks, known for witty lyrics and hard-edged guitar-driven sound, were part of the British invasion of the 1960's and rang up a succession of hits that included ''You Really Got Me,'' ''Sunny Afternoon,'' ''All Day and All of the Night'' and ''Lola.''
CLASSIC MUSIC: SECOND HEARING -- Neglected classical music will get a second hearing in a new project under the patronage of the conductor Sir Simon Rattle. The project, a collaboration between BBC Radio 3 and the Royal Philharmonic Society, is intended to rediscover and give performances of 15 compositions in the next four years, the British newspaper The Independent reported. Record companies, orchestras, conductors, publishers and musicians are being asked to nominate deserving works, and the 15 selections are to be announced next month. Tony Fell, the chairman of the Royal Philharmonic Society, said, ''While the world premiere of a new piece of music is often attended by media attention and heightened expectation, only repeated hearings can bring out the depth and detail which will ensure a work's place in the repertoire.''
FOOTNOTES
Nilas Martins, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet and artistic director of the Nilas Martins Dance Company, is to serve as artistic director of the First Beijing International Dance Festival. In collaboration with the National Ballet of China, he is to oversee three performances, on Jan. 17, 18 and 20, to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the birth of George Balanchine. The last of the performances is scheduled to take place in the Great Hall of the People in Beijing. . . . The velvet-voiced blues and jazz singer Lou Rawls, 70, married his girlfriend of two years on New Year's Day in Memphis, The Associated Press reported. After performing in New Year's shows at the Liberty Bowl and the Peabody Hotel, the Grammy Award-winning Mr. Rawls and Nina Malek Inman, 33, a flight attendant, were married before a handful of people at the hotel. Though engaged, the couple had not planned the New Year's wedding, Mr. Rawls said, adding, ''We just looked at each other and said, 'Let's do it.' ''
