Gen. Wesley K. Clark on Monday proposed a broad overhaul of the tax code that would eliminate federal income tax payments for families of four earning up to $50,000 and cut taxes for families with incomes of up to $100,000.
The plan, which General Clark called a cornerstone of his domestic agenda, would also raise taxes on Americans with annual incomes of $1 million or more.
''I believe that those who work hard and excel should be rewarded,'' he said in a speech here. ''But I also believe that all Americans must pay their fair share in the burden of preserving and protecting our country.''
On the same day, as the Democratic presidential candidates looked toward the first voting in Iowa in two weeks, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, another Democratic candidate, made proposals to rein in what he termed the ''outsourcing'' of American jobs overseas.
Mr. Kerry criticized the Bush administration as the tool of special interests. And in about as populist an appeal as he has made, he railed in a speech in Des Moines against a system he called ''stacked against'' average workers.
''I'm running for president because the American people are calling 911 for help,'' Mr. Kerry said.
''I think the American people are tired of watching corporate executives on Friday afternoons pile into their airplanes paid for by their corporations,'' he said, ''going to homes paid for by the corporations, playing golf on the weekend in memberships paid for by the corporations, going to shows on Broadway paid for by the corporations, all of which is subsidized by the American taxpayer while the American taxpayer is struggling to get along.''
''Middle-class families have an agenda, too,'' he shouted to loud applause. ''And it's about time someone in the White House held a special meeting for them.''
The candidates turned to the economy as they stepped up their efforts to catch up with Howard Dean, who is ahead in the polls in the early voting states.
General Clark said his proposals were intended ''to take back tax reform as our issue,'' rather than leaving it to the Republican Party.
''For them, tax reform is too often a cover for giving huge tax breaks to the families of the wealthiest Americans,'' he said. ''They don't care if it's for working families, if it makes the tax code more complicated or if it explodes the deficit.''
General Clark said his plan would eliminate the need for most American families to file federal income tax forms. Taxpayers would be free to use a simple three-line form to allow the Internal Revenue Service to calculate how much they owe.
Under his proposal, General Clark said, a typical married couple with two children making $85,000 would get a $975 tax cut, while a family of four with income of $50,000 would save $1,500, its entire previous tax liability. Currently a family of four earning up to $39,000 does not pay federal taxes.
General Clark acknowledged that many of his plan's benefits would not flow to married couples without children or to single taxpayers.
Jeffrey Liebman, an associate professor of public policy at Kennedy School of Government at Harvard who appraised the Clark plan at the request of the campaign, said it would remove 3.2 million Americans from the tax rolls. About 31 million families would get a tax cut, he said, roughly 86 percent of all families with children. The average tax cut for families with children would be $1,044, Mr. Liebman said, while the average cut for families without children would be $99.
General Clark said the tax cuts would not increase the deficit. They would be offset by the higher taxes on wealthiest Americans and the closing of what General Clark called ''corporate loopholes,'' particularly those that he says reward companies for moving jobs offshore.
The highest-income taxpayers, in addition to their 39.6 percent rate, would pay a 5 percent surcharge on all income above $1 million. The marginal tax rate for those Americans would be 44.6 percent, the highest since 1986, Mr. Clark's aides said. General Clark issued a direct challenge to Karl Rove, President Bush's chief political adviser, daring Mr. Rove to attack him as an old-style tax-and-spend Democrat. ''You don't have to read my lips,'' General Clark said. ''I'm saying it. And if that makes me an old-style Democrat, then I accept that label with pride.''
Mr. Kerry focused Monday on new proposals for stanching the flow of jobs overseas. He dismissed recent positive economic reports as a ''Bush-league recovery'' and a ''special interest recovery,'' saying that average income grew by only 3 cents last quarter, though the economy grew at a rate of 8 percent.
One proposal, a call for a law requiring that telemarketers disclose where they are calling from, featured a rare whiff of America-first rhetoric from Mr. Kerry, otherwise an ardent supporter of globalism and free trade.
''A quarter of a million call-center jobs have been sent overseas in the past three years,'' he said. ''When people pick up the phone they hear people who've been trained to speak in an American twang and dialect, so you won't know where they are.''
He also noted that the State of New Jersey had filled some government-service jobs with offshore labor. He said he would ensure that if government contracts could be performed by American companies, they would be.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ECONOMIC PROPOSALS
