The president of the Writers Guild of America, the union that represents Hollywood screenwriters, was ineligible to run for re-election in September, an independent investigator decided on Monday, recommending that the election be overturned, according to several people who have read the decision.
The action came on the same day that a screenwriter sued the union in federal court, contending that he was denied the chance to receive credit for work on ''The Last Samurai.''
In his report, William B. Gould IV, an independent investigator and labor law expert, found that the guild's president, Victoria Riskin, was not eligible to run for another two-year term in September because she did not fulfill the requirement for maintaining active membership: being paid for a writing assignment.
To maintain active status, guild members must have earned income from projects covered by guild contracts within four years. Rival union members said that Ms. Riskin had been granted a bogus deal -- an option to rewrite the classic film ''Magic Town,'' originally written by her father, Robert Riskin -- purely to maintain that status.
Mr. Gould did not say that the deal was bogus but he said that Ms. Riskin needed to be paid for the rewrite, not just paid for an option, to be considered an active member. The guild's board met to discuss the recommendation and was expected to take immediate action.
Ms. Riskin's lawyer, Larry Feldman, said he hoped that the board would not overturn a majority election based on Mr. Gould's report but added, ''I'm sure Ms. Riskin will abide by the decision of the board.''
A guild member, Eric Hughes, lost the election in September to Ms. Riskin and was among those protesting her eligibility as a candidate.
He said he had been asked to run for office by fellow union members and was surprised to find that no one expected him to try to win. ''This is a very, very corrupt guild,'' he said. ''It was stunning to find that the winner is designated. And then you discover that the president of the guild is not even a writer?''
Mr. Hughes said if the board did not remove Ms. Riskin, he would take the matter to the state Department of Labor in California.
A Connecticut-based writer sued the guild on Monday along with the writer-producers and director of the Warner Brothers film ''The Last Samurai,'' contending that he had been denied credit for originating the story, which is about a Civil War veteran who takes up arms with Samurai warriors in 19th-century Japan.
A lawyer for the writer, Michael Alan Eddy, filed a suit accusing the defendants of fraud, breach of contract and breach of the duty of fair representation. Mr. Eddy said that he and two other writers, Garner Simmons and Robert Schenkkan, were not given the opportunity to go through the guild's arbitration process on assigning credit.
''Myself and a couple of other writers went through channels and tried to do it the right way, and it didn't work out,'' Mr. Eddy said. ''I didn't feel I had any choice. I tried to go through the Writers Guild. They didn't follow their own guidelines. We were cut out of being considered part of full-blown arbitration, which is the way it should have gone.''
Instead, he said, the guild assigned ''expert readers'' to review contracts and scripts, and they decided that the matter should not be officially arbitrated. Edward Zwick, who directed and produced the film and shared writing credit; his partner, Marshall Herskovitz, who was also a producer and shared writing credit; and Warner Brothers and Interscope were also named as defendants. According to the lawsuit: ''The W.G.A. now operates a bizarre and secretive system of apportioning credits that denies fundamental due process to its very members, and has a dual set of rules for certain writers. To make this all the more unusual, these 'special rules' are nowhere codified, but are made up at the whim of the executives who run the guild.''
Mr. Simmons made a similar complaint about the guild in a letter to California's labor commissioner, Arthur Lujan, on Dec. 23, asking that he take action to force the guild to reopen credit arbitration for ''The Last Samurai.''
According to the suit, Mr. Eddy wrote a script called ''Eastern/Western,'' which was later rewritten by Mr. Simmons under the title ''West of the Rising Sun.'' Mr. Schenkkan replaced Mr. Simmons as the third writer on the project, the lawsuit contends, before it was taken over by Mr. Zwick. Another writer, John Logan, also received screenplay credit for the film and is not named in the suit.
Mr. Zwick was in Europe for a premiere of the film, but Mr. Herskovitz said in a phone interview: ''I think it's finally a Writers Guild matter. The guild has a long-established procedure for determining who gets credit. That procedure is weighted very much in favor of the original writers on any project. If they decided that the original writers of this project should not be eligible for an arbitration, that's their decision.''
A guild spokeswoman, Cheryl Rhoden, declined to comment, saying she had not received a copy of the suit.
MEDIA BUSINESS  Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  An article in Business Day on Tuesday about a dispute involving the eligibility of Victoria Riskin as an official of the Writers Guild of America referred incorrectly to her union's jurisdiction. She was elected president of the guild's Western branch in September; the Eastern branch has a separate president, Herb Sargent. (Ms. Riskin stepped down early Tuesday.)
