ON the occasion of my last conversation with Chuck Daly, the renowned coach of the Bad Boy Pistons, he dismissed the need to pity his former point guard, Isiah Thomas, who had been rudely dismissed as the Indiana Pacers' coach by their old antagonist Larry Bird.
''Isiah's been a winner all his life,'' Daly said from his home in Florida. ''He'll be fine. Believe me, this guy could jump out of an airplane and land on his feet.''
Yesterday, when it became apparent that Thomas is not only back on the plane but flying it at supersonic speed, Daly came to the telephone and before a question could be asked posed one of his own.
''What did I tell you?'' he said.
Word of Thomas's first signature deal (accommodatingly timed, to my astonishment, mere hours after I wrote Sunday night that New York was eagerly awaiting a blockbuster move) had already reached Daly, who gave it his endorsement.
''Look at the Knicks' starting five now,'' Daly said. ''In the East, that's a pretty forceful group.''
In obtaining Stephon Marbury and Penny Hardaway from Phoenix for a collection of thoroughly dispensable players and two first-round draft picks, Thomas has more than put his stamp on the Knicks. In two stunning weeks, he has deleted almost all memories of Scott Layden from the franchise hard drive. It's as if Layden never happened -- the ridiculous contracts for marginal talent (Clarence Weatherspoon, Howard Eisley), the drafting of foreign youngsters on stilts (Slavko Vranes, Maciej Lampe) when the roster needed an upgrade of athleticism and the one decisive pull of the trigger in four-plus years that exploded in Layden's hand with the pop of Antonio McDyess's surgically rebuilt knee.
In less time than it took Layden to conjugate a verb, Thomas has balanced his roster, disbanded the comedic convention of unglamorous power forwards and point guards. Contrary to the industry propaganda that we all bought into for much too long, Thomas, as promised, produced within the constraints of punishing salary-cap conditions a healthy, career-prime all-star and an actual Knicks point guard possessing a wide array of offensive skills and gears.
Not that Marbury, joining his fourth team in eight seasons, comes without baggage. Most unbecoming for a top-level point man has been his problems maintaining a positive coexistence with other high-priced talent, as Keith Van Horn undoubtedly recalls from their mutually miserable days with the Nets. That said, the draft picks surrendered are an acceptable risk against the opportunity for the Brooklyn-born Marbury to find full-blown maturity living his dream, playing at Madison Square Garden, learning what the pro game is all about from the Knicks' new savior, Isiah Lord Thomas.
One thing we have heard repeatedly about Thomas is how much he loves rough-edged players, believes they are reared to compete and survive under the toughest conditions, as he did growing up in Chicago. For the sake of Knicks fans so thirsty after three decades of championship drought, better for Thomas to recreate the Knicks in his own image than with reclamation projects like Eddie Griffin or Leon Smith.
Choirboy looks aside, Thomas always had the reputation of being the nastiest guy in the gym. He probably had to be to become a 6-foot-1 franchise player on a championship team. ''Isiah Thomas was fearless, would play through any injury,'' Daly said. ''Had he been 5 inches bigger, he might have been the greatest player ever.
''But I wouldn't say he is building the Knicks in his own image. It's more complicated than that, but Isiah knows that a big-time point guard can drive you, not necessarily to the title, but quickly up the ladder. Look at Iverson: he took Philly to the finals and without him, they're not even a playoff team.''
Poker-faced, Thomas watched Jason Kidd dismantle the Knicks on Sunday night in the fourth quarter at the Garden and had apparently seen enough. He wasn't going to wait for Frank Williams to grow into the job. The East is largely guard-dominated, and now the Knicks have an answer to Kidd, for whom Marbury was last traded. They have a player who travels in the same speed lanes to go with their new president and general manager, who dropped out of the sky and hit Midtown running.
''He decides what he thinks is the problem and he makes decisions,'' Daly said. ''I will tell you this: Some people may not like him but he will be followed. People follow Isiah Thomas.''
Why is he in such a hurry? Thomas knows that honeymoons don't last long here and that his no-holds-barred style will wear on people unless he wins. He knows there are no great teams in the East. The best conference record right now happens to belong to Indiana. How about the retooled Knicks against the Pacers in the playoffs? Thomas against Bird, the man who canned him, who created the worst playing moment of Thomas's career, stealing Thomas's sloppy inbounds pass on a hot playoff night and costing the Pistons a trip to the finals.
Of course, Thomas was right back in Bird's face the next season, on his way to three successive finals and two titles.
''He has a drive to succeed that is almost next to none, and he is not afraid to make a mistake,'' Daly said. ''It's pretty remarkable what he's doing, but he knows what he wants and he also knows he is royalty. N.B.A. royalty, understand? If this doesn't work, he doesn't have to worry because . . . because if he falls out of the airplane, he'll wind up in a $5-million-a-year coaching position.''
Sports of The Times
