Many people were waiting expectantly for David Beckham to fall on his face after his celebrated transfer from Manchester United to Real Madrid last summer. They are still waiting.
''Real Madrid now without David Beckham is unimaginable; the way he has played has absolutely staggered people,'' said Tom Watt, who collaborated with Beckham, a 28-year-old English midfielder, on his autobiography, ''Beckham: Both Feet on the Ground'' (HarperCollins, 2003). ''The Bernabéu absolutely adores him. It is astonishing what has happened.'' (Real plays its home games in the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium.)
Ryan Giggs, Beckham's former teammate at Manchester United, recently told the Spanish newspaper Marca: ''He is the best passer of a ball in the world and Real's style suits him. He's shown that by the way he's been playing. He loves Spanish football.''
After Saturday's 1-0 victory over visiting Murcia, Real leads La Liga by 2 points over Valencia. Beckham, who went to Real in a $45 million transfer last summer, has moved into the central midfield and scored three goals this season playing with stars like Ronaldo, Raul, Zinedine Zidane and Roberto Carlos.
Beckham, captain of England's national team, had spent his entire professional career at Old Trafford, joining United's youth system at age 12. But last spring he was at odds with the club's manager, Sir Alex Ferguson. Whether the falling out was because of his emergence as a global superstar or his strong and public bond with his wife, Victoria, the former Spice Girl, is hard to say.
''The key moment in football terms was David's being left out of the second leg of the Champions League quarterfinal against Real Madrid at Old Trafford,'' Watt said. The personal relationship between them hit a low point after another match, a United loss, when Ferguson kicked a soccer shoe at Beckham.
That, too, is in the book, which is available in 24 countries. It has sold nearly 500,000 copies in Britain and about 25,000 copies in the United States, mostly to teenage girls, according to David Hirshey, vice president and executive editor of HarperCollins in New York.
U.S. MEN'S OLYMPIC TEAM  Testo Finally Recognized
The United States men's Olympic team gathered in Carson, Calif., Sunday for the start of a two-week training camp, and probably the only unfamiliar name on the 25-man roster compiled by Coach Glenn Myernick is that of David Testo.
Testo struggled to find the silver lining last January when he was not drafted by a Major League Soccer team. A striker from Arden, N.C., Testo instead signed a three-year deal with the Richmond Kickers of the A-League (he was the rookie of the year in 2003) and after the season went back to classes in business management at the University of North Carolina, where he had helped the Tar Heels win the N.C.A.A. Division I men's title in 2001. He also emerged last year as the United States Olympic (under-23) team's top scorer (8 points from 3 goals and 2 assists) when the team had a 5-1-3 record.
''I was astonished I wasn't drafted,'' Testo said in a recent telephone interview. Testo then referred to Myernick when he said: ''Mooch hooked me up with Kansas City and I went with them to South Africa in the preseason last year. They wanted me as a developmental player, but I didn't want to get the last roster spot. So I went to Richmond and got more than 2,000 minutes of playing time and tons of experience.''
The United States advanced to the final round of Olympic qualifying, which will be held Feb. 2-12 in Guadalajara, Mexico. Two of eight nations will advance to the Olympics next summer in Athens. The United States will play in Group A against Canada, Honduras and Panama.
Coincidentally, Guadalajara is where Testo scored an eye-popping goal in a friendly last May against Mexico.
''I got thrown into the game late with us leading, 2-1,'' he said. ''Mexico moved up its goalkeeper pressing for the equalizer and the place was going crazy. The ball popped out and I just launched it from 80 yards out. It went in. It was an out-of-body experience.''
INTERLIGA 2004 TOURNAMENT  Four Teams Open With Victories
Interliga 2004 -- the top eight Mexican clubs vying for two spots in South America's Libertadores Cup -- began Sunday with doubleheaders in Los Angeles and Stockton, Calif.
On a narrow, pock-marked field at Stagg Memorial Stadium in Stockton, Calif., Atlas defeated Tigres, 2-0, and Toluca beat Morelia, 1-0, before 15,373 fans.
Later Sunday at the sold-out Home Depot Center in Carson, Calif., Jared Borgetti scored twice to lead Santos Laguna past Chivas, 2-1, and Ariel Gonzalez's header in the 81st minute gave Club América a 3-2 victory over Atlante.
Corner Kicks
M.L.S. -- The league will maintain its sudden-death overtime format (two five-minute periods) next season and will petition FIFA, through U.S. Soccer, for a fourth substitution for use only in overtime. The league will play its championship game on Nov. 14, and there is a good chance it could be played at Shea Stadium or Yankee Stadium. The full schedule is expected to be released by the end of the week.
CLINT MATHIS -- The former MetroStars striker is on trial with Hannover 96 in Germany after recent workouts with Glasgow Rangers and Leicester City in Britain. Another American, Steven Cherundolo, plays for Hannover. It is possible that Mathis will play in M.L.S. next season, but it will not be with the MetroStars.
SOCCER REPORT
