In May 1969, two months after the Concorde's first flight, New Yorkers couldn't help feeling a pang of nostalgia upon watching the Queen Elizabeth 2 gracefully make her way into the harbor for the first time. Everyone assumed that this sleek new flagship of the Cunard Line would be the last great ocean liner ever built.
She wasn't. Fast-forward more than three decades, and it's the age of supersonic flight that is over, with the recent retirement of the Concorde. Ocean liners, oddly enough, live on. The new $800 million Queen Mary 2, which Queen Elizabeth II will christen on Thursday, will take over trans-Atlantic duties from the ship that shares the monarch's name.
So one of the more poignant sights of 2004 promises to be that of the first new ocean liner in a generation as it makes its way up the Hudson and past the mothballed Concorde, which is now part of the Intrepid complex.
Plenty of cruise ships are built these days, but the Queen Mary 2 is advertised as the first true ocean liner since the Queen Elizabeth 2. A steel-hulled behemoth, the Queen Mary 2 is the largest passenger ship of any type ever built and will be capable of crossing the North Atlantic at a brisk 30 knots an hour, regardless of the weather. Triple the size of the Titanic, the Queen Mary 2 weighs about 150,000 tons, rises 23 stories high and generates enough power for a city of 300,000.
The ship combines the classic lines of its Cunard ancestors with some suspicious cruise-ship traits, like those stateroom balconies that make today's vessels look like floating condos. Staterooms will cost $1,500 to $30,000 a week per passenger, making the Queen Mary 2 a billion-dollar bet that some of the same affluent types who favored the Concorde can be lured onto the high seas.
The arrival of a new ocean liner may no longer be the blockbuster civic event it was when the first Queen Mary sailed into New York in the 1930's. Still, the new ship represents a renewal of one of the city's oldest links to the rest of the world, a link that dates to Samuel Cunard's 1839 contract to take mail across the Atlantic on three 800-ton, 300-horsepower ships. With that in mind, and with a pang of nostalgia, we wish the new queen a long, charmed life.
