Parmalat bondholders outside Italy have been nervously watching since the company filed for bankruptcy, saying that the reorganization of Parmalat may be a watershed event that determines whether they will invest in Italy in the future.
Many investors are concerned that Italian banks will be given preferential treatment in the bankruptcy process. Such a decision could cool a recent boom in Italian bonds. The bond market in Italy is relatively small compared with that of other large European countries because Italian companies have preferred to borrow from local banks. But issuing debt has become a more popular option in recent years, and more than 20 billion euros ($25.2 billion) in bonds were issued by Italian nonfinancial corporations in 2003, according to Fitch Ratings, up from less than 2 billion euros in 1997.
''If the Italian courts and regulators are not going to treat nondomestic investors fairly, that will not be a country we are going to participate in,'' said Gary E. Wendlandt, chairman and chief executive of New York Life Investment Management, which owns $30 million in Parmalat private placement bonds. This is the first investment that New York Life has made in Italy that has gone bad.
Parmalat has issued more than 5 billion euros in bonds in the last four years, and most of the bonds are held by investors outside Italy. The company's three Italian bank lenders, Capitalia, Banca Intesa and San Paolo IMI, are owed more than 1 billion euros, about the same as foreign banks. The way the debt is structured banks and the bondholders are on the same level.
But experience in Italy shows that local companies and banks are often given preferential treatment. In 2001, for example, Telecom Italia shareholders outside of a stake held by Olivetti, many of them foreign, received no premium when the company was taken over by Pirelli. Olivetti received an 80 percent premium. And an earlier bid for the company was blocked by Italian regulators because it was backed by a French utility.
Foreign creditors are also worried by Italy's bankruptcy law, which, unlike the law in the United States, does not require creditors' approval before a restructuring plan is submitted to regulators. ''We're looking for the regulators to recognize the creditors as important stakeholders, and consult them first,'' said one person involved with a large bondholder consortium.
Regulators, meanwhile, have done little to assure foreign creditors that they will get their money back. Italy's industry minister, Antonio Marzano, stressed last month that the company's bankruptcy decree was to ''safeguard employment, not the shareholders or the management.''
He added that the ''main brief'' of Enrico Bondi, the court-appointed administrator of Parmalat, was to ''overhaul the company, not to sell the company's assets.'' European Union officials have said they will be watching the situation closely.
Should foreign investment in Italy decline, the slow recovery there could be weakened. The country's sovereign debt, at 104.9 percent of gross domestic product, is the highest in Europe.
Italy has the second-highest level of public investment-grade debt after Japan, said Moritz Kraemer, a director with Standard &amp; Poors. The ratio is coming down, Mr. Kraemer said, ''but too slowly, given the challenges Italy will face'' in the future.
The country's aging population will put great demands on government spending, Mr. Kraemer said, but Italy has not opted to reduce its public debt now, before that happens. Standard &amp; Poor's has a negative outlook on Italy's government debt. The Parmalat collapse has not affected the performance of Italy's sovereign debt, nor is it expected to. And foreign investment is not necessarily important for the financial stability of Italian companies, because they can still rely on the local banking system, said Lorenzo Codogno, a managing director with Bank of America. But it is important for the Italian economy over all, Mr. Codogno said.
Mr. Bondi, the turnaround expert who has been saddled with the task of fixing Parmalat, is well aware of foreign investors' concerns, and has been willing to meet with bondholders, say several people on both sides of the situation. ''This is not the first time he had to do this sort of thing,'' one such person said. ''He understands that there will be tough conversations, but the solution has to be acceptable to everyone.''
But bondholders say they have not yet been able to secure meetings with Italian regulators.
If bondholders' worst fears are realized, and local Parmalat debtholders are given preference over foreign investors without reason, some say they will desert the market. ''If they choose to treat the Italian banks as a special class of creditors, we will not be a participant in Italian markets in the future,'' Mr. Wendlandt of New York Life said.
