After Anxious Dreams, Gregor Samsa Awoke
Like Japanese anime characters, a group of MTV hosts -- known by their noms de video as DAMIEN, LA LA, VANESSA, QUDDUS, HILARIE and SUCHIN -- buzzed between dressing rooms, stopping only to regard themselves and declaim. La La, baring a shoulder tattoo of Tweety Bird, said to another V.J., ''You look hot.''
On an unseasonably mild New Year's Eve in Times Square, many probably said the same thing. With hours to go before 2004, they had nothing to do but look up at the bay windows of MTV, where an occasional celebrity limb or face appeared.
Inside Valhalla, a desultory crowd of invited hundreds milled.
The co-host of the evening was HILARY DUFF, the star of ''The Lizzie McGuire Movie'' and the pre-Sybil SALLY FIELD of her generation. Also appearing were LUDACRIS, the hip-hop performer; the cast of the WB's ''One Tree Hill''; and ERIKA CHRISTENSEN, best known as the crack-addicted teenager in ''Traffic.''
Perhaps in deference to the 16-year-old Ms. Duff and her nearby parents, the affair was bereft of intoxicants. Pyramids of soda-pop cans decorated ''the bar,'' instead of Cristal, the hip-hop Champagne of choice.
Ms. Christensen reminisced about working, sort of, with MICHAEL JACKSON. Now 21, Ms. Christensen had appeared in a music video for Mr. Jackson's 1995 song, ''Childhood.''
''It was blue-screened,'' or added electronically, she said. ''We were in boats, flying above him, singing.''
CLAY AIKEN, the recent runner-up on Fox's ''American Idol,'' was feeling introspective. The previous New Year's Eve, in Raleigh, N.C., he watched the Giant Acorn drop instead of an expensive hunk of Waterford crystal.
So, he said, surveying MTV's red room reserved for celebrity interviews, ''It's a little bit odd.''
Still, could we touch his bleached porcupine hair? Sure, he said.
Meanwhile, Ms. Duff was escorted to the stage. Blue stage glow, dramatic pause. She sang ''So Yesterday'' from her hit album, ''Metamorphosis.''
Later, her mother, SUSAN DUFF, looked out at the gargantuan image of Hilary on the Times Square television screen. ''You blink and they go from babies to this,'' she said.
Less than a block away, on West 44th Street, another Boldface reporter was witnessing another transformation, that of MEL BROOKS.
After our reporter unsuccessfully begged a publicist to attend a cast party for ''The Producers'' at the restaurant Angus McIndoe, next door to the St. James theater, there, suddenly, was Mr. Brooks, talking affably with his limousine driver. Might we have a word, Mr. Brooks?
''Gimme a break!'' bellowed the silver-haired Mr. Brooks, and with that he turned on his heel.
Now this may sound like we're stalking Mr. Brooks, but we know where he went later. Twenty blocks away, at the Gagosian Gallery on West 24th Street in Chelsea, Mr. Brooks made it to the elegant wedding of JESSICA MAY KAMINSKY, a television writer.
Also attending were A. R. GURNEY, ALEXANDRA PENNY, JULES FEIFFER and STUART APPLEBAUM of Random House. FRANK PELLEGRINO, a co-owner of Rao's, was also there, looking like he might wince if anyone asked him about the Dec. 22 homicide at his restaurant in East Harlem.
And when did Mr. Brooks arrive? The bride's father, HOWARD KAMINSKY, said about Mr. Brooks, born Melvin Kaminsky, ''My cousin arrived at about 1 a.m.''
About 20 minutes later, BOY GEORGE finished being a D.J. at the New Year's Eve party held at the Hudson Hotel on West 58th Street and said he had no resolutions for the new year. Did he want to add anything? ''Be nice to your mum,'' he said.
with Lily Koppel, Jess Wisloski and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
