Secretary of State Colin L. Powell is recovering well from prostate surgery and looks forward to a busy schedule in coming days, his spokesman, Adam Ereli, said Monday.
Mr. Powell, whose prostate was removed Dec. 15 after doctors detected a localized cancer, underwent his first postoperative checkup on Monday.
Mr. Ereli declined to discuss Mr. Powell's medical condition, except to say that everything went ''O.K.'' during the examination at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington. A department official added, ''He's fine,'' and said there was no cause for concern.
Mr. Powell has been on a reduced schedule, though his aides noted -- somewhat ruefully -- that his predawn calls to colleagues have become more and more frequent.
He spoke Monday with Kofi Annan, the secretary general of the United Nations, about Afghanistan, which approved a new Constitution over the weekend. The men also spoke about Iraq, where Mr. Powell has been pressing for a resumption of the United Nations' presence, Mr. Ereli said.
Mr. Powell's surgery coincided with the high-profile return of James A. Baker III, the former secretary of state, as a White House special envoy seeking to persuade nations to forgive Iraq's foreign debt. Mr. Baker's arrival and early success fed some speculation that Mr. Powell, who is 66, is being sidelined on the diplomatic front.
Colleagues disputed that idea, and said Mr. Powell and Mr. Baker were consulting frequently. The two spoke last Tuesday, aides said, after Mr. Baker returned from a trip to Asia. Mr. Baker is next scheduled to call on Arab creditors who hold about $45 billion of Iraq's outstanding debt, which totals about $116 billion.
One senior State Department official said the talk of a rivalry between Mr. Baker and Mr. Powell was the creation of bureaucrats and journalists looking for a rift in an administration that prides itself on discipline.
Mr. Powell and Mr. Baker ''have egos like other people -- they're human,'' the official said. But, ''they're businesslike,'' he said. ''These guys just care about getting the job done.''
Still, the official acknowledged a sort of emerging parlor game among some department watchers. On a visit home over the holidays, the official said, relatives repeatedly asked: ''Where's Powell?'' He said he replied that the secretary had not gone anywhere. ''These people are killing me,'' he said.
Mr. Powell has denounced as ''nonsense'' a news report over the summer that he and the deputy secretary of state, Richard L. Armitage, plan to retire at the end of Mr. Bush's first term, regardless of what happens in the election. Mr. Baker, a close adviser of the president's father, has said he does not seek to broaden his portfolio.
In an Op-Ed article in The New York Times on Thursday, Mr. Powell laid out his priorities for the new year, including the fight against terrorism, subduing North Korea's nuclear weapons program, promoting trade and democracy, and helping to rebuild Afghanistan and Iraq.
