Flight controllers established a direct communications link with the Mars rover Spirit on Monday and worked systematically through a checklist of postlanding tests, while scientists cast eager eyes on three-dimensional pictures of potential exploration targets, including a place they are calling Sleepy Hollow.
''It was a good day on Mars,'' Matt Wallace, manager of the robotic rover mission, said after the distant Sun set on Spirit's landing site in Gusev crater, near the Martian equator.
Mr. Wallace said the rover's main antenna was successfully pointed toward Earth for the high-speed transmission of pictures and data from Mars and for sending commands and software changes from the control center here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. Most radio signals to and from Spirit had been relayed through two spacecraft orbiting Mars.
Dr. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell, the mission's chief scientist, said that tests of most of the rover's science instruments had been completed and that all appeared to have survived the vibrations of the braking rockets and the bouncing, rolling touchdown late Saturday night. He added that German scientists were particularly relieved that one of their spectrometers for analyzing Martian rocks was in excellent condition after exhibiting erratic behavior earlier in the mission.
In the first stereo panoramic pictures, scientists got a three-dimensional look at the many rocks, craters and distant hills of the landing site. The 360-degree scan was in black and white. More detailed and striking color panoramas have been taken but are not expected to be transmitted to Earth until Tuesday.
From the pictures in hand, scientists were able to get a clearer look at a circular depression that had attracted their attention right after landing. Roughly north of the rover, the depression appears to be about 30 feet wide and up to 50 feet away. Scientists suspect that it is a shallow impact crater filled with dust to a foot or two of the rim.
Pictures of the area taken by spacecraft orbiting the planet show as many as a dozen such shallow depressions in a cluster. Dr. Squyres said this suggested that they were secondary craters: pits gouged out not by the initial impact of a meteorite, but by rocky debris scattered in the impact. In any case, scientists said, the crater rim could be a place to observe layers of sediment revealing the geologic history of the Gusev region, which is thought to have once held an ancient lake.
Because it was late at night when sleep-deprived scientists studied and debated the crater pictures, Dr. Squyres said, they named it Sleepy Hollow.
''Right now, Sleepy Hollow looks like the place to be,'' he told a news conference.
But geologists said they wanted to examine color photography before making a decision to send the rover to the depression in one of its first excursions next week. They expected the colors to reveal the types of rocks and soil in the depression and at other places near the rover.
If Sleepy Hollow is to be Spirit's first destination, scientists and mission planners said, the journey will be made slowly and cautiously. Although the six-wheel, 400-pound vehicle is capable of covering the distance as a day trip, it will be commanded to move deliberately and feel its way over the unknown terrain. It may also be instructed to pause for a day to investigate the mineralogy of two imposing rocks between the landing site and Sleepy Hollow.
The latest pictures also showed some smudges inside the depression. Scientists speculated that the spacecraft, enveloped in protective air bags, bounced across Sleepy Hollow before coming to rest.
Flight engineers continued to estimate that it would be at least nine days after touchdown, or Monday at the earliest, before Spirit would roll into action for the planned three months of surface exploration. Its twin rover, Opportunity, is approaching Mars for a landing on Jan. 24.
