A hobbit and a Middle Earth king reigned at the movie theater this holiday season, largely at the expense of an English seafarer and an American samurai warrior.
The third and final chapter of the ''Lord of the Rings'' trilogy, ''The Return of the King,'' has brought in $292 million at the domestic box office since opening on Dec. 17, rivaling last summer's animated film ''Finding Nemo'' in popularity.
At the same time, adult-oriented and family comedies showed staying power: films like the Jack Nicholson/Diane Keaton romp ''Something's Gotta Give'' and Steve Martin's ''Cheaper by the Dozen'' proved that it is not just teenage boys who can make a movie a success.
''The chasing of teen boys as a key to commercial success is a false perspective of the marketplace,'' said Nina Jacobson, president of Buena Vista Motion Pictures Group, part of the Walt Disney Company. ''The truth is, older people have been coming to the movies for a long time.''
According to Nielsen EDI, which tallies ticket sales, an estimated $507 million was spent at the box office across the country in this holiday season's last two moviegoing weekends, far exceeding the $463 million spent in 2002.
But those numbers mask the reality that ''Master and Commander,'' ''The Missing'' and ''The Last Samurai'' -- which opened earlier in the season and hoped for long lives as epic blockbusters -- have not proved as popular with holiday moviegoers as the studios that made them would have liked. Several movie analysts and studio executives suggested today that those movies could end up losing money or breaking even at best. ''The Last Samurai,'' with Tom Cruise playing a Civil War veteran who goes to Japan and winds up embracing its samurai traditions, has earned $90 million since it opened on Dec. 5. The sea adventure ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of the World,'' with Russell Crowe, has taken in $83 million, according to Nielsen EDI.
''One of the things that hurt us is that we did not receive the reviews we anticipated,'' said Dan Fellman, president of domestic distribution at Warner Brothers Pictures, which released ''The Last Samurai.''
An executive at 20th Century Fox, which released ''Master and Commander,'' said that any awards nominations could extend that movie's popularity.
Meanwhile, another epic with high hopes, ''Cold Mountain,'' which opened Christmas Day, has so far earned $43.9 million at the box office. But it is too early to tell if it will be a moneymaker. ''Cold Mountain,'' which is based on the Charles Frazier novel, and similar films with literary pedigrees often depend on Oscar nominations to extend their lives with moviegoers. Those nominations won't be announced until the end of this month.
Attendance for the year was down for the first time since 1991, suggesting that moviegoers were not interested in everything the studios had to offer. In 2003, 1.53 billion tickets were sold, down from 1.6 billion a year earlier, said Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which tracks ticket sales. Box office revenue was down nearly 1 percent, to an estimated $9.27 billion, he said.
''Despite many big opening weekends, the word of mouth wasn't very strong this year on several movies,'' Mr. Dergarabedian said. ''That reflects viewer dissatisfaction.'' Among the movies that had a significant dropoff after a splashy opening was the third installment of the ''Matrix'' series, which was poorly reviewed by critics, and the sequel to ''Charlie's Angels.''
The surprise of 2003 was the return of the adult-oriented movie starring older, seasoned actors. Several older actresses, among them Ms. Keaton and Jamie Lee Curtis, who starred in ''Freaky Friday,'' were lauded for their comic performances. Bill Murray, too, has received praise for his performance in ''Lost in Translation.'' ''Something's Gotta Give'' was third at the box office over the weekend, with an estimated $82 million in total sales. And ''Cheaper by the Dozen'' was second, behind the final ''Lord of the Rings'' installment, with a total take of about $86 million, according to the Nielsen figures.
It seemed, too, as if everyone was willing to take off clothes in 2003 -- William H. Macy disrobed for ''The Cooler,'' as did Ms. Keaton for ''Something's Gotta Give.'' (Mr. Nicholson showed his buttocks.) And Ms. Kidman took off her clothes not once, but twice, in ''Cold Mountain'' and ''The Human Stain.''
Ms. Jacobson said that movies aimed at adults, with or without fleeting moments of bare skin, are often more affordable to make than special-effects-laden fare, meaning they are quicker to turn a profit and rarely result in huge losses.
Disney had the best year of any studio by far with a market share of about 17 percent, the result of hits like ''Pirates of the Caribbean,'' ''Finding Nemo'' and ''Freaky Friday.'' The studio is likely to have one of its most profitable years in more than a decade.
