With the Gucci succession gathering the kind of awed attention one associates with the College of Cardinals, the time seems apt for a look at how fashion used to be. Autocrats and divas were the order of another day, when a designer's primary concerns were not diversified distribution, prestige spending and licensing buybacks. If Yves Saint Laurent can be said to have personified not only the stereotype of fashion designer as tormented soul but also to have parodied it, it is not because he lacked for either genius or demons.
Yves, the chain-smoking, the drug-addled, the controlling, the neurasthenic, the morbid recluse-about-town is surely the last of a breed. So precocious was Saint Laurent in both his gifts and his vices that alongside him John Galliano and Alexander McQueen look like punks. If the French filmmaker David Teboul's two Saint Laurent documentaries, which open tomorrow at the Film Forum in Manhattan, treat the designer's peccadilloes somewhat gingerly, they nevertheless provide mirror-shard glimpses of an artist's process.
''Yves Saint Laurent: His Life and Times'' is a biopic about a man the director characterizes as ''elegant, cold, shy and distant.'' Rich as it is with footage from the 60's and 70's and interviews with the designer's mother ( he got his start, we learn, when, at age 3, he pointed out to an aunt that her shoes did not work with her dress); his lover, Pierre Bergé; his muse, Loulou de la Falaise; and the well-born nobodies of his coterie, the archival material alone merits a trip to West Houston Street.
But the second film on the bill, ''Yves Saint Laurent: 5, Avenue Marceau, 75116 Paris,'' also represents some important social anthropology. For the first time in 40 years, cameras were allowed inside the designer's atelier, where Mr. Teboul spent three months documenting not just the Saint Laurent process but also the folkways of a crafts tradition -- the famous petites mains -- now kept on life support by French government subsidies. Very little about how fashion operates today resembles what took place in the atelier in 2001, the year before Saint Laurent closed his business. Designers work on computers, for one thing, often enough on spreadsheets, while leaving ''creative'' decisions to armies of drones.
What most surprised Mr. Teboul about Saint Laurent was the ambivalence at his core. ''He seems to be a very hurt, very damaged, very fragile person psychologically,'' he said on Sunday from Paris. ''And yet he has this prodigious physical strength.''
GUY TREBAY
