Almost from the moment Senator John Edwards finished his unusually spirited debate on Sunday, his aides were saying he would follow it up by campaigning almost nonstop in Iowa right through the caucuses in two weeks.
True to their word, Mr. Edwards was here Monday morning, to give a big campaign speech.
Another Democratic candidate, Senator John Kerry, also turned up in Des Moines on Monday morning, offering his own speech and a piercing attack on Howard Dean. Mr. Kerry, from Massachusetts, described Dr. Dean's Iraq policy as ''duplicitous'' and warned that Dr. Dean would raise taxes, offering a taste of what his aides said Mr. Kerry would be doing in the state over the next two weeks.
Truth be told, for all this display of time, force and money on campaign commercials, not even the biggest boosters of Mr. Edwards or Mr. Kerry are saying the two have much of a chance of winning the caucuses here, given the overwhelming organizational strength of both Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt.
But for Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, winning is not everything. Second or third will do. And the bankshot strategies they have adopted here to advance their campaigns somewhere down the road, assuming there is a down the road for Mr. Kerry or Mr. Edwards, have entangled an already complicated competition here. As a result, contests within contests are being created and a whole new debate is being set up over how to define what a victory is.
''It's not just the sort of who-is-going-to-win campaign right now,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's national campaign manager, reflecting the sentiment among all the campaigns. ''Now you've got these other dynamics starting to go on,'' he said, adding, ''It's become just way too fluid to figure out where it's going to go.''
This intense drive by Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry to not win is the latest example of the convoluted strategies so many of these candidates have adopted with the goal of emerging in February as the second person in a two-way race with Dr. Dean. Gen. Wesley K. Clark has sought to accomplish the same thing by ignoring Iowa and campaigning heavily in New Hampshire, where he is seeking to race past Mr. Kerry and post a strong second-place showing to Dr. Dean. Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut is also sitting out the Iowa caucuses.
But this maneuvering also underlines the vagaries of the caucuses in Iowa, where one does not need to get the most votes to win, and where sometimes a win is not a win, and a loss is not a loss.
Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, is looking to sneak onto the field with a surprise showing behind Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean.
No matter how well Mr. Edwards did on Sunday night, polls continue showing him toward the back of the pack. And, more significantly, he does not have the kind of get-out-the-vote organization that is critical to winning the caucuses here, particularly compared to Dr. Dean, Mr. Gephardt and Mr. Kerry.
Yet in this strange electoral environment, that might be an advantage for Mr. Edwards. Given his obstacles, he would almost certainly try to portray third place as a big win, and a second place showing as nothing short of an upset. An aide went even further on Monday, suggesting that coming in fourth in a seven-person field would be good enough.
''A number of positions in Iowa are going to have value, not just the No. 1 position,'' said the aide, David Axelrod. ''The second position and the third position are important. And the fourth could be too, if it's relatively close.''
Mr. Gephardt's campaign manager, Steve Murphy, laughed at that notion and said, ''I don't think Edwards would get anything out of finishing fourth in Iowa.''
One state Democratic official who has not endorsed a candidate described Mr. Edwards's performance at the debate as ''great,'' but added: ''I find it hard to believe that at this late stage of the game that Edwards could actually pull it out at No. 2. But he doesn't need it. Three would be a huge win.''
Mr. Kerry has planted his flag in Iowa out of necessity, after watching his candidacy in New Hampshire, sink slowly under the shadow of the doctor from Vermont.
Many Democrats say the Kerry campaign has showed signs of life in Iowa. Kerry is looking for a strong showing here, possibly No. 2, though Mr. Kerry would no doubt argue that a strong No. 3 would be good enough to get him back into the game in New Hampshire, a state he once almost took for granted.
''If John Kerry came in second behind Gephardt in Iowa, it would be a huge deal of course,'' said Mr. Murphy, Mr. Gephardt's campaign manager. He declined to even entertain the possibility of Mr. Kerry's coming in second behind Dr. Dean.
Although the campaigns of Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean like to view this race as a two-way contest for first, it would seem that they ignore the other goings-on at their peril.
As was clear at the debate, Mr. Edwards has determined that a prime source of votes for him is Mr. Gephardt, who would seem to already have enough on his hands with the Dean challenge. Mr. Edwards at the debate Sunday challenged Mr. Gephardt directly on his signature issue of opposition to free trade treaties, and has been campaigning tirelessly in the rural areas of Iowa where Mr. Gephardt has spent a year building the foundation of his campaign.
But that is not necessarily good news for Mr. Kerry either. If Mr. Edwards does manage to scurry his way up to the No. 3 position, mathematics would seem to relegate Mr. Kerry to the No. 4 position. Even in the bizarre world of Iowa caucuses, coming in fourth would probably have to be viewed as at least a disappointment, if not a loss.
Finally, considering Mr. Kerry's yearlong rivalry with Dr. Dean, one would think that the Dean campaign would welcome a Kerry shellacking here.
But that's not so. Dr. Dean's advisers suggested that they would prefer that Mr. Kerry hold on through New Hampshire, to block General Clark from a strong showing that could establish him as a strong competitor with Dr. Dean come February.
So it is that the Dean campaign on Monday was predicting to anyone who would listen that polls in New Hampshire show that Mr. Kerry would drop behind General Clark. If that happens, Mr. Kerry's campaign would suddenly be besieged by reports suggesting they were in crisis.
Still, so far, at least, neither of the two candidates who seem to be running to win, in other words, to come in first seem concerned about the turmoil at the bottom. ''I think the reality is they are fighting for third,'' said Steve Elmendorf, a senior adviser to Mr. Gephardt.
Mr. Trippi said he had enough on his hands that he did not have the time to try to figure out what was going on in the race within the race. ''We're just trying to do our best to win the damn thing,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: IOWA CAUCUSES
