Conrad M. Black, the embattled chairman of Hollinger International, is already feuding with Richard C. Breeden, the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission who is overseeing a special committee's investigation into payments made to Lord Black and other top Hollinger executives.
Hollinger International said yesterday that Lord Black had been granted a two-week extension to repay $850,000 that he owes the company. In return, Lord Black has agreed not to try to sell the 30 percent stake that his private company, Hollinger Inc., owns in Hollinger International during that period. That stake, which has largely supervoting shares, gives Hollinger Inc. 72 percent of the vote in Hollinger International.
It is still not clear, however, whether Lord Black intends to make the repayment, even though Mr. Breeden says he owes that amount.
On Dec. 31, Lord Black was scheduled to repay $850,000 of the $7.2 million in noncompete fees he received that the board did not authorize. The company has said that $32 million in such payments were made to Lord Black and several top associates.
He failed to make that payment, and his spokesman told The New York Times yesterday that Lord Black was still conducting his own inquiry to determine his obligation to make the payment.
Those remarks angered Mr. Breeden, who issued a statement yesterday saying, ''There is not any doubt whatsoever that the payments in connection with these supposed 'noncompete' agreements were not authorized by the board.''
Mr. Breeden added, ''The issue is not the subject of further review, inquiry or negotiation.''
But Lord Black's lawyer, John L. Warden of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell, quickly disputed Mr. Breeden, saying effectively that there are outstanding issues related to the payment that remain subject to discussion.
As to the rationale for the reprieve, people close to the company said that the board of Hollinger International, which publishes The Daily Telegraph in London, The Jerusalem Post and The Chicago Sun-Times, had worried about reports that Lord Black was trying to sell his holdings and had been in talks with potential buyers. The board did not want him to sell his shares other than through an orderly process, according to people close to the company.
To try to ensure an orderly recapitalization of the company, Hollinger has hired Bruce Wasserstein of Lazard.
In November, Lord Black agreed not to circumvent that process, but that agreement left some flexibility. One caveat would let Lord Black sell his holdings in Hollinger Inc. -- if it faces insolvency. In March, Hollinger Inc. faces an interest payment of $7 million on $120 million of debt, and it is unclear whether Lord Black can make that payment.
