Tom Coughlin was interviewed yesterday for a second time by the Giants, who appear close to selecting a new head coach, a decision that seems contingent only on whether Nick Saban of Louisiana State is interested in the job.
Coughlin is the only candidate to have a second interview with the Giants. According to sources briefed on the team's search, Coughlin could be named as early as today if Saban takes himself out of the running. Coughlin's wife, Judy, confirmed to The Associated Press yesterday that Coughlin had traveled to New York for the interview.
Giants officials would not confirm the second interview, and Saban's agent, Jimmy Sexton, would not say whether the Giants had contacted Saban, whose L.S.U. team won a share of the national championship with a victory over Oklahoma in the Sugar Bowl on Sunday night.
In a news conference after the game, Saban deflected questions about his potential candidacy for several N.F.L. jobs but did not emphatically close the door on that option. L.S.U. officials had promised Saban a new contract after the season, one that would make him the highest-paid college coach.
Last week, Saban's wife, Terry, said the family was not going to move after this season.
That has not stopped N.F.L. teams from putting Saban high on their wish lists. The Giants' interest is natural. Saban worked with Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi when Saban was a defensive coordinator in Cleveland under Coach Bill Belichick and Accorsi was the general manager. Saban was offered the Giants job in 1997 and turned it down. The Giants then hired Jim Fassel, who was fired last week after seven seasons.
The Giants' job has come down to two candidates the team previously tried to hire. In 1993, the Giants offered the job to Coughlin, who was Boston College's head coach at the time. He decided to stay at Boston College, but in 1994 he became the first head coach of the expansion Jacksonville Jaguars, the team he coached for eight seasons before he was fired after the 2002 season. Coughlin took the Jaguars to the American Football Conference Championship game twice.
Coughlin, 57, compiled a 72-64 record in Jacksonville. He is known as a strict disciplinarian who exerted almost complete control over the team, including all personnel decisions. Coughlin was a Giants assistant under Bill Parcells from 1988-90.
Coughlin has never made any secret of his desire to return to the N.F.L. as a head coach. He was a finalist for the Cincinnati Bengals job last year, which went to Marvin Lewis, and he turned down an offer to be Parcells's offensive coordinator in Dallas. The only other team that has indicated interest in Coughlin this season has been the Buffalo Bills, who appear to be leaning toward the New England Patriots' offensive coordinator, Charlie Weis, although they also have an interview scheduled with Fassel today.
The Giants interviewed Weis along with the Patriots' defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel, and the Rams' defensive coordinator, Lovie Smith, last week. Crennel was thought to be a leading candidate, along with Coughlin, but hiring Crennel would require the Giants to wait until the Patriots' season was over.
Sources inside college football have said that Saban, 52, had not ruled out a return to the N.F.L. and that if he were to make that move, the Giants and the Chicago Bears were the only franchises that would interest him. Saban is a close friend of the Bears' general manager, Jerry Angelo, who fired Coach Dick Jauron last week.
L.S.U. Athletic Director Skip Bertman has said he is confident that Saban would return. Even before Saban's Tigers reached the national championship game, Bertman and the L.S.U. chancellor, Mark Emmert, said Saban would be offered a new contract. Under his deal, winning the national title requires Saban to be the highest-paid coach in the country. Oklahoma's Bob Stoops, who makes more than $2.2 million a year, currently holds that position.
Saban talked Sunday night about defending L.S.U.'s championship next season with the young players he has recruited in his four-year tenure with the Tigers.
''I don't think there's any question about the fact that younger players on this team have not had the opportunity to go through some of the treacherous steps climbing the mountain that the older players did in growing up in this program,'' Saban said. ''But saying all that, it's going to be very important that they learn and develop the same kind of character, attitude and competition when their roles increase on the team.''
What Saban's role will be -- and where -- is the biggest question after winning the national championship. The Giants apparently will be among the first to know.
FOOTBALL
