'Out of Time'
In a documentary the stars of Carl Franklin's film describe what it was like working with one another: great. Otherwise, shooting in South Florida had its moments. At night the catfish left the water and walked the streets. On one location the crew stayed close to the set lest the alligators get them. Mosquitoes were so thick that people needed protective clothing resembling space suits. Everywhere the heat was broiling, the rains biblical.
''All kinds of wild things down there in Florida,'' Mr. Franklin says in his director's commentary about a film he made in the Keys and around Miami. But all was fine in most respects. Miami has the best night life in the country, he says. What's more, in Florida 50-year-olds are sometimes the youngest ones in the clubs, which is an ego-booster. (Mr. Franklin is in his 50's.) Miami also has those ice cream colors and Deco feel.
On screen the police chief of Banyan Key (Denzel Washington) finds himself in a corner when he lends his lover (Sanaa Lathan) $450,000 in confiscated drug money that he has been keeping in his office safe. Suddenly she's dead, the money is gone, the feds want it back and the powerhouse detective sent down by the Miami police to investigate is the chief's ex-wife (Eva Mendes).
Mr. Washington is smooth and amusing as a man seconds ahead of theft and murder raps. ''But while 'Out of Time' is often supple and pleasurable, Mr. Franklin used his talents for dramatizing the driving force of greed far more effectively in 'One False Move' and his intensely satisfying adaptation of Walter Mosley's 'Devil in a Blue Dress,' his first collaboration with Mr. Washington,'' Elvis Mitchell wrote in The New York Times. 2003. MGM. $27.98. 106 minutes. PG-13.
Revivals
Studios are adding interesting extras to movies made decades before squads of filmmakers recording the filmmakers began trotting around behind the scenes for DVD. In a featurette with John Ford's ''My Darling Clementine'' (1946), released today by Fox, Robert Gitt, a film archivist, says that Darryl F. Zanuck, the studio's head of production, first told Ford that he liked the film and then sent him a memo the next day calling for a ''major and radical cutting job.''
Ford moved on to another project, but Zanuck shortened scenes and punched up the score. Ford's longer preview version, with some of Zanuck's changes, is on one side of the DVD.Later Zanuck changed it further for the theater release, and so it has stood ever since. That film is on the other side of the disc.
Zanuck or no Zanuck, Ford's movie about Wyatt Earp (Henry Fonda) and Doc Holliday (Victor Mature) in Tombstone, Ariz., is one of the most superbly atmospheric westerns ever made. But it's hard to argue that Ford didn't have it right the first time. Mr. Gitt doesn't blame Zanuck, who, he says, worked often and well with Ford.
Studio intervention also trimmed the 1932 ''Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,'' released today by Warner. Directed by Rouben Mamoulian, the film is generally considered the best of many screen versions of Robert Louis Stevenson's story. Fredric March won an Oscar in the title roles, and his feverish, strongly sexual Hyde, looking like a platoon leader from ''Planet of the Apes,'' practically devours Miriam Hopkins in the role of Ivy, the dance-hall girl.
Hyde's sexuality bothered censors, who also didn't like him throwing a kitten in a river and kicking a bear rug in the head. In a commentary full of asides about the studios and stars in the 30's, the film historian Greg Mank tells stories about the famously difficult Hopkins, who once demanded that Edward G. Robinson stand on a box so he wouldn't be shorter than she. (Bette Davis said that after working with Hopkins she went home and screamed for an hour.) On the flip side of the DVD is the 1941 ''Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde,'' a relatively decorous version starring Spencer Tracy.
That ''Jekyll'' was a winner in an Internet poll that asked fans to choose five films from 20 classics in the Warner library. The other four are also available today at $19.97 apiece.
Censors were in full cry by 1946 when MGM released ''The Postman Always Rings Twice,'' adapted from James M. Cain's novel. Given the restrictions it was tough to position Lana Turner as Cora, the wife of an elderly cafe owner who takes up nowhere near as steamily as everybody would have liked with the handsome drifter Frank Chambers, portrayed by John Garfield.
Nevertheless heat is generated and murder gets done in a drama that is still entertaining today. A terrific documentary, ''The John Garfield Story,'' traces his career from the New York stage and back after he ran into difficulties with the House Un-American Activities Committee. Born Julius Garfinkle, Garfield overcame a stammer. ''A tough hombre,'' says Hume Cronyn, the slippery lawyer Arthur Keats in ''Postman,'' who contributes to the documentary with Joanne Woodward, Richard Dreyfuss, Danny Glover, Lee Grant, Norman Lloyd and James Cromwell.
In a director's commentary with ''Days of Wine and Roses'' (1962) Blake Edwards says that Jack Lemmon, portraying an alcoholic drying out, became so intense at one point that he had to calmed down. Mr. Edwards's recollections of his own trouble with alcohol and his 40 years of sobriety are a nice addition to a film that for him remains ''as true to life as a vodka martini.''
John Milius comments on his ''Wind and the Lion'' (1975), another Warner poll winner, which stars Sean Connery as a Barbary pirate, Mulay Achmed Mohammed el-Raisuli the Magnificent, loose on the Moroccan coast, and Brian Keith as a very bully Theodore Roosevelt.
The movie isn't shy with its florid rhetoric. In the commentary, Mr. Milius frequently likens it to ''Lawrence of Arabia,'' which is a stretch, but there are many striking scenes, particularly a starchy attack on the palace of the pasha of Tangier by a closely drilled, quick-stepping detachment of American marines.
Last and least of the group is ''Where the Boys Are'' (1960), about the student invasion of Fort Lauderdale. In a warm commentary, Paula Prentiss, who starred in the film with Connie Francis, George Hamilton, Yvette Mimieux and others, talks about visiting another of its stars, Dolores Hart, who gave up the movies and became a nun.
New DVD's
