Architectural preservationists are coming to the rescue one more time. Thanks to these intrepid souls, the ground zero design process may shortly enter a new stage. Legitimacy, it might be called.
Preliminary discussions are being held today on a federal review of plans to develop the World Trade Center site. As stipulated by the National Historic Preservation Act, the so-called Section 106 review requires that the site's historical significance be officially evaluated before federal money can be used to rebuild it.
For the first time, in other words, independent scholars will have the opportunity to address publicly the historical meaning of ground zero and its value to future generations. This is welcome news indeed. Not since the milestone Supreme Court decision that upheld the preservation of Grand Central Terminal has there been a landmarks issue of comparable importance to the future of urban America.
The review may well liberate the site from the clutches of politicians, architects, their publicists and other unqualified figures who have presumed to speak in history's name. And it could slow the breakneck redevelopment timetable imposed by Gov. George E. Pataki.
More important, if done properly the review will be a pioneering undertaking in cultural archaeology, for it will explore not merely the value that is inherent in urban artifacts but also the mechanisms a society uses to confer value on some artifacts and withhold it from others.
Historical significance, that is to say, is in the memory of the beholder. In the case of ground zero, it resides in the conflicts that arise when memories disagree.
So the review ought to arouse philosophical as well as historical debate. What is there, after all, to be preserved? A void? Little physical evidence remains of the twin towers. The void itself has been voided by the new temporary PATH rails that run under the ground where the towers once stood.
This voided void is densely packed with history nonetheless: with the layers of ideology encoded by the towers and by the critical responses to them, and with the changing perceptions of architecture as the city around them evolved.
Peering into this void could substantially alter the scope of historic preservation itself.
I propose that we begin this cultural excavation by sifting through the stratum nearest us in time: the plans developed by the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation since its creation after 9/11. We can learn about the site's meaning by reviewing the history we have been living through while it is still fresh in living memory. The attacks brought to the surface many of the unresolved conflicts over the twin towers. Call it the protracted panic stage.
On the whole, I find the record deplorable. Yet even its most depressing episodes could be redeemed were the record to be treated with the proper degree of historical awareness. In fact, in a Swiftian vein, I can already envision an educational program -- a sort of Almost Like Freedom Museum -- dedicated to learning from the mistakes so far.
They include parceling off the public realm to the highest private bidders; the eagerness of cultural institutions to embrace their own devaluation in the marketplace; the suppression of civil discourse through techniques of risk management and conflict avoidance; the manipulation of stirring images to distract attention from baser motives; the abuse of religious belief to evade personal responsibility.
No one should be surprised that it has been left to preservationists to restore a measure of sanity to Lower Manhattan. Until recently, with the rise of a new audience for contemporary architecture, preservation and public art were all that remained of the liberal consensus that once supported architecture in New York. It may take another generation before the new audience discovers that solidarity does not automatically mean settling for the lowest common denominator of taste.
Preservationists, however, have had ample time to build organizational skills. And these talents need not always be deployed toward turning back the clock. In fact, preservation now has the potential to foster some of the most advanced thinking on modern social space.
In the last two decades, a remarkable body of scholarship has emerged on the concept of cultural landscape, a category that has only begun to filter into popular consciousness. With roots in traditional archaeology and the structural anthropology of Claude Lévi-Strauss, this area of study has become a major discipline in cultural studies. The writings of J. B. Jackson, the homespun philosopher of the American landscape, also belong to the genre. Historians like Gwendolyn Wright, Delores Hayden and Patricia Morton are among its leading practitioners today.
Ideally, the Section 106 review of ground zero will be guided by approaches developed by these thinkers. It could help make clear that preservation now denotes much more than lying down in front of bulldozers, valuable as such techniques undoubtedly are. It is also strategy for training vision, for learning how to recognize the ideologies from which built forms emerge. Equally important, the review could reveal the ideologies from which built forms do not emerge: the beliefs and assumptions that underlie the drive to declare some places to be protected zones of history and others not.
Is this asking too much of the Section 106 review? Not if public confidence in the ground zero plans matters. Unfortunately, politicians often believe that they are entitled to public trust without troubling to earn it. So long as they are in charge, the plans will remain a classic study in the rage for self-deception: the defining cultural characteristic of the post-cold-war era.
We won! We're the big winners. We can put shopping malls into graveyards, make office buildings dress up for the Fourth of July. Come see a culture implode.
Critic's Notebook
