After spending the holiday week working the phones and trying to reassure members of his own party, Gov. John G. Rowland is scheduled to meet face to face for the first time with the Democratic leadership on Tuesday morning to try to assure them that he can still govern effectively while facing a sprawling federal corruption investigation involving his administration.
''We don't know what to expect,'' said Dean Pagani, the governor's chief of staff. ''The agenda is going to be set by the Democrats.''
For their part, the Democrats have repeatedly voiced their concern that Mr. Rowland is too distracted to do his job properly.
Ever since Mr. Rowland, after first issuing a denial, admitted that he accepted gifts and free work on his private cottage from companies doing business with the state, top Democrats have talked about the ''grave'' situation Connecticut finds itself in. But the leaders have not proposed any way of dealing with it.
While the State Democratic Party has called for Mr. Rowland to resign and a handful of lawmakers have said they would consider impeachment, the legislative leaders have not gone that far. Instead, they have started looking at the process for beginning an impeachment inquiry.
Setting up an inquiry would amount to a legislative investigation of the governor. While the inquiry may never lead to actual impeachment hearings, it would allow the Democrats to keep Mr. Rowland's problems in the spotlight and the Republicans could do little to stop it.
The top three Democratic leaders who will meet with Mr. Rowland are the speaker of the House, Moira K. Lyons; the House majority leader, James A. Amann; and Senate President Kevin B. Sullivan.
Mr. Sullivan said in an interview that the leadership was not planning to ask Mr. Rowland to resign. Instead, he said, they are going to ask him if he plans to resign. Assuming he says no, Mr. Sullivan said lawmakers needed to set a course of action within the next two weeks.
The top three Republican lawmakers will also attend the meeting, which will take place in Mr. Rowland's second-floor office in the Capitol. Mr. Rowland, a Republican who is serving his third term as governor, has been trying for two weeks to make sure that he does not lose the support of his party.
So far, those efforts seem to have paid off. While some prominent Republicans have been sharply critical of Mr. Rowland, none have asked for him to resign.
Mr. Rowland spent several hours on Sunday and Monday in closed-door meetings with Republican lawmakers at his official residence here. He began each meeting by repeating his apologies and then listening to advice.
Mr. Pagani said one theme was ''to be as open as possible.'' Republicans also advised the governor to ''communicate directly with the people.''
The Senate minority leader, Louis C. DeLuca, who attended Monday's meeting, said he wanted to wait until the federal investigations play out before coming to any judgments about the governor. As far as holding Mr. Rowland accountable for what he has admitted doing, Mr. DeLuca said the State Ethics Commission would be the appropriate venue.
''I feel the lying was serious,'' he said. ''I think the taking gifts was wrong.'' But still, he said he did not believe Mr. Rowland had done anything criminal. Asked if most people at the meeting were supportive, Mr. DeLuca said, ''There were some that were deeply disturbed, that were hurt that they had to go back to their constituents and explain their support'' of the governor.
Mr. DeLuca said Mr. Rowland was humble, asking for their forgiveness but not saying he expected it.
The Republican leader in the House, Robert M. Ward, did not attend either the Sunday or Monday meetings at the governor's residence but will be at the meeting on Tuesday. ''Clearly, the governor still has work to do to regain trust,'' he said.
While people close to Mr. Rowland have said he was surprised at the level of anger over his admissions, Mr. Pagani said the governor realized this was not just going to fade away. ''This is an agenda item just like the budget,'' he said.
The first step, Mr. Pagani said, was to be sure that he apologized both publicly and privately. Then, Mr. Pagani said, Mr. Rowland has to explain ''how he moves forward with his agenda.''
While Tuesday's meeting may provide an opportunity to try to do that, the federal inquiry continues. Mr. Pagani confirmed on Monday that investigators had asked for records concerning work done at the governor's official residence since 1997. Since one of the allegations being investigated is that workers who did discounted work on Mr. Rowland's cottage were promised construction jobs at the residence, it may appear natural that investigators would want those records. Mr. Pagani said they would show nothing improper.
''I assume those documents are being gathered,'' Mr. Pagani said.
