When Pete Rose signed a deal with Rodale Press last March to write his second autobiography, the news generated little interest. Rodale is not a major New York publisher and is best known for ''The South Beach Diet,'' which has sold more than five million copies, and magazines like Prevention, not celebrity memoirs.
But Rose, who was barred from Major League Baseball in 1989 for illegal gambling with bookmakers, could not recycle his longtime denials that he did not wager on baseball and expect a major payday.
In his new book, ''My Prison Without Bars,'' Rose, baseball's career hits leader, confesses to betting on games in 1987 and 1988. He wrote that he made the admission in late 2002 to Commissioner Bud Selig, who is still deliberating whether to reinstate him and make him eligible to be voted into the Hall of Fame.
Rodale, based in Emmaus, Pa., could not resist the power of Rose's popularity and notoriety. It paid him an estimated $1 million advance, about four times what he and the writer Roger Kahn received for their 1989 book, ''Pete Rose: My Story'' (Macmillan), which sold about 70,000 copies.
''Pete is an endless source of public fascination,'' Jeremy Katz, the executive editor of Men's Health Books for Rodale, said by telephone. ''He's led a fascinating life that has been led publicly. And hearing the story from Pete Rose's own mouth is something everybody in the world wants to hear. This extends beyond baseball and general sports readers to the wider population because it's a story of redemption.''
Rodale acquired the book in a three-day auction last March. An editor at a publishing house that declined to bid said the proposal for the book lacked a clear sense of Rose's contrition or an admission that he bet on Cincinnati Reds games. ''We couldn't be wholly committed to what he was saying,'' said the editor, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Joel Gotler, one of Rose's agents, said that three other publishers came within 75 percent of Rodale's offer.
But Steven P. Murphy, the president and chief executive of Rodale Inc., who would not confirm the $1 million figure, said, ''Don't assume that we were willing to pay more than anybody else.''
The book, which Rose began writing with his collaborator, Rick Hill, in 2001, is being released in a planned news media blitz. Sports Illustrated acquired the rights to publish a lengthy excerpt as its cover story this week, and the ABC News anchorman Charles Gibson's highly promoted interview with Rose will be carried in two days on the network's ''Prime Time Thursday'' program. An excerpt from it was carried on ABC's ''Good Morning America'' yesterday.
The book will be available on Thursday -- although some bookstores have already ignored or broken Rodale's sales embargo -- and other interviews with Rose will not begin until then.
''It's part of the tried and true publishing playbook to try to motivate book buyers to purchase a news-making book,'' said Stuart Applebaum, a spokesman for Random House. ''It's a formula that's been used for everyone from Jessica Lynch to Hillary Clinton to Norman Schwarzkopf, and it often works, at least in the early day on sale.''
But Applebaum said that a quick promotional blitz -- highlighted by the revealing excerpt in Sports Illustrated -- has a potential drawback.
''The problem is that all the news from the book will be available free and diminish consumer desire to buy it,'' he said.
Rodale is not worried that the news of Rose's confession will dampen interest from consumers. It is supporting its belief in Rose's story by printing 500,000 copies -- a large number based in part on making back much of the money paid to Rose -- with expectations of adding more if the market demands it.
''Pete is a hero in the old sense of the word,'' Murphy said.. ''While the excerpt is terrific and tells part of the story, you need the whole book to get Pete. There's news in the excerpt, but the emotional arc is available only in the book.''
Rose's confession that he gambled on baseball is disquieting to Rick Wolff, the executive editor of Warner Books, who acquired and edited Rose's first book when he was at Macmillan. In the book's chapter on gambling, Rose denies betting on baseball.
''We gave him an opportunity to get his story out and it turns out that he didn't tell the truth,'' Wolff said. ''I don't like to publish people who don't tell the truth. You feel like you've been duped.''
Wolff recalled meeting meeting Rose and his defense team in Cincinnati in September 1989; he was shown evidence that contradicted baseball's findings on Rose's gambling.
''I went in with an open mind and my sense at the end of the day -- and I told this to Kahn and the people at Macmillan -- was that I'm not sure he gambled on baseball,'' Wolff said. ''He's very convincing in person.''
A group of Rodale officials had a long meeting with Rose before they decided to bid, and they came away persuaded by his confession.
''They felt that his wish to come forth with his story was terribly compelling,'' Murphy said.
The Rose book is part of Rodale's drive into general nonfiction publishing. ''The success of 'The South Beach Diet' gave us incredible encouragement that the marketing methods unique to Rodale are working,'' Murphy said. The diet book has spent 37 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list.
BASEBALL
