In June 1998, Stacy Jenkinson of Brooklyn learned that she suffered from lupus nephritis, an inflammation of the kidney caused by an immune-system disease that can also harm the skin, joints and brain. This, after so many doctor visits, so many failed attempts to find out what was wreaking havoc with her body.
''I was really, really sick,'' she said, recalling her first symptoms. ''I was vomiting all the time. I was going to the emergency room. They would look at me, take tests, then send me home.''
Repeatedly, medical examinations and blood work concluded nothing substantial.
Fatigued and in a mental fog, she went on disability from a secretarial job in the radiology department at Long Island College Hospital.
After two weeks, her body began to swell. After four, her long, black braided hair began falling out in clumps and a burning rash developed on her face and shoulders.
After one particularly tearful phone conversation with her mother, Janet Grand, in Boston, Ms. Jenkinson decided to visit her. She wanted her mother's comforting and also hoped that the doctors in another city might shed light on her condition.
While Ms. Jenkinson's children temporarily moved to her aunt's home in Brooklyn, she went to Codman Square Health Center, where she finally got some answers.
One, in particular, was grim. Her kidneys were failing.
Immediately admitted to Boston Medical Center, she was put on dialysis and given steroids intravenously. ''Pumping me full of steroids was the only way to get my kidney functioning,'' she said.
More tests eventually showed she had lupus, and she remained hospitalized for three weeks.
After she was released, she began to experience bloating, a side effect of her steroid treatment. Meanwhile, her brother had given her a crew cut to even out her hair.
''I would walk around with this face and no hair,'' she said. ''I had tubes in my neck, I lost 40 pounds -- I was a walking ghost.''
For a while, Ms. Jenkinson stayed in Boston under the care of her doctor and mother. Her children went up, too. While still on disability, she continued to draw half-pay from her union job.
Meanwhile, the family tried, amid their troubles, to develop some routines. The children enrolled in school, but Ms. Jenkinson's son found his mind wandering.
After a year, Ms. Jenkinson had taken steps forward, and steps back. She began feeling physically stronger, but financially weaker. Her debt was escalating to $5,000, she said, and creditors began hounding her.
She decided to return to Brooklyn, to reclaim her old job and life. But the children stayed behind again, with her mother, while Ms. Jenkinson moved in with her aunt.
She resumed her secretarial work at the hospital. She also consulted with an expert on debt consolidation.
Still, her bad credit almost ruined a chance for securing a new home and reuniting with her children. After applying for a low-income apartment in East New York, she was turned down because of her financial record. But an appeal led to a reversal of the decision.
When her children joined her in their new two-bedroom apartment, Ms. Jenkinson felt as if she was making it at last, she said. Her son's insomnia started to improve, and he went off his medication.
But last May, Ms. Jenkinson had a relapse. Without warning, her temperature and blood pressure soared. Test revealed that her kidneys were again showing signs of failing.
Doctors advised her to stay at home and go back on disability to avoid stress that could worsen her illness. Out of work again, she began to run up debt once more, and by July, she was three months behind in rent, owing $1,908 to her landlord.
That is when, at a neighbor's suggestion, she called the Community Service Society of New York, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. At the charity, she spoke to Anna Auleley, a social worker.
Within two weeks, Ms. Jenkinson received a $636 check from the Neediest Cases Fund for one month's rent. She managed, with help from her mother, to pay the balance.
These days, Ms. Jenkinson's face is still a little puffy from her medication. Though she is told that the effect makes her look more youthful, she still dislikes it.
''It's not as bad as it used to be,'' she said, poking one of her cheeks.
''But I suppose,'' she said, pausing, ''there could be worse things.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,640,556.23  Recorded Friday: 301,142.21
Total: $5,941,698.44  Last year to date: $6,357,684.62
