A dispute between a tiny public school district in Garrison, N.Y., and an even tinier home for troubled children there took a decisive turn when the home, which had been operating without a license, was denied its application for one.
In a letter dated Friday, the New York State Office of Children and Family Services gave St. Basil Academy, a former Greek Orthodox residential school, multiple reasons for the denial of its application and told it to stop providing care for children by the end of the month.
The dispute between the Garrison school district and St. Basil Academy began just before the school year started, when the state education commissioner issued a temporary ruling that the roughly two dozen children who resided at St. Basil could attend Garrison's public schools free. St. Basil, which had stopped educating children on its campus in 1997, had been sending children to the Highland Falls-Fort Montgomery school district, but was asked to withdraw them for nonpayment of tuition.
With the Highland Falls district off limits, St. Basil petitioned to send its children to the Garrison schools, claiming that since it is situated in Garrison, in Putnam County, the children could attend school there like any other residents. Richard P. Mills, the state education commissioner, released a temporary decision on Aug. 26, just days before school started, siding with St. Basil, which upset residents and school officials in Garrison.
They said that the St. Basil children were not full-time residents of Garrison, and that their presence would strain the district of 400 students, especially because many St. Basil students required special services.
Another issue soon complicated the matter: St. Basil had been operating without a license. It applied for one late last year, but the application was denied. The state said St. Basil's fiscal viability was in question.
The Rev. Constantine Sitaras, the executive director of St. Basil, did not return phone calls for comment, but the St. Basil Web site offered a possible clue to future plans: ''Saint Basil Academy always has been and will continue to be a safe haven for Orthodox children in need.'' However, it said, ''there are plans for a new Retreat and Conference Center, which will be a spiritual haven for all Orthodox Christians, young and old.''
