Devils left wing Patrik Elias extended his arm as far as it could go and stopped the puck with the end of his stick before it could slide over the blue line. With one thrust, he might have ended the Devils' malaise, too.
Keeping the puck in Edmonton's end, Elias let loose with a shot that Sergei Brylin tipped in for the tying goal with 4 minutes 38 seconds left in regulation Monday. Elias then tipped in a pass from Scott Gomez 41 seconds into overtime to give the Devils a 3-2 victory over the Oilers.
The Devils (20-8-9-1) appeared destined to lose to the Oilers (15-17-7-1) until Elias stopped the puck with the teams skating four a side. Brylin knocked in his seventh goal, and Elias later scored his 12th goal of the season -- and his third in overtime.
''I like it there,'' Elias said of playing in overtime. ''I think you should go for the win.''
Edmonton took a 2-1 lead on an unusual breakaway goal by left wing Ethan Moreau at 3:35 of the third period. The Devils rookie defenseman David Hale tried to get the puck from one side to the other by sending it around the boards. He shot way too hard.
The puck bounced past the Oilers' blue line all the way to the other blue line, where Moreau gathered it and beat Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur with a backhand shot for his eighth goal of the season.
Devils Coach Pat Burns was simply going for a tie when he put Elias at the point before Brylin scored the tying goal. Burns used three forwards and one defenseman during the four-on-four situation with the hope of scrounging some last-minute offense.
''By having that other forward out there, we got the message to be a little more aggressive, and it worked out,'' said Scott Niedermayer, the only Devils defenseman on the ice at the time of Brylin's goal.
Brylin found a spot in front of the goal, and after Elias stopped the puck and took a hard slap shot, Brylin swatted at the puck and tipped it past Edmonton goaltender Tommy Salo.
''When Patty shot it, it was perfect,'' Brylin said.
The Devils had scored only 12 goals in their previous six games, a stretch in which they had a 1-2-2-1 record. They had scored three goals in only one of those six games, and had lost that one to the Islanders.
So Burns changed his line combinations. He put Elias at left wing on a line centered by Gomez, a time-tested combination. Turner Stevenson, who had missed 12 games with an infection, was the right wing.
The line generated the Devils' first goal. At the start of the Devils' second power play of the game, Gomez won a face-off in the Edmonton zone, tracked down the puck and skated into the left corner.
Stevenson found a spot in front of the right goal post. Gomez flipped a perfect pass to Stevenson, who shoved the puck between Salo's pads at 5:06.
But Edmonton left wing Raffi Torres, a former Islander, scored his 11th goal at 1:36 of the second period. Oilers center Mike York, a former Ranger, flipped the puck to Radek Dvorak, another former Ranger. He passed it to Torres, who tapped it in.
Moreau's goal looked as if it would be the winner, but Elias made his save at the blue line, and he and Gomez teamed up for the winner.
''It was pretty close,'' Elias said of keeping the puck in the zone. ''I don't think it was out, or they would have called it.''
HOCKEY
