The World Health Organization urged caution on Monday as provincial leaders in southern China rushed to kill thousands of civet cats as a preventive measure against SARS. Organization officials warned that such a large-scale slaughter, if done improperly, could pose serious hazards, including the possibility of more infections.
Earlier in the day, experts with the organization and the Chinese Ministry of Health confirmed that a 32-year-old man in Guangdong was the first person in mainland China infected with SARS since the initial outbreak ended last summer. W.H.O. experts said the man's case appeared isolated and emphasized that it did not represent an ''immediate public health threat'' to southern China.
After the announcement about the civets, the W.H.O. officials called for leaders in Guangdong Province to conduct a risk assessment study before killing the estimated 10,000 civet cats in captivity in the province. They said Guangdong should protect against possible soil or water contamination during the slaughter while also ensuring that workers carrying out the cull are not exposed to the virus.
''We would recommend that the authorities do take extreme caution,'' said Dr. Jeffrey Gilbert, an animal expert in the World Health Organization's Beijing office, speaking Monday night at a news conference. ''We do feel that there is a potential hazard.''
Chinese officials, however, seemed determined to move quickly. Some scientists suspect that severe acute respiratory syndrome had spread to humans from civets, and state news organizations reported that Chinese authorities had issued an order to kill the civets by Saturday. No details were released about how or where the slaughter would be carried out.
The health organization praised Guangdong officials for their handling of the case of the man whose SARS was confirmed and said travelers should feel safe to go to the province and elsewhere in China. The plaudits were in stark contrast to the situation early last year when the organization had warned travelers against coming to Guangdong and, later, to Beijing. Those advisories were lifted after the spread of the disease was halted.
''We do believe the system in Guangdong is working,'' said Henk Bekedam, the organization representative in Beijing.
Nonetheless, the reassurances came at the end of a day when concerns about a new outbreak of SARS arose across Asia. Health officials in the Philippines quarantined a woman who had developed a fever after a flight from Hong Kong. Her husband was also quarantined with a fever, though it could take several days to determine if the couple is infected with SARS.
Dr. Jean-Marc Olivé, the World Health Organization's representative in the Philippines, said he was personally skeptical that the case was SARS, because Hong Kong does not yet have any newly documented cases of SARS. But he added that the Philippines government was taking the correct precautions.
There were also reports in Guangzhou, the provincial capital of Guangdong, that a woman, possibly a worker in a wild game market, had been hospitalized with symptoms consistent with SARS. A local health official told the official news media that such reports were ''baseless,'' but the official confirmed that a worker was hospitalized with a fever related to pneumonia.
As the day began, China's leading SARS expert, Dr. Zhong Nanshan, announced in Hong Kong that the SARS patient in Guangdong appeared to be stricken with a new strain of the virus, which is genetically similar to strains found in civet cats. He also announced the findings of a joint study with Hong Kong microbiologists, which found a high preponderance of SARS-like viruses in civet cats.
Diners in southern China are known to be adventurous, and the civet -- a ferretlike creature related to the mongoose -- is considered by many to be a winter delicacy. During the initial SARS outbreak, officials banned the sale of civets.
But by August, despite warnings from scientists, Guangdong officials ended the ban, and civets were again returned to local menus. Now, Guangdong officials say they will round up and kill civet cats at markets, restaurants and breeding farms. At some markets, the roundup began Monday. The government also announced plans to register all workers who handle wild game.
Dr. Gilbert, who called the extermination plan ''a radical step,'' said any killing should be done in a controlled atmosphere with strict regulations, as has been done in other countries where animals have been slaughtered to prevent the spread of disease. He said scientific research had implicated civets but had not yet found definite proof that the animals are the source of SARS. He observed that the new findings about civets announced in Hong Kong have yet to be published or subjected to a peer review.
He said, though, that such a cull could provide scientific rewards and that officials should be careful about not ''destroying the evidence.''
Scientists still have not been able to determine how the sick man in Guangzhou contracted SARS. Chinese news reports have suggested that rats may be involved. But W.H.O. officials said 30 rats trapped near the man's apartment had tested negative for the virus.
