New York Philharmonic subscribers might not think of their orchestra as peasant entertainment. But on Friday evening the ensemble, under Andrew Davis, showed how much earthy folk elements and cheap tunes are part of orchestral tradition.
This isn't a bad thing. Dominated by Tchaikovsky's violin concerto and Dvorak's Sixth Symphony, and featuring the violinist Joshua Bell, the program was eminently enjoyable. Mr. Davis kept the whole thing moving along, and the musicians hammed it up, almost enough. The audience whooped. Toes tapped. You left the concert hall humming. This is all good stuff. So what if it's not exactly highbrow?
Written within a couple of years of each other, in 1878 and 1880, these Tchaikovsky and Dvorak works fell afoul of the German world's prejudice against Slavic composers. Eduard Hanslick, the Viennese music critic, famously slammed Tchaikovsky's concerto at its premiere for its Russian vulgarity. Dvorak's symphony had to wait several years for its Viennese premiere because the musicians of the Vienna Philharmonic didn't want to sully their hands with this Czech music.
Today, we like the folk tunes, and schmaltz has become part of the way people think about orchestral music. But both of these pieces go beyond these elements to try to hook you, seduce you and show off with anything they can lay their hands on.
Look, Dvorak says, I can do Beethoven, I can do Brahms, I can luxuriate in this big full warm-timbred simple Central European orchestral sound, and then, yes, I can make it play a peasant dance. Look, Tchaikovsky says, at me, and cartwheels through elaborate goopy passionate ornament, which Mr. Bell gave for all it was worth.
The tricky thing about playing this music in the 21st century is that it practically begs you to strike a pose of cynical distance. Mr. Bell, indeed, set quotation marks around his performance, even as he had fun with it. He's one of those musicians able to manipulate time to give a sense of unhurried ease even to a rapid melody, with room to insert all kinds of extra fillips, particularly scoops up to high notes or down to low ones. He carried this talent to the point of irony in the third movement, a dashing tease as he extended to the breaking point the moment before he plunged into the main theme. As seductive as the composer, he found all kinds of ways to hold the ear.
The orchestra, which played well, didn't quite dig in to the same degree. Mr. Davis, a pro, created a lot of surface activity without overdoing things (but overdone is just what this music aches to be).
The program opened with Mark Anthony Turnage's ''Quick Blast'' (2000), another piece designed to show off both orchestra and composer. Scored for winds, brass and percussion, it avoids the obvious loudness its title might lead one to expect. Rather, it's a more subtle, compact and intricate swatch of music. Mr. Turnage is very good at writing for orchestra with sophistication, but his musical statements are not as interesting as his writing. Still, it was an apt illustration of how the showman's tradition has extended to the present day.
MUSIC REVIEW
