I remember from boot camp some real ugly guy with morning-after Pabst Blue Ribbon breath snarling in my face that ''there's always 10 percent of any group that just don't get the word,'' and inquiring pointedly whether I myself might be among that sorry 10 percent. No sir, I assured the tyrant.
That was a while ago, of course, but the anecdote comes to mind because for a long time I regarded that figure as an impeccable nugget of wisdom: in any given group, in any given situation, 10 percent of those involved will be clueless.
I note this as a prelude to this second follow-up on a column I wrote on Nov. 11 about a customer service initiative being put into effect by the Transportation Security Administration, which announced a program that allows air travelers to seal their checked bags with locks made by various manufacturers and certified by a company called Travel Sentry.
Using those locks, the T.S.A. said, travelers can confidently secure their checked bags without fear of damage by inspectors, because those 18,000 baggage inspectors all had master keys for the locks and were fully trained on how to use them.
Last week, after I'd heard from several readers saying that their experiences didn't bear this out, I asked both the T.S.A. and Travel Sentry whether the program was going smoothly. Their replies: Couldn't be better! Splendid! No problems!
Well, readers have now weighed in by the scores. Let's just say it looks like the 10 percent theory is alive and well at the airports.
First some good news. ''I am happy to report that I recently used the new locks and did not have any problems,'' wrote Evonne Swann.
Carolyn G. Pohlman also used the locks over the holidays. ''I had no problems at all,'' she reported. Likewise, Chris Georgeson reported using the locks on three trips since Dec. 27 "without any problems whatsoever."
But others had problems. Linda Cameron said that at the airport in Norfolk, Va., in late December, she couldn't open her Travel Sentry lock to stash a hat and gloves in her bag. ''I approached a T.S.A. employee, explained my plight and showed him a copy of your article,'' she wrote. Neither he ''nor his supervisor, nor his supervisor had any idea what I was talking about.''
Jay Pasachoff of Williamstown, Mass., ordered eight Travel Sentry locks from Brookstone to secure expensive camera bags on a trip to Australia. Leaving the airport in Albany, Mr. Pasachoff said he was assured by T.S.A. inspectors that ''they had a key for the locks.''
Yet when the bags arrived in Melbourne on a flight with connections through Chicago and Los Angeles, one of the locks was missing, and there was a T.S.A. inspection notice inside. On the return trip, he used two more locks on camera bags. These bags arrived ''with no locks at all,'' he said.
Freda Shen of Toluca Lake, Calif., concurs about the problem. ''Yup, more bad rules,'' she wrote, adding that she bought certified locks for a trip departing from Los Angeles International for London over the Thanksgiving holiday. ''No one at LAX had heard of these locks, let alone had a key,'' she reported. The same thing occurred on a trip on Dec. 15 from Long Beach, Calif., to Kennedy International Airport. ''Once again, blank stares all around,'' she said.
Randal Craft of Brooklyn wrote that T.S.A. inspectors at a small airport in the South took one look at his Travel Sentry locks last week and ''said I would have to remove them.''
''I explained my understanding that these were T.S.A.-approved locks to which the T.S.A. was supposed to have the keys,'' he said. The inspectors ''had never heard of the program.''
''They called in their manager, who also was unaware of the program. Naturally, I removed my locks. By the way, the T.S.A. personnel were professional and courteous at all times.''
Chris Murphy said he and his wife traveled to Switzerland from J.F.K. in mid-November, checking two bags sealed with certified locks. At the machine in the concourse where passengers deliver checked bags for screening, inspectors said they ''had never heard about'' the locks, he said.
Upon arrival in Zurich, ''one bag was missing one of the new padlocks'' and one had a large ''rip along the seams,'' he wrote, adding, ''Someone obviously did not like having locks on baggage again.''
Kim Hawkins was exacting in her appraisal. ''Following your 11/11 column, I went right out and bought the new locks,'' she wrote. ''Since then I have made four round trips'' between La Guardia and Cleveland, checking a bag each time, she added.
The first round trip went well. ''My luggage was opened, inspected and relocked for both flights,'' she said, adding that she thought the locks were an ingenious ''solution to baggage security.''
That turned out to be a premature assessment. On the second round trip, ''the lock was cut off'' at LaGuardia ''but neatly placed in my bag, taped to one of those T.S.A. billet-doux'' notices, she said. She took the broken lock to Brookstone, which replaced it free -- as all retailers of the locks do if they are damaged.
She tried a phone complaint to the T.S.A. but ''after 10 minutes of Muzak, I decided life was too short.'' Discouraged, she didn't lock her bags at all on the third round trip. But faith returned to her on the fourth round tip.
That time, she said, ''the lock was cut off in Cleveland.'' But the broken lock wasn't left inside her bag, she added, ''so I cannot take it in for a replacement.''
David M. Hyman tops that. On a return trip to Newark from Phoenix, he reported, Travel Sentry locks on both of his checked bags were cut off by the T.S.A. and left inside his suitcases ''with a notice from the T.S.A. cautioning against locking luggage.''
BUSINESS TRAVEL: ON THE ROAD
