There is Stephon Marbury's petulant past: four teams in eight years, a litany of disgruntled teammates, most who wanted him to pass first and shoot second, and no second-round playoff experience on the résumé.
There is also a brilliant forecast, the raw explosiveness, the way he turns a routine jump-stop into riveting theater, skittering by one defender, going up and over the next, scoring when he wants, promising another N.B.A. city he is all grown up.
Coney Island's own is coming home, and whether Marbury makes a team a finals contender or a playoff poseur depends on who shipped him and who acquired him.
Ask the Phoenix Suns, and they will say the Marbury experiment failed, the way it did in New Jersey and Minnesota. That Marbury, the mercurial point guard they call Starbury, can only take a team so far before he glowers at teammates who miss layups and before his moodiness becomes contagious.
That is partly why they traded Marbury, Penny Hardaway and Cezary Trybanski to the Knicks on Monday for Antonio McDyess, Howard Eisley, Charlie Ward, Maciej Lampe, the rights to Milos Vujanic, two first-round draft picks and cash, in one of those blockbuster deals only sports talk radio and maybe Isiah Thomas could dream up.
Ask the Knicks, and they will say they swapped a slew of role players, contracts and unfulfilled potential for one of the game's top 15 talents.
Indeed, on the surface, the Knicks will have a top floor leader in his prime for the first time since Walt Frazier ran the floor at Madison Square Garden. Marbury, a Brooklyn schoolboy legend, is an All-Star, able to create his own shot in the final seconds of a close game the way none of the Knicks can.
By any account, this starting five is not shabby. Marbury. Allan Houston. Keith Van Horn. Kurt Thomas. Dikembe Mutombo, serviceable at center if slightly decrepit. Shandon Anderson and a watered-down Hardaway coming off the bench. If that is not at least a seventh-seeded team in the East, what is?
''On paper, talent-wise, this puts us right up there at the top,'' Van Horn said. ''But that's just paper.''
Indeed, rather than answering questions about the Knicks' new-and-improved crew, Van Horn spent most of yesterday afternoon's session with the news media playing down all the times Marbury had publicly disrespected him.
What was that gem from last summer, when Marbury lumped in Van Horn with Gheorghe Muresan and Jim McIlvaine as former Nets teammates with little or no game? When Van Horn was traded to the Knicks from Philadelphia, Marbury surmised that Van Horn was too soft to play at the Garden.
Marbury was drafted by Milwaukee and traded immediately to Minnesota, where he eventually forced a trade to the Nets. Instead of teaming with Kevin Garnett to become the heirs apparent to John Stockton and Karl Malone in the Western Conference, he came East to play near his hometown.
The move backfired in a torrent of losses and bruised egos, until he was shipped to Phoenix for Jason Kidd. He spared little criticism of his former teammates.
''You got to be way tougher than Keith is to play in New York,'' Marbury said last September. ''You got to be gritty. You've got to be a grinder.''
Marbury mentioned Latrell Sprewell, Michael Jordan, Tim Duncan and Allen Iverson as players who met the standard.
''But Keith is not a player who fits the description,'' Marbury said then.
Yesterday, Van Horn said: ''It's not just about Stephon and I, it's about the team. When he gets here, I'm sure we'll sit down and talk. Because I want to be on the same page with him and he wants to be on the same page with me, and ultimately I just want to win. If there's any issues we need to work through, we'll talk.''
Spike Lee, the filmmaker and longtime Knicks zealot, wanted Marbury to audition for his 1999 movie, ''He Got Game,'' about a fictional schoolboy legend by the name of Jesus Shuttleworth from, yes, Coney Island. But Marbury's agent at the time refused to have him audition if he was not guaranteed a significant part in the movie.
Lee played down the notion that the movie was based on Marbury's life -- a number of hangers-on, street agents, soulless college coaches and female groupies tried to corrupt the character played by Ray Allen.
Yet as Marbury returns home, one has to wonder about those distractions: the relatives competing for space and attention in the family lounge, the expectations from the people who saw him grow into one of pro basketball's most scintillating performers.
That petulant past colliding with that awesome future, and how it will work itself out.
Lost in the latest purge of everything Layden was another point guard, Charlie Ward, the last remnant from the Pat Riley era. Ward was often ridiculed and booed, and rumored for years to be going elsewhere.
Seventy-seven playoff games, a couple of Eastern Conference championships and a few Game 7's later, Knicks fans got their wish. Ward is gone. He never had Marbury's basketball instincts or improvisation, but when the Knicks still mattered and Ward was still spry, he competed and found the resources needed to win games for his team in the spring.
If Stephon Marbury competes in 77 playoff games during his Knicks career, consider him fortunate.
N.B.A. Analysis
