Harry W. Frankson was a big, strong guy. It seems possible, his widow said the other day, that he never really believed cigarettes would kill him.
Until the doctor told him it was too late. Lung cancer.
He and his wife, Gladys, went home to Brooklyn after that doctor's visit in 1998, and he asked her to forgive him. '' 'I've thrown our life away. Over cigarettes. I just couldn't stop,' '' he said through tears, Gladys Frankson remembered last week.
In five months, he was dead. He was 57. He had smoked Lucky Strikes almost continuously since he was 14. Mrs. Frankson wanted revenge against the company that sold the cigarettes and, for years, she said, made them seem harmless and fun.
She got a taste of retribution on Dec. 18, in what could be a watershed lawsuit against a tobacco company. A Brooklyn jury ordered the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation to pay her $175,000 as compensation.
It was the first defeat for a tobacco company in the New York State courts in a suit over an individual smoker's death. And it was the first in the Northeast since an early, and eventually abandoned, case in New Jersey in 1988. In its verdict, the jury said Mr. Frankson and the company were each 50 percent responsible for his illness. The company says it will appeal.
But the true measure of Mrs. Frankson's revenge could come this week. Tomorrow, the same jury in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn (Kings County) is to begin considering the next phase of the case, whether to force the company to pay punitive damages that could amount to millions of dollars.
Mrs. Frankson's case could be a turning point in a lengthy campaign by critics of the tobacco companies to hold them liable for the deaths of individual smokers. ''New York juries, particularly in Kings County, can be very generous,'' said Oscar G. Chase, a professor at New York University School of Law who has studied liability verdicts in the city.
In other parts of the country, smokers or their families have been chipping away since 1996 at the industry's formidable record of winning cases involving the claims of individual smokers. So far, smokers or their families have won 13 cases nationwide, according to the Tobacco Products Liability Project at Northeastern University, which works to foster lawsuits against the industry.
Because of appeals by the tobacco companies, in only one instance has a company paid a smoker's family: $1.09 million in a case in Florida.
Such suits are not as complicated as they once were because so much information is available about the health effects of smoking, said Richard A. Daynard, chairman of the liability project. The Brooklyn case, Mr. Daynard said, ''is very important because it shows that cases can be brought and won'' everywhere, including before the potentially generous New York juries. In the last three years, tobacco companies defeated smokers' claims in three similar cases in Brooklyn and Queens.
One of Mrs. Frankson's lawyers, Michael A. London, said that he believes attitudes among New York jurors may be shifting, partly because the city's ban on smoking in bars and restaurants feeds subconscious concerns about the dangers of smoking.
If there is a change in New York jurors' attitudes, that could be a major blow to the cigarette companies' strategy of arguing that smokers must bear responsibility for their decisions to smoke. ''If the jury is annoyed enough to award big damages, and if that was sustained on appeal, the industry and its stockholders could have something to worry about,'' said Mary Aronson, an analyst who studies the suits for institutional investors.
The companies have often been successful in urging jurors to view health claims against the industry in terms of personal responsibility.
Thomas J. Quigley, a lawyer for Philip Morris who was involved in the three earlier New York City cases, said he was not convinced that the verdict in Mrs. Frankson's case suggested any change in attitude among New York jurors. ''I think New Yorkers in general believe in personal responsibility,'' he said. ''People who smoke assume the risks of smoking.''
The first phase of the trial in Mrs. Frankson's case was in many ways typical of smokers' cases around the country. Lawyers for Brown &amp; Williamson dwelled on what Harry Frankson knew about the risks of smoking. In 1994, Brown &amp; Williamson, now the country's third-largest cigarette company, acquired the American Tobacco Company, which made Lucky Strikes.
When Mrs. Frankson, 62, testified, the company's lawyers worked to get her to concede that doctors had told her husband to stop smoking since at least 1963. They delved into her attitudes about the risks of smoking during 35 years of marriage. ''I would say to you,'' she testified, ''that for decades I encouraged my husband to quit smoking.''
The company's lawyers said the danger of smoking was hardly hidden by the industry, as the suit asserted. ''It wasn't concealed, it was reported in the newspapers,'' one of the company's lawyers, Thomas E. Riley, said in an interview.
Mrs. Frankson's lawyers, Mr. London and Gary J. Douglas, dwelled on the now familiar story of decades of tobacco industry public statements about health questions. In one 1967 statement that was introduced at the trial, Robert B. Walker, the president of American Tobacco, said, ''No clinical or biological evidence has been produced which demonstrates how cigarettes relate to cancer or any other disease in human beings.'' That was three years after the surgeon general's 1964 report linking smoking and lung cancer.
The lawyers showed the jurors company advertising cartoons featuring Happy-Joe-Lucky, the cute animated character in the cap who spurred millions of people to remember the ubiquitous slogan ''Lucky Strike means fine tobacco. L.S./M.F.T.''
The jurors heard from Anthony J. Sforza, 62, who was Mr. Frankson's lifelong friend. At 13 years old, the two boys had slipped away from their parents' houses on 126th Street in South Ozone Park, Queens. At the corner candy store, they tried on adulthood: they bought cigarettes.
''That's all you saw years ago,'' Mr. Sforza said in an interview. ''Everybody was smoking; it was the thing to be a big shot, I guess, to be grown up.'' Almost immediately, Mr. Sforza said, Harry was hooked.
Mrs. Frankson, a retired administrative assistant at a Brooklyn private school, said that like many smokers, her husband tried for years to discount the reports about the dangers of smoking. He would mention 93-year-old smokers. He would question the evidence.
''He believed for many years,'' Mrs. Frankson said, ''that it was safe to smoke or it would not be on the market in our country.'' Even though she had quit smoking herself, she said, she would look at how big he was and how healthy he seemed. It would not seem possible that the cigarettes could kill him, the father of her son.
But when the evidence accumulated, long before he became ill, the jurors heard, Mr. Frankson, an airport operations manager, was desperate to stop. He tried hypnosis, acupuncture, nicotine patches and just about every other conceivable method of quitting. ''He couldn't stop smoking no matter how hard he tried,'' Mrs. Frankson said.
During the five months it took for him to die, she said, he suffered in ways she would not have imagined. When he was gone, she said, she consulted lawyers, who told her she could file a lawsuit claiming that cigarettes were a defective product and that the company conspired with others in the industry to conceal the dangers of tobacco.
She decided to go ahead with it. ''I needed closure,'' she said. ''I needed to know I got some revenge. I wanted as many people as possible to know that smoking can kill you.''
