The strengthening economy and generous sales incentives led to robust car sales last year, automakers said Monday, but the American companies' share of the market continued to shrink as import brands like Toyota, Honda and BMW posted the biggest gains.
Despite those declines, the American companies did not pledge to increase market share in 2004, as they have often done. Instead, they said they would look for ways to make the cars and trucks that they do sell more profitable, largely by making them more appealing to consumers.
''Oversupply of vehicles consumers don't want has led us to raise incentives or run to daily rentals fleet sales and we have to stay out of that trap,'' Steve Lyons, president of the Ford Motor Company's Ford division, said during a conference call.
Including its Lincoln and Mercury divisions, but not its foreign luxury makes like Jaguar and Volvo, Ford's sales fell 8 percent in December from the same month a year earlier, and its share of the North American market slipped to 20.7 percent from 21.3 percent in 2002. For the year, Ford's sales were down 4 percent, including an 11 percent decline in cars sales.
Mr. Lyons added that while Ford planned to introduce several new vehicles, including a minivan and an upscale sedan, he expected the Ford brand's market share to remain where it was last year, at about 17.1 percent, in 2004.
Wesley Brown, a partner with Iceology, an automotive research firm in Los Angeles, said Ford's forecast suggested a new reality in Detroit. ''Maybe the companies are finally getting to that point of acceptance,'' he said, ''where they recognize what their true market share really is and then determine how to be profitable at that figure.''
American automakers' share of the North American market has been dropping for decades and is now 61.8 percent, according to Ward's AutoInfoBank. Japanese makers have 29 percent of the market with German and Korean automakers making up the rest. Two decades ago, the American automakers held 80 percent of the domestic market; in the 1970's, General Motors alone had more than 50 percent.
The market itself shrank to 16.6 million cars and trucks in 2003, down from 16.8 million in 2002. Still, that was above some analysts' forecasts of 16.2 million, largely because of the aggressive use of low-interest loans, cash rebates and other incentives to buyers. For some G.M. models, the incentives totaled about $4,000, according to Edmunds.com, a consumer research company in Santa Monica, Calif.
In 2003, G.M.'s market share dropped to 28.3 percent, said Paul Ballew, G.M.'s chief sales analyst. That is down from 28.7 percent in 2002, and the first decline for G.M. in three years. Some G.M. executives have started wearing lapel pins with ''29'' on them to encourage employees to push the company's share over that figure.
Mr. Ballew said that ''2003 was a solid year for G.M., but we didn't get to where we wanted to be.'' However, instead of saying that the company would push for market share gains in the next year, he noted that G.M.'s market share for the last five years has remained stable in the 28 percent range despite tough competition.
G.M.'s 2003 sales slipped 2.2 percent to 4.7 million cars and trucks, with car sales sliding 5 percent and truck sales up 0.2 percent. Its December sales were down 9 percent compared to a year earlier when G.M. went on a marketing and incentive blitz.
The market share for DaimlerChrysler slipped to 12.8 percent from 13.1 percent in 2002, putting it 270,000 units ahead of Toyota, which said 2003 sales rose 6.3 percent, making it the company's best sales year in its 46-year history.
None of the American carmakers said they would abandon incentives this year.
G.M. said it would give away 1,000 new vehicles over the next two months. The idea, said Steve Hill, a top marketer at the company, is to encourage shoppers to visit G.M. dealers ''and close this perceptual gap in how people think about G.M. and how good it is today.''
Meanwhile, Chrysler said it would offer buyers a zero-percent interest rate for 48 months on many of Chrysler vehicles, and also offer a $2,000 cash rebate.
Show Floor News  Correction:  January 7, 2004, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about 2003 auto sales misstated DaimlerChrysler's share of the United States market. It was 14.1 percent; the 12.8 percent figure was for the Chrysler Group only.
