The more information that comes out about last week's violence involving two Staten Island firefighters, the more questions it raises about firehouse culture. It now appears that the incident, which ended with one man on a respirator and another under arrest, resulted from ''busting chops'': firefighters' teasing one another about work habits, physical appearance and -- as is reported to have occurred here -- sexual orientation. Firefighters have a special need to bond with one another. But the department must ensure that their banter does not rise to the level of harassment, or instigate violence.
Robert Walsh's face was smashed, according to Fire Department sources, after he exchanged words with Michael Silvestri, a fellow firefighter. Mr. Silvestri had called Mr. Walsh names before, another firefighter said, and when he arrived to begin his shift, he directed an anti-gay slur Mr. Walsh's way. Mr. Walsh responded by charging that Mr. Silvestri had gamed the system to earn extra overtime pay, according to this account, and Mr. Silvestri attacked Mr. Walsh with a metal chair.
Initial reports said Mr. Walsh had been injured in a fall. An investigation is now under way into whether a captain misrepresented the incident to his superiors, and whether other firefighters participated in a cover-up. These are serious charges and should be pursued vigorously.
The department says teasing is to be expected in a setting where people live, sleep and eat in close proximity, and it insists that playful ribbing can build the esprit de corps necessary for dangerous work. A ''vast majority'' of the kidding is innocuous, a department spokesman, Francis Gribbon, says.
That may be true. But as last week's incident indicates, not all of the kidding is harmless. According to The Times's Michelle O'Donnell, a male firefighter who once worked at Bloomingdale's has been referred to as ''she'' by his colleagues for more than a decade. Other firefighters are mocked about their height or other physical attributes.
The firehouse's culture of taunting may violate anti-discrimination law, and may be one reason white men make up about 91 percent of the department, which has only one woman in its current probationary class of 304. ''Busting chops'' can also exacerbate tensions and create a risk of violence. While the department investigates the particulars of last week's incident, we hope that it will also examine the role firehouse culture may have played in setting it off.
