Until last year, few Americans felt drawn to museum shows featuring Mesopotamian antiquities. But the looting of the Iraq Museum in Baghdad in April focused new attention on this ancient civilization, and its glories are now the subject of two lavish shows.
The Oriental Institute at the University of Chicago, which has one of the world's richest collections of these antiquities, has opened a new hall to display them. At the same time, museums are clamoring to mount a traveling show about Mesopotamia that has been assembled by the University of Pennsylvania.
''I've been amazed at the response,'' said Richard Zettler, a curator of the University of Pennsylvania show, ''Treasures From the Royal Tombs of Ur,'' which has extended its run in Philadelphia and will go on the road again later this year. ''The pictures you see on television these days don't present the most positive image of Iraq, and this presents the other side. People get a sense that something happened there that is very important for the history of humanity.''
The show, which Mr. Zettler helped assemble for the university's Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, came home to Philadelphia a few months ago after being seen in 10 cities over the last five years. Its last stop was New York, where its most magnificent objects were part of a larger show called ''Art of the First Cities'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
News of the looting in Baghdad has led at least three other museums to ask for the show. As a result it will go on view in Pennsylvania for just six months starting in March and will then be sent back on the road.
Although several of the world's leading museums, including the Metropolitan, have large collections of Mesopotamian artifacts, specialists in the field consider the Chicago and Pennsylvania collections especially valuable because they are made up mainly of items that come directly from ancient sites rather than through dealers or collectors. Archaeologists consider this a crucial distinction.
''Context is an absolutely critical part of understanding these artifacts,'' Mr. Zettler said. ''Knowing exactly where an object came from is what allows you to tease the meaning out of it. It makes all the difference in the world, and you normally don't get that in any detail at an art museum.''
The Edgar and Deborah Jannotta Mesopotamian Gallery at the Oriental Institute in Chicago, which opened in October, reinforces this museum's position as one of the premier showcases for Middle Eastern archaeology. It marks the latest phase in a 10-year program of expansion and renovation that has already produced new Egyptian and Persian galleries. Other galleries to display artifacts from Anatolia, Nubia and the ancient town of Armageddon, now Meggido in northern Israel, are to open by 2006.
No one imagined that this opening would be so timely. McGuire Gibson, a University of Chicago archaeologist who has spent decades working in Iraq, said that the April looting there resulted in the loss of about 14,000 artifacts, of which only about 3,000 have been recovered.
The director of the Oriental Institute, Gil J. Stein, needs only the slightest provocation to begin a lengthy discourse on what ancient Mesopotamians contributed to the world.
He said they built the first cities, conceived the idea of the centralized state, and invented mathematics, astronomy, writing, the wheel, the sail, government bureaucracy, and even the 60-second minute and 60-minute hour.
''Everything starts there,'' he said. ''The way we think of who we are all began there, and it hasn't changed all that much. Mesopotamia's impact on our own civilization is so pervasive that we don't even think about it. It's not just the birth of Middle Eastern civilization; it's really the foundation for all Western civilization and also, to a large degree, Eastern civilization.''
The new permanent exhibition that Mr. Stein helped install here is in a 5,400-square-foot hall and contains more than 1,300 artifacts. Some are huge and spectacular, like a 40-ton winged bull with a human face that gazed out over the palace of the Assyrian king Sargon II in the eighth century B.C. There is also a tablet on which is inscribed part of the Gilgamesh epic, often considered the world's first piece of literature, and another with two songs written by King Sargon's sister that are the earliest works known to be written by a woman.
These awesome treasures, however, are the exceptions in the new display. Most of it concentrates on daily life rather than the grandeur of royalty, with objects like toys, jewelry, cooking utensils and writing tablets.
Some of the tablets are mundane but fascinating, containing everything from quadratic equations in cuneiform to a contract that records the sale of three goats. Others offer deeper insight into Mesopotamian life.
On one tablet, a father laid down rules for his son. They include ''Do not buy an ass which brays too much,'' ''Do not commit rape upon a man's daughter'' and ''Do not answer back against your father, do not raise a 'heavy eye.' ''
Many of these tablets were left by students learning how to write. One contains part of a love story in which Gilgamesh's father, after meeting his wife-to-be, ''could not resist kissing her on the eyes, could not resist kissing her on the mouth, and also taught her much about lovemaking.''
Mr. Stein said his favorite item in the exhibition was a table than contained only an idle doodle.''It's so easy to imagine this poor kid in writing class,'' he said. ''It's 120 degrees, the teacher is droning on, and he's sitting there daydreaming and scratching out this doodle.''
The Mesopotamian exhibition and the others in adjacent galleries are only the public face of the Oriental Institute. It also pursues scholarly projects, for example compiling a 26-volume dictionary of Akkadian, a Semitic language used in parts of Mesopotamia beginning around 2500 B.C.
Just days after scholars here learned of the looting in Baghdad, they began designing a Web site that now contains the world's most comprehensive data bank of Mesopotamian artifacts (www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/IRAQ/Iraqdatabasehome.htm). It is meticulously cross-indexed, and has proved to be a unique resource for tracing lost objects.
''This database is intended less for a scholarly audience than for anyone who might encounter a stolen object from the Iraq Museum -- anyone from a customs official to the cleaning personnel working for an unscrupulous antiquities dealer,'' Clemens D. Reichel, director of the project, wrote in a recent report.
The Oriental Institute acquired most of its vast collection, more than 120,000 objects from almost every corner of the Middle East, through the system of partage, under which Middle Eastern governments gave foreign archaeologists permission to take home about half of what they found.
That system ended in the late 1960's, when governments began insisting that archaeologists deposit almost everything they discovered in local museums.
''What we have here is irreplaceable,'' said Mr. Gibson, the University of Chicago archaeologist. ''It could not be reconstructed today. Even if by some miracle you could go out and discover comparable sites and make comparable finds, you would not be able to bring them out.''
Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  An article on Jan. 6 about exhibitions of Mesopotamian antiquities misidentified the author of two songs inscribed on a tablet, which are the earliest works known to have been by a woman. She was Enheduanna, whose father, King Sargon of Akkad, founded the Agade dynasty in the third millennium B.C. -- not a sister of King Sargon II of Assyria, who lived in the eighth century B.C.
