Americans Traveling More This Winter
Even with tightened security creating longer lines at domestic airports, Americans are planning to travel more this winter, according to the Travel Industry Association of America.
Contributing to that trend has been ''a noticeable increase in business travel'' for the winter, the travel industry trade group said. From December 2003 through Feb. 2004, Americans will take 31.4 million separate business trips, an increase of 3.7 percent from last winter, according to an annual survey by the group. That represents the first growth in business trips since the winter of 1999-2000, when Americans took an estimated 39 million business travel trips.
Leisure travel trips are expected to number about 164 million this winter, an increase of about 2 percent over the winter of 2002-3.
Trips are defined as noncommuter travel exceeding 50 miles and/or including an overnight stay. About 75 percent of travel is done by automobile and 16 percent by airplane.
United Suspends Some Rules in Chicago
O'Hare International Airport in Chicago was socked in with snow and ice Sunday, and weather delays continued yesterday. As a result, UAL's United Airlines has been using e-mail messages to reassure passengers with flights from, to or through O'Hare that ''all rules and restrictions regarding standard change fees, day or time applications, and/or minimum stay or Saturday night stay requirements have been waived'' through Jan. 12 for tickets purchased on or before last Sunday.
Customers may rebook on any available flight in the same class of service; tickets must be reissued or revalidated by midnight on the day of the original scheduled departure.
NetJets Orders 50 Hawker Planes
NetJets, the big fractional-share business jet company, has ordered 50 Hawker 400XP light jets and 8 Hawker 800XP midsize jets from the Raytheon Company. The total value of the order exceeds $360 million. The new 400XP aircraft -- which has a top speed in excess of 500 miles an hour -- will be offered as an entry-level jet, NetJets said.
Some Visitors Facing New U.S. Requirements
New requirements for fingerprinting and photographing foreign nationals from most countries will probably add "only seconds" to visitors' processing times at airports and seaports, the Department of Homeland Security said yesterday as the program went into effect.
Citizens of the following countries belonging to the Visa Waiver Program are exempt from the new security measures for visits of up to 90 days: Andorra, Austria, Australia, Belgium, Britain, Brunei, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Singapore, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland.
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
