When Howard Dean was governor of Vermont, his administration was taken to task in a 1993 state audit that questioned the involvement of a top Dean aide in the awarding of a contract to a health maintenance organization. The aide, the audit noted, once represented the H.M.O. as a lobbyist.
The contract was canceled after the audit was made public.
Four years later, a second audit stumbled across a highly critical review of the same H.M.O., then the state's largest. The review had never been made public, as required under state law.
The 1993 audit, by Edward S. Flanagan, pointed out that a $900,000 contract to administer health claims for the state's 17,000 workers had been awarded to Community Health Plan at a time when Dr. Dean's secretary of administration, the top official in the cabinet, was David Wilson, a lawyer and lobbyist who had counted the H.M.O. among his top clients.
Also, the audit concluded, Mr. Wilson played a substantive role in the awarding of the contract, despite having vowed to recuse himself from any state business involving former clients.
The 1997 audit, to gauge how well the state was enforcing compliance with state regulations by health-care providers, inadvertently turned up an independent 1993 review of Community Health Plan that had been requested by state officials. The review, by a North Carolina investigator, was highly critical of some of Community Health Plan's practices.
Under Vermont law, the report should have been sent to the H.M.O., which would have had 30 days to respond, after which the review should have been made public.
Instead, the critical review remained hidden in state files until the auditors came across it.
Dr. Dean's top aides from that time, as well as officials in his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, contended that both audits were overblown and that the criticisms in them were without merit.
Regarding the 1993 audit, they point out that Mr. Wilson, who died two years ago, served less than a year in Dr. Dean's cabinet, was not on the committee that actually awarded the contract and was out of office and back working as a lobbyist by the time the audit was released.
Any implication that Mr. Wilson played a substantive role in the contract was ''absolutely and utterly baseless,'' said Jay Carson, Dr. Dean's press secretary.
Indeed, proof that the H.M.O. held no special sway over the Dean administration is in the state's having canceled its contract shortly after the audit's release, said William Sorrell, the Vermont attorney general, who took over from Mr. Wilson as Dr. Dean's secretary of administration in the fall of 1992.
''C.H.P. was not equipped to do the job the state needed done,'' Mr. Sorrell said. ''No question, it had been a mistake to award them the contract. We had the right to get out early and we got out early. But implications that David Wilson had influenced any of this was just plain bunk.''
Garry Schaedel, who now works on child care and school health issues for the state, was the unofficial chairman of the committee that awarded the contract to Community Health Plan in 1992. He said that Mr. Wilson played no role in the decision.
''It irritated me back then when Ed Flanagan suggested it, and it irritates me now,'' Mr. Schaedel said. ''Dave Wilson played absolutely no role.''
Mr. Flanagan, however, defended both the audits and his motivations.
''I am a supporter of Howard Dean's presidential campaign, so this puts me in a rather awkward position,'' he said. ''But the factual bases for these reports are rock solid and thoroughly documented.''
Mr. Wilson might not have been on the committee that awarded the contract, Mr. Flanagan said, but he pointed to Mr. Wilson's involvement in staff meetings at which the contract was discussed, as well as a telephone call Mr. Wilson made to one of the other bidders after that bidder tried to contact the governor as proof that Mr. Wilson was indeed involved.
''This happened 10 years ago,'' Mr. Flanagan said, ''but with all due respect, intercepting a communication between one of the two serious bidders and the governor, I suggest, does amount to substantive involvement.''
These audits have emerged as several of Dr. Dean's Democratic opponents have been stepping up criticisms of the candidate seen as the front-runner in the presidential race. His rivals often cite him for hypocrisy in chastising President Bush for taking actions that they say are similar to actions Dr. Dean took as governor.
They have pointed out that Dr. Dean criticized President Bush's tax cuts for corporations even though Dr. Dean, as governor, championed tax breaks for corporations doing business in Vermont.
Dr. Dean has criticized the Bush administration for being secretive, yet he sealed almost half of his own governor's records until 2013.
And Dr. Dean has accused the president of under-financing domestic security, yet during his tenure as governor, his rivals note, the state's biggest terrorist target, the Vermont Yankee nuclear plant, was criticized for its own poor security.
Certainly, Dr. Dean's top supporters expect that his opponents will seize upon the disclosure of these latest audits as further grist.
Dr. Dean has been critical of the Bush administration's treatment of special interests. The disclosure of the audits of Community Health Plan could result in similar criticisms that Dr. Dean, while governor, rewarded companies with ties to his political allies.
Another major factor in these and other audits conducted during Dr. Dean's tenure as governor was the continuing bad blood between his office and Mr. Flanagan's, said Kathy Hoyt, who had been the governor's chief of staff.
''There were some tense times between the governor's office and the auditor's office,'' Ms. Hoyt said. ''And a lot of that was those of us in the administration feeling that the auditor was using stories and making these allegations to get a name for himself.''
Mr. Sorrell, the attorney general, said he found the 1993 audit to be shallow and biased.
''We considered when we looked at the facts that this was a politically driven document from Flanagan,'' he said. ''It was not the first nor was it the only time there were flare-ups between us and the auditor.''
Mr. Flanagan, a liberal Democrat and graduate of Harvard Law School, was elected auditor in 1992. Under him, the state job went from a sleepy post to an activist one.
That, and an aggressive personal style, raised Mr. Flanagan's public profile.
''Ed Flanagan had a way of rubbing people the wrong way,'' said Peter Freyne, a long-time political columnist for an alternative Vermont newspaper, Seven Days. ''He certainly rubbed Howard Dean the wrong way.''
In 1998, when a reporter asked Dr. Dean what needed to happen to repair relations between the auditor's office and the governor's office, Dr. Dean said, ''A new auditor.''
Mr. Flanagan, who lost a bid in 2000 for the United States Senate seat occupied by James M. Jeffords, said there had indeed been some rough moments between his office and Dr. Dean's, but he denied that political ambition had influenced his audits.
''Ambition is advanced by meeting the responsibilities of one's office,'' Mr. Flanagan said. ''My responsibility was to accurately report to Vermonters the operations of their government. That's what happened here.''
The 1997 audit began when two state representatives, the House speaker, Michael Obuchowski, and Representative Paul Poirier, asked Mr. Flanagan to undertake a review of the state agency responsible for, among other things, enforcing state regulations for health-care services.
It was during this audit that the earlier, critical review of Community Health Plan surfaced in the agency's files.
Under Vermont law, the review should have made public after 30 days. That never happened, said Elizabeth Costle, who was head of the Vermont Department of Banking, Insurance, Securities and Health Care Administration, the agency that was being audited.
''It just fell through the cracks,'' said Ms. Costle, who has since left Vermont government and moved to Northern Virginia. ''They tried to make a big deal out of it, but the truth is that the governor had nothing to do with that. The person who dropped the ball was me.''
As a result, Mr. Carson said, it will also be difficult for Dr. Dean's opponents to imply that his administration was overly protective of Community Health Plan.
''To make any argument that he was trying to protect them,'' Mr. Carson said, ''is laughable.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
