The fight over Medicare is picking up exactly where it left off four weeks ago, when President Bush signed a bill offering prescription drug benefits to the elderly.
Democrats, denouncing the arm-twisting tactics used to pass the bill in the House, vowed Monday to rewrite the law to reduce the role of private health plans, to increase drug benefits and to authorize the government to negotiate drug prices.
President Bush and other Republicans plan to trumpet the law as a boon to the elderly and will oppose changes, saying the law should be given a chance to work. Administration officials and Congressional Republicans predicted that the Democrats would not gain traction with their arguments.
Within hours after Mr. Bush signed the Medicare law on Dec. 8, Democrats and labor unions held a rally on Capitol Hill.
''We have only just begun to fight,'' Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts said then. Jean Friday of Pittsburgh, a spokeswoman for a group of retired steelworkers, described the bill as ''an abomination.'' Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House Democratic leader, advised the elderly, ''Beware of Republicans bearing gifts.''
Mr. Kennedy said Monday that Democrats and their allies would resume the effort when Congress convened on Jan. 20. ''If Republicans think this fight is over, they are wrong,'' he said.
At the moment, Democrats appear to have no chance of modifying any significant provisions of the law. Republicans said they saw no need for even technical corrections. With their majority in the House, they can usually block consideration of Democratic amendments.
But Democrats plan to make a political ruckus and said they hoped to put Republicans on the defensive.
''We want the debate to start now,'' said Representative Benjamin L. Cardin, a Maryland Democrat who is drafting a bill to revise the new law. ''This issue is far from resolved. We don't want people to go through the election and the year without knowing what's in the law.''
Democrats said they planned to raise their concerns day after day on the Senate floor.
Representative Rahm Emanuel, Democrat of Illinois, said: ''The Medicare issue will be dormant this year only if we allow it to be dormant. We'd be fools if we did.''
On Jan. 16, the administration is scheduled to announce higher Medicare payment rates for private health plans, including health maintenance organizations. Democrats said they would attack the rates as a giveaway to the insurance industry. In March and April, Congress is likely to debate a budget for the coming year. Democrats will offer amendments to increase the drug benefit. In May, insurers will start issuing government-approved drug discount cards to Medicare beneficiaries. Democrats will cite studies saying such cards produce small savings.
The White House, AARP and Congressional Republicans say they know they need to educate the elderly about the new law.
Critics are eager to help. Ronald F. Pollack, executive director of Families U.S.A., a consumer group, said he was planning a ''road show,'' which will visit about 25 states in March and April. He will explain the law, including what he sees as its strengths and weaknesses.
Republicans are prepared to defend the law they wrote. The House Republican Conference has given its members ''suggested responses'' to Democratic arguments.
The materials assert that ''seniors will initially save 25 percent or more through the prescription drug card'' -- somewhat more than the typical savings of 10 percent to 15 percent envisioned by the Department of Health and Human Services.
Mr. Kennedy and Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, have introduced bills to alter the new law. Democrats in the Senate and House are developing comprehensive bills.
The proposals would allow people to import prescription drugs from Canada; eliminate tax breaks for health savings accounts; fill in gaps in Medicare drug coverage (the ''doughnut hole''); reduce payments to private plans; and abolish a demonstration project that will require traditional Medicare to compete directly with private plans.
Republicans say the Democrats are sore losers, angry at losing control of the Medicare program.
For the first time in years, the ''liberal intelligentsia'' was excluded from the process of writing a Medicare law, a House Republican said. The law was written mainly by conservatives and centrists.
