The Chinese government's decision on Monday to start killing all civet cats in captivity in Guangdong Province is belated and only partly counters the government's tolerance of the sale of the animals in markets, a SARS expert for the World Health Organization said.
On Monday, Chinese and W.H.O. scientists said they had confirmed that a 32-year-old television producer in Guangdong had SARS. No other cases have been identified, and the source of the producer's infection is unknown, they said.
The case should not have been a surprise because ''we had warnings,'' said Dr. Klaus Stöhr, the W.H.O. expert. Dr. Stöhr said, ''We knew that civet cats posed a public health risk because SARS coronavirus was repeatedly isolated from these animals most of last year, and it was only a question of chance and time before a case occurred.''
During the SARS epidemic last year, the Chinese government had imposed a temporary ban on the civets' sale but lifted the restrictions once the outbreak subsided. The civet is the Himalayan, or masked, palm civet, which resembles a weasel and is related to the mongoose.
In a public policy sense and in an era of globalization, SARS may be likened to mad cow disease. Officials deferred crucial decisions that affected public health in their own countries, and many others delayed action until their hand was forced in a time of crisis.
''The precautionary killing of civets is the right decision, but it must not divert attention from the fact that our knowledge about SARS is incomplete'' and the source of SARS in nature is unknown, Dr. Stöhr said in a telephone interview on Monday. He was a leader in the W.H.O. efforts to stop transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome last summer and later spent three weeks in China to review studies by scientists there .
SARS is believed to have first jumped from an animal species to humans in Guangdong Province in November 2002. Dr. Stöhr and some other scientists have criticized China for not having conducted the comprehensive studies that are needed to determine the source of the SARS virus in nature and how the virus is transmitted from animals to other species, as well as to humans.
Such studies should have included putting infected civets found in Guangdong in cages with a variety of uninfected species of animals to determine how and with what frequency they transmit SARS, Dr. Stöhr said, adding, ''All these studies are long overdue.''
A few studies have been conducted, have been but not in a systematic way, Dr. Stöhr said. Chinese scientists, he said, took 5,000 samples last year from about 100 animal species and isolated viruses from some. The results have not been published.
In experiments, scientists at Hong Kong University are injecting the civet SARS virus into monkeys to help determine its virulence for other species, said Dr. David Ho, who directs the Aaron Diamond AIDS Research Center in Manhattan. He also directed a joint AIDS-SARS laboratory at Hong Kong University.
Dr. Stöhr said culling the civet population ''needs to be done with utmost care'' to prevent infection among workers who kill the animals, ''and combined with scientific investigations,'' to take samples of blood and other tissues ''so health officials can be ready to answer questions if new cases occur after the animals are killed.''
Last year, scientists found SARS virus in human feces. Scientists in Hong Kong have said they have found large virus amounts in civet feces, raising questions about how often SARS may be transmitted through feces to humans and among them.
The infected producer in Guangdong has told epidemiologists that he has no memory of contact with civets in the four weeks before he fell ill on Dec. 16. Many rats found in his apartment building are being tested for SARS.
The W.H.O. has asked Chinese epidemiologists to widen their search to include all people who were in contact with the patient in the 30 days before he became ill.
The 30-day period is about double the 14-day period that China has used in its current epidemiologic investigations of SARS, said Dr. Julie L. Hall, the SARS team leader in Beijing for the W.H.O. The 14-day period represents about the longest known interval between exposure to the virus and the onset of illness. The W.H.O. uses a 10-day period because an overwhelming majority of cases have occurred within that incubation period.
''That is quite a complex and difficult investigation to do,'' Dr. Hall said in a telephone interview.
THE DOCTOR'S WORLD
