Four Americans died in the crash of a Paris-bound Egyptian charter plane in the Red Sea on Saturday. They were part of a group of 135 people, most of them French tourists, who were returning from Sharm el Sheik, a popular vacation spot during the winter holidays.
The passengers included Edward Zalaznick, a 42-year-old New Yorker who lived in Paris with his wife, Isabelle Fouchard, 43, and their three children, David, 12, Paul, 9, and Thomas, 6. Mr. Zalaznick and the three children held dual French and American citizenship.
Mr. Zalaznick was born in Manhattan and graduated in 1985 from the law school at New York University, where he met Ms. Fouchard. The couple married in 1989 and moved to France in 1994, when Mr. Zalaznick was offered a job in the legal affairs department of the French oil company Elf, which has since merged with Total. In November 2003, Mr. Zalaznick was promoted to chief of mergers and acquisitions of the company's legal department.
The family had spent a week in Egypt, along with six other relatives of Ms. Fouchard's. Mr. Zalaznick's father-in-law, Philippe Fouchard, who was also on the flight, was a law professor at the University of Paris.
On Monday, an underwater French robot arrived in Sharm el Sheik, where it will assist in the recovery of the remains of the 148 people, including the crew, killed in Saturday's crash.
The robot will also seek the airplane's flight recorders, which investigators hope will throw light on why the Flash airlines Boeing 737 crashed almost immediately after takeoff. Egyptian and French officials have said the accident was a result of a technical malfunction, but the exact cause remains unclear.
Mr. Zalaznick was remembered Monday by a friend, Peter Sahlins, a history professor at the University of California, Berkeley, on sabbatical leave in Paris. ''Ed was a passionate man, and he put his passion into his work,'' Mr. Sahlins said. ''He was really an original artist. He could have gone on, could have had a career, did a lot of collage stuff every year. He sent these sorts of collage-photograph Christmas cards of his kids.''
Mr. Sahlins moved to Paris in 1999 to lead Berkeley's Paris program and met Mr. Zalaznick then. ''We moved to an apartment on the same floor as the Zalaznicks, and we had kids the same age,'' Mr. Sahlins said. ''We opened the door, and our kids just mixed.''
The Sahlinses moved back to the United States for several years but returned to Paris in 2002. ''We really wanted to be neighbors again, but the apartment that we had went on sale,'' Mr. Sahlins said. ''And it was too expensive. But Ed bought it actually. They joined it with their apartment. It was amazing.''
Mr. Zalaznick, a music and wine lover and runner who completed the New York marathon in 2002, will be remembered at a ceremony in Paris, the details of which are not yet final, Mr. Sahlins said. A memorial service for Mr. Zalaznick and his family will also be held in New York, at a date to be announced.
