The number of fuel-efficient hybrid models available in the United States will more than double in the next year, to seven from three, with new entries coming from Toyota, Honda and Ford Motor.
Two of the new vehicles were announced at the North American International Auto Show -- one of the auto industry's most important annual product previews -- which opened here Sunday for the news media.
But the news from Japanese automakers was hardly all green. They are redoubling their efforts to take on the Big Three in the market for pickup trucks. Toyota, for example, unveiled a gigantic pickup truck prototype, called the FTX.
The truck, which Toyota said it modeled after a clenched fist, appears to be its answer to the biggest offerings from United States automakers as well as to Nissan's burly new Titan pickup. Nissan also showed a new version of its compact Frontier truck.
Honda, the only one of the six largest automakers in the United States market that does not sell a pickup truck, said on Sunday that it would build its first pickup truck by 2005. It pitched an early prototype of the truck, which looks like a cross between a car, a truck and a spaceship, as a quirky vehicle that is more for ''cool dads'' than construction workers.
Tom Elliott, executive vice president of American Honda, said that many consumers now look at trucks ''not as work vehicles but instead as products to support their active lifestyles.''
The growth in pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles, both in sales and size, has for years been ratcheting up the nation's gasoline consumption even as fuel-saving technology has advanced. Pickup trucks are increasingly sold as luxury passenger vehicles for people who do not need them for heavy lifting.
If hybrids have had some positive effect on the nation's gas consumption, they are not now sold in enough volume to have a big impact.
The industry over all remains mixed on the prospects for hybrids, which improve fuel economy and reduce emissions by supplementing internal combustion engines with electric motors.
''I'm just not a blind monk of hybrid technology,'' said Carlos Ghosn, the chief executive of Nissan, adding that the technology was still too expensive to be profitable or a good value for buyers.
Hybrids add a few thousand dollars to the manufacturer's cost of a vehicle. A package of tax deductions for the vehicles died when the energy bill stalled in Congress last month.
Nissan plans to sell a hybrid version of its Altima in 2006, but Mr. Ghosn said it would not be profitable.
Toyota has been far more bullish on the technology, predicting that by the end of this decade people will have bought two million hybrids worldwide -- 600,000 of them in the United States alone. Analysts forecast that Americans will buy about 50,000 hybrid vehicles this year.
Yoshio Ishizaka, an executive vice president at Toyota, said on Monday that the company's hybrid sedan, the Prius, was already profitable and was becoming more so. He added that Toyota had reduced its costs for producing hybrid systems by more than 30 percent since they were introduced in the late 1990's.
''Every Prius we make, we make a profit,'' he said.
In addition to the Prius, Toyota will offer a hybrid version of the Lexus RX sport utility by fall. On Sunday, the company added that within a year it would sell a hybrid version of the Toyota Highlander, an S.U.V. that is built on the same underpinnings as the Lexus. A Toyota executive said the Highlander hybrid could travel 600 miles on a single tank of gas.
On Monday, Honda said that it would add a hybrid car from its Acura division this year to the two Honda hybrids that it already sells.
And Ford has previously said it will become the world's third automaker to sell a hybrid when a version of its Escape sport utility vehicle goes on sale this summer.
''Because of that, we'll be talking more about the environment this year,'' said William Clay Ford Jr., the chairman and chief executive of Ford. He added that protecting the environment was ''a core value to me.''
The Detroit show looks like an inversion of those a half decade ago, when the Big Three focused on sport utilities and pickups while the Japanese automakers came to dominate passenger cars.
As Toyota, Nissan and Honda push into pickups, the Big Three -- General Motors, the Ford Motor Company and the Chrysler Group division of DaimlerChrysler -- are all talking about winning back passenger car customers. A lack of profitability in cars has been a considerable business challenge for the domestic industry.
''If we can be successful in trucks continuously, why not do it in cars?'' said Dieter Zetsche, the chief executive of the Chrysler Group. ''The profits in trucks didn't necessarily come from the fact that it's the natural order that trucks are profitable.''
Trucks brought in profits for American companies in the 1990's, he said, because there was less competition than in the passenger car market. ''We didn't have the imports in those segments,'' he said. ''They are coming no matter what. So if we do not understand how to work competitively, we won't be successful in trucks or in cars.''
Toyota's FTX prototype pickup, which owes its design flair to Japanese cartoons, was meant to suggest what Toyota plans in its next-generation full-size pickup. The Tundra, its current full-size pickup, is not quite as large as the Nissan Titan or the offerings from Detroit. But the FTX is big: nearly 19 feet long, 7 feet wide and 6.5 feet tall. Its design features massive metal bumpers, although Toyota painted it turquoise with white trim, an approachable combination.
James E. Press, executive vice president of Toyota Motor Sales, said the automaker was giving ''serious consideration'' to developing a hybrid version of the FTX. Mr. Press said the truck could provide a platform for an advanced hybrid engine, providing V-8 power with the efficiency of a V-6 engine.
Stressing the point, Mr. Press took the hybrid decal that Toyota uses on the Prius and held it next to the side of the FTX.
''That looks quite nice,'' he said, addressing a row of Toyota's Japanese executives, who would have final say over whether a hybrid truck reaches the market.
Given that the project has not yet been approved, Mr. Press said a hybrid engine would not be ready when the FTX, set to be built in San Antonio, is introduced in 2006.
Show Floor News  Correction:  January 7, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day yesterday about automakers' plans for more hybrid vehicles misidentified one model that Honda will start selling this year. It is an Accord, not an Acura. Because of an editing error, the article also referred incorrectly to a forecast from the Toyota Motor Company. The figure of two million sold by the end of the decade was for Toyota models only, not those of all automakers.
