He is remembered for convincing his 1973 Mets teammates that ''You Gotta Believe'' you're going to win the National League pennant, and they did, but Tug McGraw, who died of brain cancer yesterday at 59, was much more than a cheerleader. At his best, he was one of baseball's most effective relief pitchers and one of its most entertaining characters.
He not only threw a screwball, but he was often accused, endearingly, of being one.
''Not me,'' he said during the 1973 World Series. ''I'm a flake, not a screwball.''
Not that there was much difference. In that era's baseball parlance, ''flake'' meant what ''screwball'' had meant years earlier. Mostly, it meant a happy extrovert. Some relief pitchers describe their occupation as if they were performing nuclear science, but he never did.
''Out there in the early innings,'' he once said, referring to the Shea Stadium bullpen, ''I sometimes have some spare ribs for a snack. And then sometimes I take a nap.''
But when Frank Edwin McGraw Jr. arrived at the mound, he was wide awake. Over his 19 seasons with the Mets and the Phillies, he had a 96-92 record with a 3.14 earned run average.
When the Phillies won the 1980 World Series, he got the last out of a 4-1 victory, a strikeout of Willie Wilson, the Kansas City Royals' center fielder, with the bases loaded. As he leaped high off the mound, Philadelphia celebrated.
Whenever the bullpen phone rang, alerting him to warm up, McGraw appeared to be the essence of energy.
''No,'' he once said. ''Warming up, I'm always short of breath. I'm so excited, I have to take deep breaths.''
When summoned to the mound, he would slap his glove against his right hip, the essence of confidence.
''No,'' he said. ''Coming into a game, my knees always feel weak. I have to push off the mound harder.''
He pitched harder, too. He was listed at 6 feet and 170 pounds, but he didn't look that tall or that heavy. With a little-boy face and a little-boy manner, he resembled the little boy down the block who had to convince the bigger boys he could play with them.
''I took up dares when I was a kid,'' he said. ''I took chances.''
When he went out for the varsity football team at St. Vincent's High School in Vallejo, Calif., he was 5-9 and 140 pounds. The coach told him that he was too small, that he should wait a year. But his father signed the permission slip and he made the team.
''I never got hurt,'' he said.
When he first joined the Mets in 1965, he had a major league fastball and a major league curveball, but to fool major league batters, he needed a third pitch. In the Florida Instructional League after the 1966 season, Ralph Terry, once a 20-game winner with the Yankees but then with the Mets, suggested the screwball.
''With the natural tail you have on your fastball,'' Terry said, ''you should try it.''
With the screwball as his ''out pitch,'' McGraw led the International League in 1967 with a 1.99 E.R.A., and he was on the way to the Mets to stay. When the Mets justified his ''You Gotta Believe'' battle cry by winning the pennant in 1973, he was their most effective pitcher in the World Series against the Oakland Athletics.
In 13 2/3 innings over five appearances, he was 1-0 with one save, a 2.63 E.R.A. and 14 strikeouts while walking 9 and allowing 8 hits.
When the Mets lost Game 7 of that Series, 5-2, McGraw never left the bullpen because the Mets never had a late-inning lead for him to protect. But with the Phillies seven years later, he got his chance to close out a Series. His knees were probably weak that night too, but he got the last out.
He usually did.
Sports of The Times
