A State Superior Court judge resigned after pleading guilty in federal court here on Monday to lying to federal agents about his financial dealings with a former client.
The judge, Daniel E. Brennan Jr., 61, who was appointed to the bench by Gov. John G. Rowland in 1999, was indicted last September on four counts of making false statements to investigators and one count of obstruction of justice. He pleaded guilty to one count of making false statements to a federal law enforcement officer. He had been on medical leave since June 2002 for a serious heart ailment, his lawyer, Edwin J. Gavin, said.
On Monday, Mr. Brennan admitted that he had lied to federal investigators twice. The first time was when he told them he had never received a loan from a former client, William A. Trudeau, a man who pleaded guilty in February 2001 in federal court to wire fraud and failure to account for and pay employee taxes. The second was when he told investigators that he never saw Mr. Trudeau with more than $10,000 in cash.
In fact, Mr. Brennan told the court on Monday that he had obtained a loan of $10,000 from Mr. Trudeau. People close to the investigation said the money was used to pay for medical expenses. And Mr. Brennan admitted he did see Mr. Trudeau with more than $10,000.
On May 11, 2001, Mr. Trudeau invited Mr. Brennan to his home and offered him $52,500 in cash while federal agents secretly filmed the encounter, people close to the investigation said. But the sting operation fell flat; Mr. Brennan refused the money and advised Mr. Trudeau to hire a lawyer, they said.
After Mr. Brennan entered his plea, he resigned from the bench, according to a statement by the chief court administrator, Joseph H. Pellegrino. ''I'm saddened by today's events,'' the statement said. ''I understand that the challenges that led to this event did not compromise his judicial responsibilities.''
Mr. Gavin echoed Judge Pellegrino's comments.
''This didn't involve any conduct regarding the performance of his official duties as judge,'' said Mr. Gavin, a Bridgeport lawyer who was part of the team that defended Bridgeport's former mayor, Joseph P. Ganim, who was convicted last March on corruption charges.
Kevin B. O'Connor, the United States attorney for Connecticut, said the plea showed that no one was above the law and ''ensures the removal of a judge who was not suited to act in matters of utmost importance to the people of Connecticut.''
Mr. Brennan will be sentenced on April 16. He faces a maximum of five years in jail and a fine of $250,000. But under the terms of his plea agreement, Mr. Brennan is eligible for probation, and the government has stipulated it is not recommending any specific sentence to the sentencing judge, Chief Judge Robert N. Chatigny of Federal District Court.
During his tenure on the bench, Mr. Brennan sentenced a Little League baseball coach convicted of child molestation to 15 years in prison. As a lawyer, he was once chairman of the litigation section of the Connecticut Bar Association and was a founder of a state trial advocacy organization for new lawyers.
Monday's federal conviction was Mr. Brennan's second time on the other side of the law. When he was 18, he pleaded guilty to forgery, was given a suspended sentence and was put on probation. The conviction stemmed from his actions while working at a temporary employment agency in Tennessee. Mr. Brennan stole two company checks and made them out to himself in the amount of $200. He was later pardoned by Gov. Ned McWherter of Tennessee.
Michael Lawlor, a state representative who is chairman of the Judiciary Committee, recalled on Monday that Mr. Brennan never sought to conceal the conviction when he was being considered for the bench.
''One great tragedy of this is he could have been a poster child for redemption and instead became a poster child for a guy who never learned his lesson,'' Mr. Lawlor said.
