As jury selection begins today in Martha Stewart's trial on federal charges of conspiracy, securities fraud and obstruction of justice, a large and lingering question is whether she will take the stand in her own defense.
Her lawyer, Robert Morvillo, said yesterday that he had not decided whether to call her as a witness in the case, which stems from her sale of shares of ImClone Systems in 2001.
''I never make that decision until the close of the government's case,'' he said. The trial will probably reach that point some time in mid-February. Meanwhile, Ms. Stewart, whom he described as ''cautious, optimistic and working hard to make sure we get the best possible result,'' is spending hours preparing for possible testimony. ''Every defendant prepares for trial,'' he said, ''and obviously there is always the possibility that the defendant will testify, and any defendant that testifies will prepare.''
Her potential appearance could be double-edged for her and her co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic, a former Merrill Lynch stockbroker who unsuccessfully sought to have his trial separated from hers, citing enormous negative publicity around Ms. Stewart.
Ms. Stewart, instructor to millions in the domestic arts and creator of a media empire, has a presence that could influence some jurors, particularly if they are fond of her publications or if they are generally sympathetic to entrepreneurship like hers. Since her indictment, she has also carefully cultivated a new image -- that of blameless victim of an overzealous prosecution -- by maintaining a Web site that focuses solely on her side of the story and sitting for hourlong interviews with Barbara Walters and Larry King in which she refused to discuss details of the case but declared, ''I am innocent.''
But if she takes the stand she also faces cross-examination by an experienced group of prosecutors, including Karen Patton Seymour, the head of the criminal division for the United States attorney's office in Manhattan, and Michael Schachter, who argued the case against the founder of ImClone, Samuel D. Waksal, who received the maximum sentence after pleading guilty to multiple charges, including securities fraud. He is serving seven years in prison for orchestrating efforts to sell ImClone stock ahead of a critical company announcement that drove down the share price.
The indictment accuses Ms. Stewart, 62, of lying about the reasons for her sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone, which was run at the time by her friend Dr. Waksal. A revised indictment issued yesterday deleted some examples of what prosecutors called illegal acts that had been included in the original version. If Ms. Stewart does not testify, jurors may find that puzzling, given her public relations drive to date.
''I think the jury always wonders why a defendant doesn't take the stand,'' Mr. Morvillo said, ''and that has a lot to do with the way defense attorneys approach a trial. There are always a lot of very good reasons why defendants don't testify. It is really very fact-specific and case-specific.''
Richard M. Strassberg, Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, declined to comment on whether his client would testify. He added, ''Peter has been working hard in preparation for the start of the case, and he is eager to have all the facts finally come out and believes he will be fully vindicated at trial.''
Potential jurors will be given questionnaires today that are intended to weed out those who might be less than impartial. Those who remain will be asked to return for courtroom sessions beginning Jan. 20, when they will be questioned by prosecutors and defense lawyers who must agree to let them participate in the case.
As the charges against Ms. Stewart are discussed, jurors will most likely face an issue at the heart of the securities fraud charge: Is there much separation between Martha Stewart the individual and Martha Stewart the business executive?
Her several homes also function as backdrops for her television shows, and she receives an additional payment from her company for that. Her company's outside counsel when the investigation became public, Andrew Nussbaum, to whom she initially turned when she was under investigation, is married to an editor at Martha Stewart Living magazine.
Her empire, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, designed as a perfect continuum of programming that feeds product lines that in turn fuel advertising revenue, has been battered as her personal legal situation has unfolded, with her magazine's subscriber base shrinking, ad sales drooping and her trademark television program losing its once-prime slots on CBS. The share price, which was $19 when the investigation became public, is now $10.60. Ms. Stewart stepped down as chairwoman and chief executive after being indicted, but remains a board member and the most influential shareholder.
The government contends that by issuing statements defending her ImClone stock trade as ''entirely lawful,'' Ms. Stewart illegally manipulated the price of her own company's stock by halting its downward slide. Some jurors might conclude that she merely spoke up to clear her name, as Ms. Stewart's legal team maintains, while others would agree with prosecutors that in doing so she could kill two birds with one stone.
Ms. Stewart's lawyers sought to have the securities fraud charge dropped in motions filed in November, but Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, who is presiding over the case, did not agree, although she called the charge ''novel.''
That will matter less to a jury than whether the government can prove its contention, one lawyer not involved in the case said. ''The jury isn't going to recognize the securities fraud charge as novel,'' said Michael J. Shepard, a former federal prosecutor who is now a partner with Heller, Ehrman, White &amp; McAuliffe in San Francisco. ''Most jurors at bottom want to be fair, and if they think that it's fair to let somebody, when they are getting batted about in the press, say 'No, I didn't do it,''' they may acquit Ms. Stewart on that charge.
The obstruction charges she faces may be more difficult for her side to win. Ms. Stewart told investigators that she sold her ImClone stock because she and Mr. Bacanovic had earlier agreed to sell it if the price fell below $60 a share. She issued a statement to that effect in June 2002 and resolutely repeated it. Mr. Bacanovic also told investigators there was a standing agreement to sell if the price fell below $60.
But Mr. Bacanovic's assistant, Douglas E. Faneuil, who was alone in the Merrill office in Rockefeller Center on Dec. 27, the day Ms. Stewart made her trade, has said that he was ordered to tell her that the Waksals were selling their stock.
Another factor that may work in the defendants' favor is that some of the public anger over corporate fraud may be abating. But Mr. Shepard said evidence was going to be more important. ''The general tenor and atmosphere of the country does reach down into juries, and still they are going to be fair,'' he said. ''If the government doesn't have it, they don't have it.''
