The past is everywhere in the Upper Egypt city of Akhmim, and mining it is a constant occupation.
At a government archaeological site, workers haul bucketfuls of soil and sand from a vast crease in the earth, gradually revealing a mammoth temple from the reign of Ramses II. But unsanctioned digging goes on all over Akhmim -- at an ancient cemetery riddled with holes left by looters; at farms and construction sites; inside homes where residents, sometimes inspired by the divinations of fortune tellers, hunt for treasure beneath dirt floors.
A decade ago, laborers excavating a building site in Akhmim hit a four-foot-high, tombstone-shaped slab of limestone incised with hieroglyphics and the image of Osiris, god of the lower world. The ancient Egyptians offered this kind of monument, known as a stele, as a tribute to a god or a dead relative.
Under Egyptian law, the stele should have been turned over to the government, a recovered shard of the national patrimony. Instead, something considerably more commonplace happened. It became an outlaw. Quietly, it passed into the global antiquities market. Five years later, cleansed of its illicit origins, it emerged in New York as a rich man's prize, in the foyer of a Fifth Avenue apartment.
Journeys like this one are traced by countless artifacts from Akhmims all over the world. Typically they begin in silence and end in silence, few questions asked.
But the stele from Akhmim has given up its secrets. Two years ago, it was seized by federal agents in New York as part of a court case. The records from that case, together with dozens of interviews and documents gathered on three continents, provide that rarest of commodities in the antiquities trade: a detailed account of the smuggling, marketing and selling of a piece of loot.
That narrative reveals the inner motivations and mechanics of the flourishing worldwide market for high-end antiquities. And while much of the material flowing through that market is unassailably clean, the stele's progress shows how seamlessly looted objects can blend in, whether dealers are aware of it or not.
''People think that there is an illicit market and a legitimate market,'' said Ricardo J. Elia, associate professor of archaeology at Boston University and a frequent critic of the antiquities industry. ''In fact, it is the same.''
The trade in looted antiquities is, of course, as old as antiquity. Its precise dimensions are necessarily unknown, though Interpol, the international police organization, says looting is probably vastly underreported, since so many countries lack the resources to safeguard historical sites.
Even so, what is clear is that the decade of the stele's passage was one of enormous changes in the antiquities world, all accompanied by heightened legal scrutiny and the racheting up of a long and bitter debate about the ethics of the trade.
Political upheaval opened up new sources of loot all over the globe. Economic globalization and the rise of the Internet helped speed those goods to market.
To critics of the industry -- largely archaeologists and some foreign governments -- the market's voracious demand for fresh objects is responsible for the continuing destruction of sites.
But dealers say they have become increasingly vigilant in recent years, far more conscientious about operating within the antiquities laws of countries like Egypt. They say they make every effort to sell only legitimate artifacts.
''I think 15 years ago, people took a more relaxed view of things,'' said James Ede, a London-based dealer and head of the International Association of Dealers in Ancient Art. ''The feeling was that these were stupid laws, they were laws in other countries, they didn't apply to us.'' Today, he said, that feeling has completely changed.
Still, the stele's journey out of Egypt illuminates the powerful, persistent tension between efforts to stanch the trade in loot and the raw instincts of the marketplace.
Across more than 5,000 miles, five owners and two snookered would-be owners, every person involved with the stele propelled it onward. At any moment, the story could have been brought up short. But no one seemed eager to ask or answer a couple of simple questions: Where did this object come from? How did it arrive at my door?
One dealer who handled the stele, Bernard Blondeel, has an explanation for that. ''Perhaps if you ask too many questions,'' he said, ''too many things will disappear.''
Akhmim: Fertile Ground
Late on a steamy June night in 1994, a man named Ali Farag, his eyes blindfolded by a towel, sat in a car traveling disorienting circles through the earthen alleyways of Akhmim. When the car stopped, the towel was removed, and Mr. Farag found himself at a construction site on the edge of town.
It was there that the Akhmim stele had been unearthed several months before, along with several small statues, a painted wooden sarcophagus and three smaller steles. An interesting find, but hardly a surprising one in Akhmim.
Modern Akhmim, a weaving and trading center 350 miles south of Cairo, has the look of a Nileside boomtown, chockablock with construction cranes and apartment towers hastily built for people flowing in from the countryside. But beneath the surface lies an archaeological layer cake, rich with the leavings of the past -- the early Islamic layer upon the Roman layer upon the Greek layer upon the monuments and everyday objects of the city the ancient Egyptians named for the fertility god Min.
This ancient wealth -- together with Akhmim's poverty, rapid development and easy corruption -- has made the city a fertile source of fresh goods for smugglers.
Places like this can be found all over the world. Some countries, like Egypt, Italy and Greece, have been feeding the market for centuries. Others -- like China, Afghanistan and the old East bloc lands -- have risen to prominence just in recent years.
In Akhmim, as elsewhere, the trade begins with the impoverished amateurs.
On a recent night, Mamdouh al-Qaoud, a blacksmith, walked a visitor toward Al Salamouni mountain, a long limestone ridge pockmarked with the violated tombs of a sprawling ancient necropolis.
''Everyone digs for antiquities in the mountains,'' Mr. Qaoud said. ''They feel it is their birthright to inherit these antiquities from their great ancestors.''
The authorities tend to view the idea of cultural patrimony a little differently. Under a law passed in 1983, all newly discovered artifacts are property of the state, export prohibited.
''Poor people who are digging in their houses get arrested all the time,'' said Makhlouf Abdel Karim Khalifa, a butcher. ''But those who are really in the business of smuggling are careful and protected.''
Mr. Farag, a thin man with a thick mustache, was very much in the business, according to the Egyptian authorities. For much of the 1990's, they say, he and his brothers ran one of Egypt's biggest smuggling rings out of a curio shop-turned-jewelry emporium housed in a 19th-century Euro-Islamic building in downtown Cairo.
Farmers stopped by on market days to sell artifacts from their fields. Village leaders and looters called in tips about new discoveries. None of it would have worked without the complicity of government officials bribed to look the other way and even provide artifacts, court records show.
The Farags also offered builders a profitable way around a big problem: what to do with a significant archaeological find that could lead the authorities to shut down a job. Still, when Ali Farag arrived in Akhmim in June of 1994, the builders knew they had to handle him with care, according to a journal kept by one of his close associates. If he knew the precise site of the strike, he could bargain down the price by threatening to expose the builders to the police.
But with the men gathered at the site and Mr. Farag's blindfold lifted, negotiations began. Mr. Farag was shown the hidden artifacts, along with blueprints of the project and where each piece had been found, according to the journal. The builders wanted $70,000 for everything.
Just how much they settled for is not clear, but soon after Mr. Farag left Akhmim, the deal was done.
Cairo: The Smuggler
Every local smuggler needs a bridge to the West. For Ali Farag, it was an Englishman named Jonathan Tokeley-Parry.
For several years, Mr. Tokeley-Parry had been a regular visitor to an apartment in a Cairo suburb where the Farags hid their latest finds. Nearly a decade later, he still recalls the smell of the place, that deep, dank scent of fresh-dug earth.
''It was the smell of tombs and ancient places,'' he said in a recent interview. ''It was like being in a suspended bubble in time.''
Mr. Tokeley-Parry says he met Mr. Farag in 1988, at the old Windsor Hotel in Cairo. Mr. Tokeley-Parry, movie-star handsome and Cambridge-educated, then in his late 30's, had gone to Egypt as an adviser to a Danish dealer. The arrangement, he admits, was compromised by his own naïveté. On his advice, the dealer had just spent $20,000 on a collection of amulets that quickly proved counterfeit.
If Mr. Farag found his bridge, Mr. Tokeley-Parry found a partner who, piece by piece, taught him the finer points of the trade. Smuggling, it turned out, was a comfortable fit for his unusual mix of inclinations and skills. He was already well known as a talented restorer of antiquities. His self-image, though, was rather more ornate: He saw himself as a throwback to the days when aristocratic adventurers roamed the exotic East claiming treasures at will.
Of Egypt he later wrote, ''You feel that anything might turn up at any moment, as you'd feel an approaching train.''
Smugglers use a variety of ruses to move their goods. Mr. Tokeley-Parry used one particularly suited to his restorer's skills: He disguised artifacts as tourist junk and walked them through customs.
To take a massive head of Pharaoh Amenhotep III out of Egypt, for example, he coated it with a removable adhesive called Paraloid B72, then covered it with a plaster carapace in the shape of a souvenir bust. He painted the piece in garish reds and golds and completed the illusion by mounting it on a base inscribed with the name of a Cairo hotel that sold curios.
Ali Farag could not be located for this article. But Mr. Tokeley-Parry says that by the summer of 1994, their six-year partnership had produced a formidable record: more than 60 trips between Egypt and England, more than 2,000 objects smuggled without incident.
As he walked into the Farags' Cairo hideaway and saw the stele propped against a wall, Mr. Tokeley-Parry was struck by its size and its crisp condition. But he also worried that it might be about as genuine as that $20,000 heap of amulets.
Sitting on the dusty floor, he recalls, he gazed at the stele almost trancelike, seeing if it felt right, if any details seemed out of place. Trolling the raw umber surface, he saw a typical memorial scene -- four human figures approaching Osiris with a table of offerings, and above them two piercing eyes representing the sun god Ra. Among the eight columns of hieroglyphics, Mr. Tokeley-Parry recognized the cartouche -- a characteristic oblong symbol -- of Psamtik I, a pharaoh of the 26th Dynasty, whose reign began around 660 B.C. Objects from that period, a time of great artistic flowering, were much prized by collectors.
Next, he slowly moved a photographer's loupe across the limestone face, inspecting the way it had aged, and the minuscule markings left by the carver. Ancient copper tools, he says, leave softer incisions than modern steel chisels.
The Akhmim stele bore the gratifying signature of copper.
Oxford: The Expert
Soon after the stele was discovered, Dr. Jaromir Malek, director of the Griffith Institute of the Ashmolean Museum at Oxford University, received a photograph of it in the mail, along with a note from a man named Kim Pegler, who identified himself as a lawyer. He was hoping, he said, to obtain some expert information for a client.
''I am extremely grateful to you for your help and hope to show the pieces and meet you in the near future,'' Mr. Pegler wrote.
The Griffith is the world's foremost archive of Egyptology, and like many scholarly institutions, it is generous with its expertise. That generosity, though, can sometimes be abused by smugglers, which was exactly what was going on with the stele.
Having established its authenticity, Mr. Tokeley-Parry says, he knew that the stele might have a different problem: Perhaps it had not been unearthed by accident but had actually been stolen from a known archaeological site or a storeroom. If so, a record might exist -- a photograph or description in a journal -- that would identify it and kill its market value.
One defense was to dupe an expert like Dr. Malek into researching the piece. Hence the letter from Mr. Pegler, who was not a lawyer but a friend of Mr. Tokeley-Parry, according to court documents.
Dr. Malek translated the stele's hieroglyphics, which told of an important government official charged with keeping track of horse populations, who had commissioned the stele as a family memorial.
''The owner of the stela is Pasenenkhons, 'Scribe of the Horse,' '' Dr. Malek wrote to Mr. Pegler.
Dr. Malek also consulted the institute's compendium of all known Egyptian monuments -- known in the trade as ''Porter &amp; Moss'' -- for references to the stele or to Pasenenkhons (pronounced Pa-sen-en-CONS). He found none; it was unknown.
For Mr. Tokeley-Parry, that meant it was good to go.
New York: The Dealer
Not long after, the fax machine in the galleries of Frederick Schultz Ancient Art on 57th Street in Manhattan disgorged a letter from Mr. Tokeley-Parry, excitedly describing the discovery at Akhmim. The stele of Pasenenkhons, he wrote, was the ''best I've seen for years on the market'' and could be bought, with the rest of the hoard, for $70,000.
The letter was a remarkable document, putting into writing what is normally only hinted at -- that looted artifacts were for sale. What made it even more remarkable was its timing.
Increasingly, the antiquities trade was being accused of illicitly trafficking in plunder. A number of major museums had begun demanding that dealers provide greater documentation of pieces' ownership histories, or provenance. At the same time, several countries, most notably Greece and Turkey, were asking American courts to order the return of objects they claimed under their national antiquities laws.
The dealers counterattacked. They argued that the United States should not recognize those foreign laws, that there was a bright legal line separating objects stolen from an individual owner -- a museum or collector -- and those that were looted, that is, unearthed and taken from the country of origin.
Frederick Schultz was a key figure in the industry's lobbying campaign; he would soon become president of a leading trade group, the National Association of Dealers in Ancient, Oriental and Primitive Art.
By all accounts, Mr. Schultz -- a preppy-looking Princeton graduate whose father had been deputy chairman of the Federal Reserve -- was an articulate voice for his industry. He was also a politically savvy one, and he warned his colleagues that, legal principle notwithstanding, any obvious missteps would help arm their critics.
''Always use a customs agent when importing objects,'' he wrote in his notes for one speech. ''Be careful who your suppliers are, and stress to them the importance that stolen things not be circulated.''
For Mr. Schultz, in his early 40's and still relatively new to the business, that high-profile spokesman's role served to enhance his standing. So did his relationship with Jonathan Tokeley-Parry.
In each branch of the antiquities market -- Classical, pre-Columbian, Far Eastern and so forth -- there are perhaps a few dozen dealers of significance. But the very top ranks are occupied by the dealers with the choicest pieces -- the rare and the never before seen. Put another way, given the nature of the hierarchy, Mr. Schultz's ambition came with a certain incentive to deal in plunder, the stock in trade of Mr. Tokeley-Parry.
A case in point, according to papers from a later court case, was the piece that began their partnership, the head of Amenhotep III. Mr. Tokeley-Parry had bought it from a builder for $6,000. Mr. Schultz sold it for $1.2 million, and it was soon acquired by the leading dealer of the day, Robin Symes.
To complete that journey, though, the smugglers had not simply sheathed Amenhotep in red and gold and sped him through customs as tourist schlock. They also had to deal with the increasingly sticky issue of provenance.
Dealers and auction houses often point out that many pieces without clear provenance are still perfectly legitimate, having been purchased by collectors before countries began restricting the trade. But dealers also sometimes used that argument as a sort of wink-and-a-nod cover story, describing questionable pieces as coming from, say, an ''old English'' or ''old Swiss'' collection.
In 1991, with the spotlight coming on the industry, Mr. Schultz and Mr. Tokeley-Parry simply constructed a more detailed cover story for Amenhotep III. They created a phony collection, supposedly amassed by a civil engineer named Thomas Alcock, who roamed the British Empire in the early 1900's. Mr. Tokeley-Parry used 1920's conservation techniques to create a veneer of authentic provenance; display stickers, for instance, were made from Victorian-era pharmacy labels soaked in tea for the yellowed brittleness of age.
Now their portfolio was poised to grow again, with the addition of the stele of Pasenenkhons. In 1995, financial records indicate, Mr. Schultz wired at least $52,000 to Swiss bank accounts controlled by Mr. Tokeley-Parry or Mr. Farag, as down payment for the pieces.
The next spring, Mr. Tokeley-Parry traveled to Geneva. He had an added incentive to complete the deal, he recalls. He had been arrested in Britain and charged with illicit trafficking in antiquities. The Akhmim stele, he hoped, would mean one more big score, an infusion of cash before he had to stand trial.
He says Ali Farag had assured him the stele would be in Geneva any day. He waited for two weeks, but it never showed up.
Zurich: The Free Port
In the best Swiss tradition, the next phase of the stele's journey remains obscure. For a time, a half ton of stone seems simply to have disappeared. Mr. Tokeley-Parry says he does not know what happened. Somewhere in the fog, perhaps, there was a double cross. Certainly, there was a change in plans, and a whole new set of characters.
The paper trail picks up again in late 1997, with a shipping manifest showing that the stele of Pasenenkhons, along with two of the smaller Akhmim steles, had been processed at a warehouse in Zurich.
The warehouse was part of a network of sprawling complexes, known as free ports, that handle huge volumes of valuable -- and usually perfectly legitimate -- cargo, from tractors to machine parts to ancient art. Still, duty free and governed by the Swiss system of business discretion, the free ports have helped make Switzerland a crossroads of the smuggler's world.
They are self-contained and secretive places, secured behind cyclone fences in major cities and at the airports. Forklifts transport merchandise down silent cinder-block corridors to bare storage lockers and opulent showrooms set behind metal doors identified by numbers, not company names. Smuggled cargo can enter a free port, change hands and be sent on its way with the barest wisp of a paper trail.
To finance the civil war in Sierra Leone, for example, rebel armies used Swiss free ports to disguise the source of tens of millions of dollars of ''blood diamonds'' dispersed to the West, according to a United Nations report.
As for antiquities, Swiss officials say that in the last five years, they have received 75 requests from foreign governments to help track artifacts they believe were smuggled into the country. ''When there is a case, there is often a link with Switzerland,'' said Marc-André Renold, director of the Art Law Centre in Geneva.
Just who brought the stele of Pasenenkhons into the country, and when, is not clear. But an official of a shipper at the free port that processed the stele and its companion pieces, Rolf Kutny of Rodolphe Haller A.G., said they had been stored in a locker leased to a company called ''H. H. Antiques.''
An executive of the free port, Adriano Bienz, said that as a matter of policy, he could not disclose any details about H. H. Antiques. But Mr. Kutny said the company had rented a locker for a short period and then disappeared.
''It was a fantasy company,'' he said.
And in November 1997, the stele was on the move again. A shipping manifest shows that a truck left Zurich for Geneva, carrying the three pieces from Akhmim.
Geneva: The Gallery
Phoenix Ancient Art, on a winding cobblestone street in downtown Geneva, has the feel of a private museum, its minimalist display space a palette of grays. On any given day, a visitor might find sculpted torsos from Greece, silver ceremonial vessels from Mesopotamia, jewelry inlaid with lapis lazuli. It was there that the stele of Pasenenkhons surfaced in late 1997.
The gallery is owned by two brothers, Ali and Hicham Aboutaam, and in the ebb and flow at the heights of the dealing world, they were very much on the way up.
The brothers had inherited the business from their father, Sleiman Aboutaam, who had started it in the 1960's in Beirut, then a hub of the market. But the sons, tall, urbane and in their 30's, had transformed it into an enterprise of an entirely different order.
They were selling to museums like the Metropolitan in New York, as well as to major collectors like the financier Michael Steinhardt and the designer Bill Blass. They were fearless players on the auction scene and supplied artifacts to other dealers in Europe and America, including Frederick Schultz. They opened a Manhattan gallery, just off Madison Avenue, and created a digital photographic archive of their changing inventory of as many as 5,000 pieces.
''They are on the top of the world,'' said Robert Hecht, an American dealer who in the 70's was there himself. ''They have realized their father's dreams.''
It was their father, the brothers said, who purchased the stele of Pasenenkhons and its two companion pieces at the Zurich free port from H. H. Antiques. As for who was behind H. H. Antiques, the brothers say they have no idea. Their father, who may have, died in a Swissair crash in 1998.
At the request of The New York Times, the Aboutaams checked their files for clues to the seller's identity. They said they could find no records -- a check, an invoice or a ledger entry -- describing the sale.
''Nothing could lead me to who was the actual person who had these when they were offered to my father,'' Hicham Aboutaam said. ''I expected our papers to be better than that.''
At the time of the purchase, the brothers said, they did not know that the pieces had been looted. But they did try to make sure they had not been stolen.
As with any object involving a substantial investment -- they estimated their father had paid about $70,000 for the three steles -- they sent pictures to the Art Loss Register, an organization that keeps a database of artworks reported stolen. The search came up negative.
The Aboutaams also took a step to help market their investment. They asked a scholar, Massimo Patanè of the University of Geneva, to translate the hieroglyphics on the three steles and write a scholarly paper about them. Archaeologists are divided over the propriety of such articles, with some arguing that they can give unprovenanced artifacts a sheen of legitimacy.
Professor Patanè's article was published in a small German journal in autumn 1998. ''This group,'' he wrote, ''remarkable both for its variety and the genealogical and religious information it contains, shows once again what happy surprises the antiquities trade has to offer.''
Paris: The Buyer
An article like Professor Patanè's is but one element in the sort of marketing campaign used to propel a piece to its ultimate destination -- a museum or private collection. It fell to Bernard Blondeel to shepherd the stele of Pasenenkhons onward.
Mr. Blondeel, a Belgian with a gallery in Paris, had long specialized in medieval tapestry. But he was looking for a way into the antiquities market, and when he walked into Phoenix Ancient Art on a July afternoon in 1998, the stele caught his eye. By day's end, he had spent about $500,000 for the stele, its companions and other artifacts.
The stele changed hands with few hard questions asked. Mr. Blondeel said he did not know which brother he had dealt with. But in either case, he said, the Aboutaams' reputation was all the assurance he needed.
''He said that there was no problem with the provenance,'' recalled Mr. Blondeel. He declined to make available any sales documents given him by the Aboutaams.
With the deal closed, Mr. Blondeel purchased a full-page advertisement in Revue du Louvre, a glossy Paris gallery guide, that showed the stele at its monumental best, bathed in light against a black background.
Mr. Blondeel also took the Akhmim pieces on tour. In the fall of 1998, the Pasenenkhons stele was shown at the Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires in Paris. Mr. Blondeel says he believes that he brought one of the smaller steles that year to the annual antiques show at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan. A few booths away sat Frederick Schultz, who had paid for that piece and lost it a few years before.
Mr. Blondeel's efforts bore fruit in May 1999, he says, when he was approached by a New York developer, H. Henry Elghanayan, who had seen an advertisement for the stele of Pasenenkhons in an antiquities magazine. The dealer said Mr. Elghanayan, chief executive of the Rockrose Development Corporation, later saw the piece at his Paris gallery and agreed to buy it.
For his part, Mr. Elghanayan would not say if he had asked Mr. Blondeel for details of the stele's provenance, or what, if anything, the dealer had told him. ''The dealer is a reputable one,'' he said. ''The dealer stood behind the work.'' What's more, he added, the dealer had promised a refund in the unlikely event of a problem.
The price was $210,000, a fair bit of appreciation for one piece in a haul that had begun with a $70,000 asking price. Five years later, it had finally come to rest, in an apartment on Fifth Avenue, across the street from the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
New York: The Recovery
For Frederick Schultz, the stele of Pasenenkhons was the one that got away. In the winter of 2002, it caught up with him.
Legal trouble had been circling the dealer, in fact, ever since the stele had vanished somewhere between Cairo and Zurich in 1997. That year, his partner, Mr. Tokeley-Parry, had been convicted in the British smuggling case and sentenced to six years in prison. Soon the Scotland Yard detective on that case, Richard Ellis, had begun asking questions about Mr. Schultz.
To make a case against the dealer, though, American investigators had to identify the pieces he and Mr. Tokeley-Parry had conspired to smuggle and sell. They believed that they would find evidence of them in the mountain of photographs and records Scotland Yard had seized from Mr. Tokeley-Parry's home.
But as they sifted through the papers, investigators found themselves at a loss to distinguish among all the heads, statues and vases in the photographs, or to interpret Mr. Tokeley-Parry's professional slang.
''We would look at his letters and say, 'What does this look like?' '' recalled Marcia Issacson, the lead prosecutor on the case. ''We didn't know what he was talking about.''
For help, they went to the Brooklyn Museum of Art, where Edna R. Russmann, an Egyptologist, was asked to match the photographs with pieces she had seen in Mr. Schultz's gallery. After months of work, an F.B.I. agent, Patrick Gildea, showed her a few last odds and ends.
''There was a kind of poor photo of a group of three steles,'' Ms. Russmann recalled. Though she was impressed by the pieces, they rang no bells. But months later, she saw an article about a large stele and two smaller companions. The steles, she realized, were the ones Mr. Gildea had asked her about.
In fact, the article was the one the Swiss professor, Mr. Patanè, had written at the request of the Aboutaams; the photograph was credited to their gallery, Phoenix Ancient Art. The big piece was the stele of Pasenenkhons.
Mr. Schultz had never sold, or even seen, the stele. But it became a stealth weapon for the prosecution: of all the pieces in the indictment, it was among the few on which the statute of limitations had yet to expire.
Mr. Schultz declined to be interviewed for this article, beyond saying he was not guilty. But at trial in New York in early 2002, his lawyers argued that he was unaware of Egypt's antiquities law and had been duped by Mr. Tokeley-Parry, now embittered and turned star government witness.
The dealer's conviction, for conspiring to smuggle stolen artifacts, set the stage for a legal battle over a fundamental issue, the one that had been at the heart of his lobbying efforts: Does American law consider pieces looted from countries like Egypt stolen property?
Last July, a federal appeals panel in New York ruled that it does, as long as those countries actively enforce their antiquities laws. Mr. Schultz is serving a 33-month sentence at a federal prison in Fort Dix, N.J.
Several months after the trial, two F.B.I. agents, assisted by three movers and several porters, removed the stele from Mr. Elghanayan's apartment. He has been reimbursed by Mr. Blondeel, who, in turn, has gotten his money back from the Aboutaams. As for the pieces Mr. Schultz and Mr. Tokeley-Parry handled, some have been recovered. Others are missing.
The two smaller steles from Akhmim are still in the possession of Mr. Blondeel, who says he is waiting for instructions about where to send them. He is sure of one thing, he says: His fling with unprovenanced antiquities is over.
And the stele of Pasenenkhons is now in the Cairo Museum, a hero, of sorts, in Egypt's campaign to reclaim its stolen treasures.
Epilogue: New Troubles
There are signs that perhaps the age-old ways of the trade are beginning to give way.
In the last year, two important Western nations on the antiquities trail have moved to crack down on smuggling. Swiss lawmakers are expected to pass a law requiring greater documentation for articles passing through its free ports, while Britain has made it a crime to handle an artifact knowing that it was looted after 2003.
Among the dealers, there is concern that the new legal climate -- and especially the appeals court's ruling in the Schultz case -- will unfairly dam up the trade. On their own, the dealers say, they have become far more scrupulous about asking the tough questions of provenance.
''Auctioneers, dealers, collectors and museums typically exercise exceptional care and diligence prior to buying and selling works of art,'' the dealers group that Mr. Schultz once headed said in a statement.
The Aboutaam brothers say they, too, have become exceptionally careful; they devote more time than ever to researching provenance, they say. They know well, they say, the questions their competitors ask about them in private -- questions about where they get some of their best pieces. But the truth of the matter, they insist, is that the Akhmim stele would never pass their muster now.
''People are always badmouthing us,'' Ali Aboutaam said in a recent interview. ''We are used to it.''
It was not long, though, before the questioning went public.
In mid-December, Hicham Aboutaam was arrested at his New York apartment and charged with smuggling a silver ceremonial drinking vessel known as a rhyton into the United States from Iran and falsely claiming that it came from Syria.
The authorities say the piece, in the shape of a griffin, may be part of the Western Cave Treasure, hundreds of works in silver discovered in the late 1980's at a cave near the Iran-Iraq border. Soon afterward, treasure hunters plundered the site and many of the pieces, which date to 700 B.C., passed into the antiquities market.
In 2000, according to a criminal complaint filed in federal court in Manhattan, Hicham Aboutaam hand-carried the piece on a flight from Zurich to Newark, planning to sell it to a collector in the United States. At the time, an affiliate of Phoenix Ancient Art based in the Grenadine Islands, Tanis Antiquities Ltd., issued a customs document identifying Syria as the piece's country of origin, the complaint adds. Imports from Iran are severely restricted and monitored.
When the collector -- Paula Cussi, a Metropolitan Museum trustee -- had first seen the griffin the previous year at the Aboutaams' Geneva gallery, the brothers had told her it was from Iran, the complaint states. But Ms. Cussi demanded proof of authenticity. So in 2002, the complaint adds, Hicham Aboutaam sent the piece to three experts, who determined that its workmanship or metal content were consistent with other objects from the Western Cave and surrounding sites in Iran. Armed with those reports, Mr. Aboutaam closed the deal that year for $950,000, the court papers say.
Mr. Aboutaam, who was released on $500,000 bail, has yet to be indicted, and neither he nor his lawyer, Peter Chavkin, returned calls seeking comment. A lawyer for Ms. Cussi, who is not accused of any wrongdoing, said she recently got back her money for the piece, which has been seized by the authorities.
Ali Aboutaam is in trouble, too.
At about the same time as Hicham was arrested in New York, Ali's name was being read out in a Cairo courtroom, one of 31 people accused of being part of a long-running ring that had smuggled artifacts through Switzerland to Western dealers and galleries. The charges grew out of a raid last summer at the main Geneva free port.
The indicted included several high-ranking Egyptian police and government officials; the mastermind, prosecutors said, was Tariq al-Suwaysi, a politician and businessman whose lavish way of life had earned him the nickname ''the Prince.'' Also among the accused were several members of the Farag family, the clan that had bought the stele of Pasenenkhons from the builders in Akhmim.
Egypt's general prosecutor, Maher Abdel Wahed, said Mr. Aboutaam had been indicted based on telephone conversations secretly recorded last year, along with other information that showed he had received smuggled artifacts through Mr. Suwaysi's ring. The prosecutor said the two men had been recorded discussing, often in code, the delivery of smuggled pieces.
''They were partners,'' he said.
After reviewing transcripts of the recorded conversations, Ali Aboutaam issued a statement saying he and his brother constantly received telephone calls from people seeking to sell them objects or claiming to be owed money by their father, Sleiman Aboutaam. The calls from Mr. Suwaysi, he said, fit into that category.
A Swiss lawyer for Mr. Aboutaam, Mario Roberty, said that while his client knew of Mr. Suwaysi, it was only because Sleiman Aboutaam might have dealt with him.
Added Ali, ''I never bought from him, for sure.''
A documentary produced in conjunction with this article will be broadcast tomorrow night on the Discovery Times Channel.
Loot | Along the Antiquities Trail  Correction:  February 26, 2004, Thursday  A front-page article on Monday about the global trade in looted antiquities misspelled the surname of an assistant United States attorney who prosecuted a New York dealer. She is Marcia Isaacson, not Issacson.
