Are you addicted to scandal-scented, fact-filled television shows about celebrities but feel that you should get off that couch for at least one night? Then you might consider the Lincoln Center Theater production ''Big Bill,'' A. R. Gurney's talking résumé of a play about the great American tennis star Bill Tilden.
While it features an intriguingly mannered study in ambivalence from John Michael Higgins in the title role, this thin patchwork drama from the prolific author of ''Far East'' and ''The Dining Room'' isn't much different from those cut-and-paste bio-documentaries on A&amp;E. When the play is over, you may find that Mr. Gurney's dialogue has melted into a single newsreel-style voice-over in your head.
Tilden's high-flying career and precipitous crash were certainly the stuff of drama. Called ''the Great Gatbsy of tennis'' at his peak in the 1920's, Tilden revolutionized both the popular perception of the game and the way it was played. Yet when in 1950 he was voted the outstanding tennis player of the first half of the 20th century in an Associated Press poll, he had only recently completed his second prison term for making sexual advances to a teenage boy.
''Big Bill,'' which opened last night at the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater under Mark Lamos's oddly flaccid direction, scrambles chronology to underline this fall from grace. Scenes of Tilden in his prime, playing to adoring crowds like a Barrymore of the net, are punctuated by sequences in which he hangs his head, a broken man, before a censorious judge.
The shaping conceit is that for Tilden, a son of financially strapped gentility from the Philadelphia Main Line, all the world was a tennis court, and every tennis court a stage. John Lee Beatty's set accordingly suggests a genteel, Newport-style grass court, with the umpire's seat doubling as a judge's bench, and the same actor (David Cromwell) appearing as judge and umpire.
The dialogue is predictably full of metaphors from the game. (Tilden to a judge after his first arrest: ''Apparently, I reached across the net.'') The anecdote-heavy, famous-name-spiced script is also stocked with images of the theater, as when Tilden and the opera diva Mary Garden (Margaret Welsh, the only woman in the show's protean ensemble) compare notes on winning an audience over.
The show business references are not gratuitous. Tilden loved the theater, writing and bankrolling plays (without success), and even had a disastrous fling at being a stage actor. It is inevitable that Mr. Higgins (best known for the films ''Best in Show'' and ''A Mighty Wind'') should pick up on the idea of Tilden as a man who was always, in effect, acting a part.
Holding a racket as if it were a rapier, framing his words with vaudevillian gestures and occasionally breaking into a chorus boy scamper, Mr. Higgins's Tilden is an uneasy composite of Jazz Age archetypes. He brings to mind a tentative cross between Douglas Fairbanks and Rudy Vallee. But his swagger is always being undermined by the lust that brims from his eyes whenever an attractive ball boy appears. (This production keeps four good-looking young men circulating in various hero-tempting roles.)
It's a fascinating but ultimately ineffective portrayal. Mr. Higgins's performance registers the notion of a man who papered over his hazy notions of his own identity with borrowed gestures but it seldom conveys the commanding spirit and drive of a champion who mesmerized fans.
''Big Bill,'' which also features Stephen Rowe in an assortment of parts, diffuses its potential impact by assembling notebooks' worth of research and then laying it out in the manner of a conscientious student's term paper. Even the paradoxes of Tilden's personality are presented in a bald, two-pronged manner that sacrifices authentically ambiguous character to thematic clarity.
One provocative scene hints at dramatic riches that might have been. In it Tilden visits a stuffy sports club to deliver a lecture. As he rakishly explains why he prefers a certain kind of racket, attire and stance, Mr. Higgins's Tilden assumes a truly theatrical presence sustained by a web of conflicting impulses that you sense might unravel at any second.
When he demonstrates tennis technique with a young man selected from the club, the erotic charge and discomfort are palpable. Too bad the tension is diffused shortly after when the boy says, ''I'd like it better if he stayed on his side of the net.''
It's an unnecessary and arch postscript, typical of a drama that more often tells than shows. ''Big Bill'' provides a promising game plan but only rarely does it actually play the game.
BIG BILL  By A. R. Gurney; directed by Mark Lamos; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by Jess Goldstein; lighting by Rui Rita; sound by Scott Stauffer; stage manager, Fredric H. Orner; production manager, Jeff Hamlin. Presented by Lincoln Center Theater, under the direction of André Bishop and Bernard Gersten. At the Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater, Lincoln Center.
WITH: John Michael Higgins (William Tatem Tilden II), David Cromwell (Umpire, Judge and others), Stephen Rowe (Herb, Maddox and others), Margaret Welsh (Mary Garden, Suzanne Lenglen and others), Alex Knold (Student, Ball Boy and others), Michael Esper (Pete, Ball Boy and others), Donal Thoms-Cappello (Jimmy, Ball Boy and others) and Jeremiah Miller (Arthur, Ball Boy and others).
THEATER REVIEW
