Brushing aside urgent appeals from his own friends and Democratic leaders, Ralph Nader announced yesterday that he would run again for president this year, sending shudders through the camps of Democratic presidential candidates just as they had grown hopeful about unseating President Bush.
Mr. Nader said in an interview that he would seek to get his name as an independent candidate on the ballot in all 50 states. He rejected the notion that he was the spoiler who helped Mr. Bush win in 2000 and would do the same in 2004.
Mr. Nader, who rose to national prominence as a consumer advocate, described his candidacy as an indictment of the weaknesses of the Democratic Party, asserting that it had failed to champion liberal positions and offer a strong alternative to Republicans.
''The Democrats have never had a string of losses like that that I can remember, and against the extreme wing of the Republican Party,'' he said. ''Their risks of losing to Bush, assuming he doesn't destruct, is no greater because of this candidacy.''
''Ten years of losses,'' Mr. Nader said of the Democratic Party. ''They have no modesty about bringing the country 10 years of losses. They have become very good at bringing the country very bad Republicans.''
Since Mr. Bush's election, Mr. Nader has become an ignominious figure among Democrats who argued that his showing in at least two states -- Florida and New Hampshire -- undermined Al Gore's presidential campaign in 2000. With the country so divided, Democrats have long feared the prospect of a Nader candidacy in 2004, just as Republicans have welcomed it as a pivotal factor in Mr. Bush's re-election effort.
''I think that Ralph Nader is proving that the only master that he serves is his enormous ego,'' said Scott Maddox, the chairman of the Democratic Party in Florida, where in 2000 Mr. Nader received 97,488 votes, and where Mr. Bush defeated Mr. Gore by 537 votes to seal the presidential election. ''I have nothing nice to say about him: 2000 should have proved to him that he's going to be nothing but a spoiler.''
A senior aide to Senator John Edwards of North Carolina said on Sunday that a Nader candidacy could prove a threat to Democrats should he succeed in getting on the ballot in six pivotal states, including Florida.
But the political landscape is strikingly different this year, and several Democrats said yesterday that it was hardly certain that a Nader candidacy would have the effect it had in the last election.
For one thing, Mr. Nader is no longer running as the candidate of the Green Party, which means he is faced with the daunting -- though not impossible -- task of getting on 50 state ballots as an independent candidate. By Mr. Nader's own assessment, that would entail collecting about 1.5 million signatures on nominating petitions in all states. In addition, he would have to battle through a thicket of court challenges that Democrats said they would wage to keep him off the ballots.
Mr. Nader said he did not plan to hire people to collect signatures, which would cost at least $1 a name. As a measure of even what Mr. Nader acknowledged was a difficult task, his first deadline is less than three months away, May 13, in Texas, when he will be required to submit roughly 64,000 valid signatures to get on that ballot.
''I think he will be able to get on a significant number of states' ballots, but I don't know how many that is,'' said Nathaniel Persily, a professor of law and political science at the University of Pennsylvania. ''From the standpoint of the Democrats, the only question is going to be whether he gets on the ballot in the battleground states. He certainly has the capacity to do a similar amount of damage to the Democratic Party as he did last time.''
Several Democrats said that what polls have found to be an overwhelming sentiment among Democrats -- that the nominee have the ability to unseat Mr. Bush -- would prove to be a big obstacle to Mr. Nader. It also means, Democrats said, that they could bring lawsuits to knock Mr. Nader off state ballots without risking the kind of backlash that typically greets such litigation, often in the form of newspaper editorials and criticism from voters.
The Rev. Al Sharpton, a Democratic presidential candidate this year, provided Mr. Nader a platform at his headquarters in Harlem in 2000. But Mr. Sharpton said in a telephone interview yesterday that he would campaign across the nation urging Democrats to reject Mr. Nader.
''The only reason he's running is either he's an egomaniac or as a Bush contract,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''What's the point? This is not 2000 when progressives were locked out. I'm going on a national crusade to stop Nader. This is only going to help Bush.''
Mr. Nader made his announcement in a series of interviews yesterday, starting with one on the NBC program ''Meet the Press.''
The two leading contenders for the Democratic presidential nomination, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Mr. Edwards, said they thought they could appeal to enough independents and Democrats to negate the Nader impact.
Mr. Kerry said he did not accept Mr. Nader's assertion that there was little difference between the parties.
''That's what he said with respect to Bush and Gore, and I think it was pretty clear to most Americans that the difference was night and day,'' Mr. Kerry said in a television interview in Atlanta. ''I intend to speak to all Americans. If people want to beat George Bush badly, and that's what's at stake here, they'll see that I'm speaking to concerns that Ralph Nader and other people have.''
Mr. Edwards said a Nader candidacy would ''not impact my campaign,'' adding, ''It's important for the Democrats to have somebody at the top of the ticket who will be appealing to some of the voters that Ralph Nader might attract.''
Mr. Bush's campaign manager, Ken Mehlman, declined in an interview to speculate on what a Nader candidacy might mean for Mr. Bush. ''I don't know what it means,'' he said. ''I think ultimately we're focused on the president.''
Mr. Nader's announcement drew almost universal derision from Democrats, even among those who said they were close to him.
Mark Green, the former New York City public advocate who worked for Mr. Nader in his capacity as a consumer advocate and remains a close friend of his, expressed distress at the decision.
''I'm very disappointed because I believe that the risk of him helping re-elect the most reactionary president in our lifetime greatly exceeds the possible benefits of him making helpful arguments about corporate power in America,'' said Mr. Green, who is now supporting Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Nader said he did not think his task would be easy, and he likened the two-party system to ''going up against a cliff.'' And, he said, he was startled by the strong opposition his potential campaign had stirred on the left, noting in particular criticism in The Nation magazine.
''We're going to lose much of the liberal intelligentsia,'' he said. ''I don't know any other candidate who is opposed by so many people who agree with their political agenda. They are freaked out by Bush so much that they engage in amnesia about how bad Clinton-Gore was.''
But, he said, he would not be deterred. ''How long do you tolerate this?'' he said. ''I've been around this circle many times where I'm told: 'This is not the time, this is not the time.' I played the good soldier. But every time I was told it was not the time, the Democrats felt freer to follow the corporate pull.''
Mr. Nader said his campaign would be an unconventional one, using volunteers to collect signatures and to fight the legal challenge he anticipates. He said he would try to campaign in every state but did not expect to broadcast television advertisements, instead relying on his Web site to broadcast his message.
Mr. Nader said he would press to be included in any presidential debates. And he said he would seek to link up with existing independent parties in a number of states, including New York, California, Florida and West Virginia.
The Democratic national chairman, Terry McAuliffe, had called Mr. Nader repeatedly and urged him to stay out of the race. His spokeswoman, Debra DeShong, said Mr. McAuliffe was ''very disappointed'' with the decision. But she said that Mr. Nader had ''promised Chairman McAuliffe that if he were to run in this election, he would not criticize the Democratic nominee.''
That promise did not last long. ''Kerry has been known to bend before the will of corporatism,'' Mr. Nader volunteered yesterday.
Informed of his remark, Ms. DeShong declined to comment.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE INDEPENDENT
