Before the start of Saturday night's game against the New Orleans Hornets, a glum Lucious Harris explained his troubles, saying he felt detached from the joy of the Nets' winning streak because of his shooting problems.
It was almost too easy to predict what would come next. When the Nets started the game at Continental Arena looking tired and lost, Harris rose from the bench and gave them a quick spark. He scored 11 points in the first half to turn the momentum and help guide the Nets to a 97-84 victory, their 13th straight.
''It does feel better,'' Harris, a shooting guard, said. ''All the winning, still, personally I beat myself up. But as a team, I'm happy we're winning the games. If I can contribute a little more, we can play even better.''
When the Nets go well, Jason Kidd usually carries them. But he has not reached 20 points in the last nine games and has shot 16 of 59 from the floor in the last four games. The Nets' other All-Star, Kenyon Martin, has played well, but he had his lowest-scoring game of the season Friday -- he was ill and scored 6 points at Toronto -- and the Nets still won by 19 points.
The Nets have reached this point, a franchise-record streak matching the longest by an N.B.A. team this season, with top-to-bottom contributions.
With no weak link in sight, the success extends from Coach Lawrence Frank, who is 12-0 since taking over for Byron Scott on Jan. 26, to bench-warming Hubert Davis, who joined the team on the same day Frank was named coach and, in a curious twist, has been in attendance for 25 consecutive victories between his time with Detroit and the Nets.
Davis had played 13 minutes in six games for the Nets before Saturday night, then moved to the backup point guard spot for eight minutes, stabilizing the team when Kidd rested. The Nets actually increased their lead with him on the floor.
''He's a good-luck rabbit,'' Kidd said after the victory. ''And I thought he played great tonight. That's what makes this team so special. You can be called upon and respond.''
The Nets' first-rate contributions from the bench have not come from notable performances from big-minutes players like Harris and Rodney Rogers, as might be expected, but with timely help from different players seemingly every game. Aaron Williams, who has been the steadiest contributor off the bench, has averaged 8.4 points and 5 rebounds over the last 12 games, only slightly better than his season averages of 7.2 points and 4.6 rebounds.
But with a little help from everywhere Saturday night, the Nets' reserves outscored the Hornets', 23-6.
''Every night it's going to be somebody different,'' said Harris, who finished with 13 points on Saturday. ''We're working hard, and any night it can be anybody. This time it was my night.''
Frank said: ''I think our bench has been super. We've had great balance during our success over the last two and a half years. It was just a matter of guys getting healthy, getting a feel for playing with each other again, getting some consistent combinations, and they've done a great job.''
REBOUNDS
According to a report in The Star-Ledger of Newark on Sunday, a member of the Nets' ownership group said that EDDIE GRIFFIN's departure from the team came at the team's insistence after an incident at a hotel in Rutherford, N.J., early on the morning of Jan. 25. That explanation is in contrast to the team's official statement on Jan. 28, when ROD THORN, the team president, said in a statement, ''Eddie has informed the team that he is not ready to resume his N.B.A. career.'' The Nets would not comment on the report.
BYRON SCOTT made his debut as an analyst for the ABC Sports pregame show ''Hangtime'' and was asked about reports that JASON KIDD had instigated his dismissal. ''I can't sit here and say for sure that Jason Kidd got me fired,'' he said. ''I know that where there's smoke there is fire, you know, and I know that there were some things said that probably led to my dismissal. I don't know. I can't ever say that Jason got me fired unless I hear that from Jason Kidd's mouth.''
PRO BASKETBALL
