People in the audience at the New York Philharmonic's recent open rehearsal of Wagner and Brahms could have been forgiven for thinking that they had mistakenly stumbled into the MTV Video Music Awards or a Giants game instead of Avery Fisher Hall.
A huge screen hung over the orchestra, showing rear-projection images from four cameras that panned the musicians and zoomed in on the conductor, Lorin Maazel.
The 15-by-20-foot screen was an experiment for the Philharmonic to see whether video close-ups might create a more intimate concertgoing experience in the 2,738-seat hall. The cameras could home in on the full cheeks of a tuba player, the fleet fingers of a piano soloist, the furrowed brow of a maestro.
The storied Philharmonic is flirting with modern technology at a time when classical music organizations are being pressured to become more user-friendly. Audiences are aging, subscriptions are dwindling, orchestras are folding.
''It's been done in rock concerts, it's been done in sports arenas,'' said Benjamin M. Rosen, a Philharmonic trustee who spearheaded and financed the experiment. He declined to put a price on it, saying only that it cost tens of thousands of dollars. ''We want to increase attendance at concerts, change the demographics,'' he said. ''And the younger generation is more responsive to visual stimuli.''
''Just as, if you go to a football game, the camera focuses in on the face of the athlete,'' Mr. Rosen added. ''You wouldn't want to go to a movie and just look at the back of Cary Grant. You want to see his face.''
But some musicians say they are not ready for their close-ups. ''We're not movie stars,'' said Newton Mansfield, a violinist who has been with the orchestra 41 years. He added: ''You don't need to blow people up to that degree. I wouldn't be able to come in if I had a wart on my nose.''
The Philharmonic is one of a handful of symphony orchestras exploring the use of giant screens. For the first time the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra has added them in 15 of its 140 concerts this season, with video that includes preconcert sponsor promotions as well as interviews with soloists.
The Pittsburgh Symphony tried a screen but decided that the technology was unworkable. The Atlanta Symphony tried one, too, featuring a preconcert interview with a composer, but then abandoned the idea. ''It was a bit too jarring for the audience, and they told us, and that was good,'' said Charles Wade, an orchestra spokesman.
To offer less formal concert experiences, smaller or more adjustable performance spaces have been designed, like the Walt Disney Concert Hall at the Los Angeles Music Center, the Judy and Arthur Zankel Hall at Carnegie Hall and Jazz at Lincoln Center's new stage in the Time Warner Center. Renovation plans for Avery Fisher Hall were suspended during the Philharmonic's failed merger talks with Carnegie Hall. Now the Philharmonic has to figure out how to make the most of its home at Lincoln Center.
''We have a hall that's pretty long,'' said Zarin Mehta, the Philharmonic's executive director. He added that any renovation was a long way off. ''Who knows when that will happen?'' he said. ''In the meantime, let's see how the screen works.''
The orchestra members have not been enthusiastic. ''I found it very distracting,'' said Glenn Dicterow, the Philharmonic's concertmaster. ''It was extremely difficult for me to keep my place in the music.''
For musicians sitting behind the screen the rear projection was particularly confusing. ''The half of the orchestra behind the screen was looking up at a giant projection of Lorin, and half of the orchestra was seeing him conduct backwards,'' said Eric Latzky, a spokesman for the orchestra.
While the musicians are accustomed to cameras for ''Live From Lincoln Center'' broadcasts and have played with a more modest screen during Young People's Concerts, they said the giant screen was something else entirely. ''It was too big,'' said Mindy Kaufman, a flutist. ''It was just so big.''
Mr. Dicterow said he found the approach uncomfortably commercial. ''It just seems like a bit of a sellout,'' he said.''Better we should spend the money on a hall that brings the audience closer to us. People might as well stay home with their big-screen TV's. It's going the route of MTV, and I'm not sure it's the way to go.''
Mr. Rosen, who said the Philharmonic would continue to experiment with the form, stressed that it was too early to judge the screens definitively. Each audience member and musician at the rehearsal was asked to fill out highly detailed surveys on the screen experience, and the results have yet to be analyzed. ''What you do when you're developing new products is you test them,'' said Mr. Rosen, the former chairman of Compaq Computer Corporation.
In Vancouver the symphony positions a nine-foot-square screen on either side of the stage. Its system includes four small cameras controlled by an operator backstage; someone who reads the score and suggests the shots; and a third person reading the score, who makes the final decision.
''Five years ago I would have said, 'My goodness,' '' said Jeff Alexander, the Vancouver orchestra's president and general manager. ''But it's really added a wonderful new aspect to attending a concert.''
The Vancouver Symphony uses the screens for two series intended to introduce audiences to the classics with interviews as well as live video. Mr. Alexander said ticket sales were up 50 percent.
Mr. Rosen said the Philharmonic could have similar results. ''The pictures were gorgeous,'' Mr. Rosen said. ''It changed the visual experience. There are some people who don't want to change anything.''
The musicians said they would do fine with individual screens on the backs of the seats in the audience or a large screen outdoors, just not one sprawling above their heads. ''If you want to see better,'' Mr. Doctorow said, ''take binoculars.''
Correction:  March 17, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 23 about the New York Philharmonic's experiment with a large video screen for the audience misstated the extent of the use of such screens by the Atlanta Symphony to show interviews with composers. The screens are still used; the practice was curtailed in one case, but it has not been abandoned.
