Iraq's interim leaders said Sunday that they could not negotiate a formal agreement with the American military on maintaining troops in Iraq, and that the task must await the next sovereign Iraqi government.
The delay could put the Americans in the position of negotiating an agreement with leaders they did not appoint on such sensitive issues as when the use of force would be allowed.
It also means that another feature of the agreement of Nov. 15, which set out the steps to sovereignty, will not occur on schedule. Other things falling by the wayside are the approval of an interim constitution, which was supposed to occur by next Saturday, and the now abandoned plan to hold caucuses to pick a transitional assembly.
But the Americans have clung to the final date of handing power to a new Iraqi administration -- June 30.
Members of the Iraqi Governing Council, appointed by the Americans in July, said they had reached a consensus that the issue was too momentous to handle without a popular mandate.
Gen. John P. Abizaid, the commander of American forces in the region, recently suggested that the military agreement would not occur according to the original timetable, but he expressed confidence that whatever the new conditions might be, the American military would be treated hospitably. Simply put, no Iraqi government could survive without the American forces, according to American commanders.
[Almost underscoring the point, a vehicle bomb detonated outside an Iraqi police station in the northern city of Kirkuk on Monday morning, killing at least six people and wounding at least that many more, Reuters reported, citing police officials. Attacks against police and paramilitary forces working with American troops are common in the city. More than 200 Iraqis have died in similar attacks nationwide this month.]
A formal agreement governing American forces in Iraq could touch on many issues, including the number of American troops remaining and their location.
While American troops would still be under American command, such an agreement could limit the circumstances under which the soldiers would be permitted to use force. As a guest rather than an occupying power, the United States would probably have somewhat less leverage than it now has over Iraq's leaders.
''Legally and in every other sense, the new sovereign Iraqi government will have the power to say 'Thanks very much, we don't need you, go home,' '' said Samir Sumaidy, a member of the Iraqi Governing Council. ''That is probably unlikely. But legally we will have the power.''
One issue of paramount interest to the Americans is legal immunity. American officials have said they want their soldiers to be protected against local prosecution, while some Iraqi officials say they would insist on the right to prosecute American soldiers who break Iraqi laws.
About 105,000 American troops operate inside Iraq, in a coalition authorized by the United Nations.
Spokesmen for both the American military and L. Paul Bremer III, the chief American administrator here, declined to talk about the Governing Council's decision.
It represents a blow to the accord struck in November between American and Iraqi leaders on the transfer of sovereignty. The pact called for a concord on American troops to be worked out by the end of March.
While the council members have not agreed on a mechanism to choose a new government, a team of experts from the United Nations has visited the country to investigate the issue. It concluded last week that direct, nationwide elections were not feasible before June 30.
On Monday, Secretary General Kofi Annan is expected to give a new report on the question. In the meantime, to garner a broader representation, ideas are afoot to increase the size of the Iraqi Governing Council.
Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, a powerful Shiite leader, has pressed hard for elections soon, despite the insecurity of the nation during a time of insurgency. But an elected body of representatives could prove unpredictable for the Americans.
The views of Ayatollah Sistani, and the politically sensitive American presence, appeared to weigh on the Governing Council's members. Some leaders said they had decided to pass the issue to a future government because they felt they lacked sufficient legitimacy to take such a momentous decision.
''We are not 100 percent accepted by the Iraqi people,'' said Ghazi M. Ajil al-Yawar, a member of the Governing Council. ''We have not been elected. We do not want to draft an agreement that a new government would come in and change anyway.''
But Governing Council members made it clear that even if an agreement was reached, the relationship between Iraqis and the American military would change.
''Once sovereignty is transferred, the Americans will be an invited guest,'' said Mowaffak al-Rubaie, a Governing Council member.
Anthony Cordesman, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, said negotiations over the status of American troops could prove very delicate.
''You are opening Pandora's box,'' Mr. Cordesman said. ''It is a deeply divided country where no one knows the rules.''
General Abizaid said, ''It's apparent to all of us that Iraqi security institutions will not be mature enough by July to continue or be able to control the situation through the nation without the help of the coalition forces.''
Nearly 250,000 American military personnel serve abroad, and the United States government has formal agreements with 53 of the countries where they operate. But the United States has maintained substantial military forces in some countries without any formal agreement. One example, Mr. Cordesman said, was Saudi Arabia, where the United States military had a significant presence until last year.
Proceeding without any agreement, even after the transfer of sovereignty, seemed to be one option that some members of the Iraqi Governing Council were contemplating.
''Sistani said that if there was an agreement, it had to be approved democratically,'' Mr. Rubaie said. ''But not if there is no agreement.''
In any case, Mr. Rubaie said, the political calculus in Iraq suggested that the Americans would be welcomed here for a long time by most of the people.
''No Shiite or Kurd will ask the Americans to leave,'' Mr. Rubaie said. ''They would like them to stay for a long time.''
