HIGHLIGHTS
ARCHITECTURE: ACCOLADE -- Demetri Porphyrios, the architect and theorist whose designs include Whitman College, Princeton's newest residential college; and the Grove Quadrangle of Magdalen College at Oxford, has been named the recipient of the $100,000 second annual Richard H. Driehaus Prize for Classical Architecture. The prize honors a major contributor in traditional and classical architecture or historic preservation. Dr. Porphyrios, the principal of the London-based Porphyrios Associates, is to receive the accolade, administered through the University of Notre Dame School of Architecture, in a ceremony on March 20 in the ballroom at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago. Besides the $100,000 award, the prize, endowed by Richard H. Driehaus, the founder and chairman of Driehaus Capital Management in Chicago, includes a bronze and stone replica of the Choregic Monument of Lysikrates in Athens.
FILM: COMING ATTRACTIONS -- The Spanish director Pedro Almodóvar's ''Bad Education'' has been chosen to open this year's Cannes International Film Festival, Agence France-Presse reported. The film is a story of two boys who discover love, movies and fear in the 1960's in a religious school and who renew their ties in the decades that follow. Organizers of the festival, to run from from May 12 to 23, did not announce if ''Bad Education'' would be among the films in the official competition. That list is to be made public late next month. Previous films of Mr. Almodóvar, above, include ''Women on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown''; ''All About My Mother,'' a 1999 prize winner at Cannes for best direction; and ''Talk to Her.''
ARCHITECTURE: SEEING THE FUTURE -- Beginning on Wednesday an eight-foot high, three-dimensional scale model of the Freedom Tower, scheduled to be the first building to rise at ground zero, will be on view at the Center for Architecture, 536 La Guardia Place. Designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill for Silverstein Properties, the model is the centerpiece of a free exhibition, ''Rethinking the Skyline: Rebuilding the City.'' The Center for Architecture, sponsored by the New York Chapter of the American Institute of Architects, is open 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Friday and 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. on Saturday.
MUSIC: VARÈSE ARCHIVE -- The papers of the futurist composer Edgard Varèse (1883-1965) have been acquired by the Paul Sacher Foundation in Basel, Switzerland, from the Chinese-American composer, Chou-Wen Chung, a friend who administered Varèse's estate. The foundation, already a repository of the papers of Igor Stravinsky and Anton Webern, among others, said the acquisition was significant because the Varèse papers, previously inaccessible to the public, will become available to scholars beginning in August. The acquisition, the foundation said, was made possible through the support of the Hoffmann and Oeri families, Basel patrons of the arts.
GAUGUIN IN BOSTON -- More than 150 works by the French Post-Impressionist Paul Gauguin (1848-1903) are to be on view from Sunday to June 20 at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. The exhibition, organized in France by the Réunion des Musées Nationaux and the Musée d'Orsay, Paris, and in the United States by the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston, includes paintings, carved wood sculpture, objects of decorative art, drawings, prints and illustrated manuscripts. Besides documentary photographs, objects from the South Seas that might have inspired Gauguin are also part of the exhibition. ''Gauguin Tahiti'' will be seen in the United States only at the Museum of Fine Arts.
FOOTNOTES
Billed as unpublished, unproduced and unknown, six newly discovered scenes from ''A Streetcar Named Desire'' by Tennessee Williams will open the spring season of ''Food For Thought'' lunch-hour theater at 12:30 p.m. today at the National Arts Club at 15 Gramercy Park South, between Irving Place and Park Avenue. In this staged reading of ''Roads Not Taken: Early Unpublished Scenes From 'Streetcar,' '' Robert Cuccioli (Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde on Broadway) will portray Stanley Kowalski, and John Doman, of ''Mystic River'' and ''The Wire'' on HBO, will play Mitch. . . . Yiyun Li, the author of the short story ''Immortality,'' has been chosen the first winner of the Plimpton Prize, given by The Paris Review and named for George Plimpton, its longtime editor who died in September at 76. ''Immortality'' was cited for the prize for ''the best piece of writing by a newcomer to appear in The Paris Review in a given year,'' The Associated Press reported. Michael Chabon's novella ''The Final Solution'' won the $1,000 Aga Khan Prize for the best fiction to appear in the magazine; for ''Brown-Headed Birds'' Julie Sheehan won the $1,000 Bernard F. Conners Prize for best long poem.
