NATO is back.
The much maligned cold war military alliance lost its mission when its primordial enemy, the Soviet Union, collapsed, was ridiculed by this Bush administration and was rendered impotent by its own divisions over the American-led war on Iraq.
Only 17 months ago, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld lectured NATO defense ministers in Warsaw that if NATO did not transform itself, ''it will not have much to offer the world in the 21st century.''
Now, the Bush administration is desperate to reduce its military presence and vulnerability in Afghanistan and Iraq. It is turning to NATO to expand the alliance's mandate in Afghanistan and play a substantive role in Iraq.
''I believe in NATO,'' President Bush told Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, the new NATO secretary general, when the two met in the Oval Office last month, according to senior NATO officials. ''I believe NATO is transforming itself and adjusting to meet the true threats of the 21st century.''
When Mr. de Hoop Scheffer, a former Dutch foreign minister, pledged to work to get NATO to do more in Afghanistan, Mr. Bush replied, ''I'm with you.'' When the conversation turned to Iraq, Mr. Bush said, ''The more of a NATO role the better.''
Mr. de Hoop Scheffer, who was the Bush administration's choice to lead NATO, came home to Europe and pitched the new line. At a speech in Brussels on Tuesday, he said the alliance was willing to deploy forces in Iraq.
''Under the right conditions we could do it,'' Mr. de Hoop Scheffer told the German Marshall Fund's Trans-Atlantic Center. If a sovereign Iraqi government with United Nations backing were to ask for NATO's help, it would difficult to ''abrogate our responsibilities,'' he added.
Until NATO took command of the force that polices the Afghan capital, Kabul, and the area around it, the organization was in the midst of an identity crisis, uncertain of its role, its future and what constituted a military threat in the post-9/11 era. Its mission in stabilizing Afghanistan represents NATO's first ''out of area'' mission beyond Europe; Iraq would be the second.
NATO's mission has become so broadly defined that Mr. de Hoop Scheffer announced during a trip to Greece on Thursday that NATO would help with security during the Olympics there in August.
In Afghanistan, the United States is pushing NATO to deliver on an ambitious plan to extend its peacekeeping presence beyond Kabul and create links with the American-led offensive military operation in the south that is struggling to rout the remnants of Taliban rule.
Washington also wants NATO to take command of the vulnerable 9,500-member multinational brigade in central Iraq, which is currently run by Poland, and possibly the larger British-led operation in the south.
The goal is for NATO to make a headline-grabbing commitment to both missions at the NATO summit meeting in Istanbul, just days before the transfer of sovereignty to the Iraqis at the end of June and five months before the United States presidential election.
The problem in expanding NATO into Iraq is that it already has failed to persuade its members to do enough in Afghanistan.
In the four months since the United Nations authorized NATO to expand its peacekeeping mission of about 6,000 beyond Kabul, the alliance has managed to send only a few hundred troops under German command to the relatively safe northern city of Kunduz.
It took months of high-level arm-twisting of NATO members last year to get them to pledge crucial helicopters to Afghanistan.
Lord Robertson, the former secretary general, was forced to lobby hard for the helicopters at the NATO defense ministers meeting in Brussels and at every farewell meeting as he completed his term in December, finally getting commitments of three Black Hawk helicopters from Turkey and at least three more from the Netherlands.
''Lord Robertson had to use everything he had to bludgeon the foreign and defense ministers into committing helicopters,'' said Robert Bell, a former White House and senior NATO official who is now a private defense consultant in Brussels. ''NATO can't operate that way.''
Gen. James L. Jones, NATO's top military commander in Europe, told a Senate committee last month that Afghanistan was a ''defining moment'' for the alliance as it adopted a broader global agenda, but complained that NATO members were not providing enough troops for the country's reconstruction.
''The alliance has agreed, the donor countries have been identified and yet we find ourselves mired in the administrative details of who's going to pay for it, who's going to transport it, how's it going to be maintained,'' he said.
On Wednesday, General Jones presented NATO members with a wish list of what he felt was needed to enable NATO to deploy forces in five provincial cities, senior NATO officials said.
The goal of the planning, which he is hoping to complete in the next few weeks, is to find countries willing to supply forward operating forces, aircraft, logistical and intelligence support and communications.
Mr. de Hoop Scheffer has also acknowledged his failure so far to persuade NATO nations to send more troops to Afghanistan, saying on Tuesday that force protection was a continuing problem. No legislator in any NATO country would approve the new request for troops if there was not an answer to the question of ''who will come to the assistance'' of the troops ''in extreme circumstances,'' he said.
On the positive side, France, whose opposition to the war in Iraq damaged its relationship with Washington, sees NATO as a vehicle for it to project its own military and political power and repair its American ties.
In recent weeks the United States has quietly welcomed two French one-star generals onto NATO's command, one at alliance headquarters in Mons, Belgium, the other in Norfolk, Va.
General Jones pushed hard for the administration to grant the French request that the two generals be placed, but the issue was so divisive that Mr. Bush himself had to make the final decision, according to NATO officials.
France has not been part of NATO's military command structure since de Gaulle, on a campaign to assert France's military autonomy, withdrew from it in 1966. Now, with about 2,000 troops in the first rotation of the 6,000-troop NATO Response Force, France is the force's largest contributor of troops.
A picture-perfect opportunity for President Bush to patch up differences with President Jacques Chirac of France and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany will come with the 60th anniversary of D-Day on June 6.
Mr. Bush's national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, has recommended that he accept Mr. Chirac's offer to dine at Élysée Palace the night before and visit the Normandy beaches together, but Mr. Bush has not formally accepted, senior administration and French officials said.
Senior American and French officials have said privately in recent weeks that Mr. Bush has no choice but to accept, given the historic importance of the event.
They also noted that a photo of Mr. Bush standing side by side in Normandy with Mr. Chirac and Mr. Schröder could help deflect charges by the Democrats that he has squandered good relations with two of America's closest and most important allies.
