Rebels seized control of Cap Haitien, Haiti's second-largest city, on Sunday, meeting little resistance as hundreds of residents cheered, burned the police station, plundered food from port warehouses and looted the airport, which was quickly closed. Police officers and armed supporters of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide fled.
The rebel advance expanded the territory held by a ragtag army of insurgents to include virtually all of the northern region of the country and drove the nation deeper into chaos. The insurgent leaders vowed that their compatriots would occupy the entire country within two weeks.
While it was difficult to gauge the extent and momentum of the rebellion -- the insurgents have refused to specify the exact size of their force -- the seizure of Cap Haitien was a major blow to Mr. Aristide. It throws into question whether an American-backed peace plan to create a power-sharing government could save the country from further mayhem.
''We came here to free the people; we will free all the people,'' Guy Philippe, the 36-year-old rebel commander, said in an interview here Sunday evening. He added that about 11 people were killed in taking the city, a figure still impossible to confirm.
''We are ready to die for Haiti,'' he said. ''This is our advantage. No one wants to die for Aristide.''
There was no immediate reaction from Mr. Aristide, who dissolved Haiti's army a decade ago and has no significant military force to rally against the rebellion.
Paulda Petime, a 23-year-old rebel dressed in camouflage, a bulletproof vest and a steel helmet, said he had helped lead about 200 rebels arriving here from Gonaïves, the city where the uprising began on Feb. 5. He was even more upbeat than his commander, Mr. Philippe, predicting the rebels would take the capital, Port-au-Prince, on Monday.
As machine-gun fire sounded in the streets of Cap Haitien, a city of about 500,000, residents greeted the arriving rebels with chants of ''Down with Aristide!'' and ''Long live the army!'' The rebels drove straight into the grassy square next to the city's police headquarters, the chief symbol of central government power at about 10 a.m. and declared the city liberated.
Residents of the city, on edge for weeks as rumors swirled that the rebel forces that control Gonaïves would march here and take control, poured into the streets and set fire to the police headquarters' two buildings.
''Aristide is a dictator,'' said Jean Robert, a 42-year-old unemployed boat captain, as the police station crackled and glowed orange behind him. ''He was in hell, and the Devil put him out because he was so wicked.''
The capture of Cap Haitien was the biggest blow yet to Mr. Aristide as he contended with a nearly three-week-long uprising that has left more than 60 people dead.
Political strife has gripped Haiti since 2000, when flawed legislative elections led opposition groups to boycott the presidential election later that year. The political turmoil increased as a range of Aristide opponents, from peaceful dissidents to those with more militant aims, held rallies and marches this fall, demanding that Mr. Aristide step down. The protests boiled over into violence when a gang once loyal to Mr. Aristide in Gonaïves revolted.
Bolstered by notorious figures from the country's violent past, the rebels claim to have steadily gained strength, although their exact numbers remain unclear.
Jean-Baptiste Joseph, a rebel soldier who said he had been in the army before Mr. Aristide dissolved it in 1994, said the rebels would maintain order in Cap Haitien and not allow vengeance killings.
''We are going to accompany the population so the chimères cannot kill anyone,'' Mr. Joseph said, referring to the armed gangs loyal to the president. ''We don't want any dechoukage,'' he added, using the Creole term for ''uprooting,'' or politically motivated mob violence.
But a few hours after the rebels arrived, Cap Haitien descended into chaos. At least four people were killed, including a 12-year-old girl, according to a doctor at the city's hospital.
The dead also included three men believed to be supporters of the president's party, Lavalas. Petit-Homme Roland, a local resident, brought two men wheeling a coffin atop a wheelbarrow to collect the body of his cousin, Robinson Dorville, a 20-year-old Lavalas militant who Mr. Roland said was gunned down by rebel soldiers.
''The man from the army shot him,'' Mr. Roland said as the undertakers struggled to put the speckled gray coffin back atop the wheelbarrow. ''Now we have to bury him.''
Hundreds of people streamed to the city's port, throwing sacks of stolen rice onto any conveyance they could find -- wheelbarrows, bicycles and baby carriages.
''I don't have work, so I don't have food,'' said a 30-year-old man who gave his name as Mesidor as he leaned against two 50-pound sacks of rice he had taken from the port. ''I saw everybody taking it so I took some. Right now I am not scared of anything because you only die once.''
Residents also stormed the police station, taking anything that was not nailed down -- beds, televisions, radio sets, battered file cabinets.
Rolex Pierre, 22, took a riot shield and helmet.
''Every year I want to remember what happened here,'' Mr. Pierre said, holding his mementos aloft.
Richard Estimable, the head of a pro-Lavalas militant group, fled the city with other top Aristide supporters by hijacking a small plane from the airport, said Jacques Jeannot, manager of Tropical Airways in Cap Haitien.
Seven people, two of them armed with AK-47 assault rifles, stormed into the airport shortly after 10 a.m., Mr. Jeannot said, and hijacked a Dash 8-100 waiting on the tarmac for passengers for a scheduled flight to Port-au-Prince.
''They got in and demanded the pilots take them to Port-au-Prince,'' Mr. Jeannot said.
Later in the day, another rebel leader, Louis-Jodel Chamblain, a former top military official who headed death squads in the late 1980's and was accused of atrocities in the aftermath of the coup in 1991 that removed Mr. Aristide from office, patrolled the streets with about 40 men dressed in camouflage and carrying assault rifles. As he marched down the street in gold-rimmed sunglasses and a chain of bullets studding his chest, he refused to answer questions from reporters.
In a statement later at a local hotel, he said, ''All I can say is I am proud to have liberated Cap Haitien. The plan now is we are going to march to Port-au-Prince to the National Palace to expel Aristide.''
While Mr. Philippe basked in pleasure over the rebel seizure of Cap Haitien, he seemed more sober about its long-term significance.
''This is not a victory,'' he said. ''No one is winning. Haiti is losing. So I am just calling it another step along the way to freeing Haiti.''
