Dr. Carlos Javier Carranza, one of Colombia's best-known plastic surgeons, has the kind of pitch that leaves one hoping his knife, at least, is not quite as blunt.
''Look at this guy, just look how ugly,'' he says, showing a picture of a young man with a bulbous nose and sagging cheeks at his grandly named clinic, the International Center for Plastic Surgery. Then the doctor points to the ''after'' picture and a smile crosses his face.
''Now this is a different man!''
Colombia prides itself on being a macho culture, a country of stoic landholders and Marxist guerrillas. It is a place where centuries ago the fabled El Dorado lured the hardiest of the Spanish conquistadors, men who would have had little care for deodorant, let alone a tummy tuck.
But today Colombia like other countries in the region has its soft side, too, and its gathering obsessions with beauty. More and more men, young and old, here and across Latin America, are looking in the mirror and finding that they are not the fairest of them all.
The proof is a growing legion of plastic surgeons who say that men, perhaps 10 percent of their clientele just five years ago, now make up more than 30 percent of those taking a nip or a tuck, reflecting trends across Brazil, Argentina and the rest of Latin America.
In the United States, by comparison, about 13 percent of surgical alterations last year were performed on men, the American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery said in a recent report.
Dr. Carranza, whose glistening smooth skin he unabashedly admits is enhanced by Botox, is among those who want to show men just how easy it is to take a bit off the waistline, sculpt a nose, stretch a face or pump up a chest. His advice is falling on receptive, if sometimes fleshy, ears.
''If there is something you do not like and you can change it, then why not?'' said Agmeth Escaf, 30, a leading soap opera star and stage actor, who went for a nose job and embodies the newly blasé approach to plastic surgery for men.
''I have a bit of a tummy now,'' he explained, pulling up his shirt in the middle of a tony Bogotá restaurant. ''I am not going to dosit ups each day. Why? I do not like them. So I am going to have surgery, just have this taken out -- clip, clip clip.''
Beauty has long been a national obsession, evidenced by hundreds of annual pageants and slinky models, blow-dried television anchors and bikini ads. But beauty, Colombians and others are finding, cuts both ways.
High-tech gyms still draw thousands of men. But now facial creams for the guys are top sellers. Manicures and pedicures are popular, too. Doctors say it is a quick and relatively painless step from a facial to a facelift.
It is also a fraction of what it costs in the United States, with a facelift going for $2,000 and a new abdomen costing $3,000, cheap enough to make plastic surgery increasingly affordable even to the middle class.
Indeed, plastic surgery for men has become so accepted that recently Colombian surgeons met at a Bogotá hotel to discuss the latest procedures, on everything from male liposuction to pectoral implants.
Panel discussions at the Symposium on Advances in Masculine Esthetic Surgery included ''narcissism and plastic surgery'' and ''what motivates a man to have plastic surgery.''
The motivation, it seems, is often to stay young-looking and attractive to compete in a working world where executives older than 30 worry fear for their jobs.
''It's image, and image is competition, and image promises the best jobs,'' said Dr. Hidally Velasco, half of whose patients -- 15 or 20 men a month -- are men. ''Older guys are being told they are too old and it is time to retire.''
Victor Muñoz, 62, a liquor distributor, wanted to make sure was not one of them. So he had Dr. Carranza tighten the skin on his face, take the bags out from under his eyes and do some simple division on his double chin.
''I am a businessman and people do not want to do business with older people -- I would not,'' he explained. ''Competition is tough and the young are the ones who have the advantage. If you look old, you do not have credibility.''
Simple vanity plays its part, too, and the fascination with the perfect body, frequently in hopes of attracting younger women.
''Now these men look for a harmonious nose, they want to lose the stomach, they want the muscles,'' explained Dr. Omar Pacheco, president of the Colombian Society of Plastic Surgeons, which has nearly doubled in five years to about 800 doctors. This works out to roughly one plastic surgeon for every 50,000 Colombians.
He went on, ''They want to see the lines on their abdomen.''
But that does not mean they want to work for them.
''You go to a gym and fight and fight and fight and you say, 'Why do I do it?' '' said Yahir Salazar, 27, a patient who said he needed to take off some weight.
Another patient, Álvaro Cardenas, 46, had the rolls removed from his chin. ''I looked like a fat person,'' he explained. ''I just did not think it was comfortable. People can say it is vanity, well, whatever.''
The tinkering can start early, too. Very early.
''Why do I advise surgery on big ears for a boy aged 5?'' Dr. Julio Enrique Gil said. ''Because kids with big ears are the butt of jokes in school, and that is a big trauma.''
To those who deplore the trend, the blunt-spoken Dr. Carranza makes no apologies. Fake breasts, he argues, are more beautiful than real ones. Big noses have no character, he says.
But didn't God intend for some people to be round and soft? ''Well, God did not invent hamburgers,'' Dr. Carranza answered.
José Francisco Chazatar, 29, recently came for a new nose. The old one may have had its charms, but Dr. Carranza proposed a sleeker, narrower one, turned up just slightly at the end.
''I like this one, yes, this one, doctor,'' Mr. Chazatar said, looking at a catalog.
Within moments he was ushered into one of two operating rooms, and anesthetized, as Dr. Carranza worked his magic, using 15 different instruments. He shaped the nose with his hand or a small hammer. He took out the cartilage. Put it back in. He sewed with ease. It was all done through the nostrils, with little blood. He finished in an hour flat.
Was Mr. Chazatar now handsome, the doctor was asked? ''Well,'' he said, ''let's say he's less ugly.''
Bogotá Journal
