Alexi Lalas was the first (and only) American to play soccer in Italy's fabled Serie A (with Padova in 1994-95). He may be the only athlete who has toured Europe as the opening act for a rock band (Hootie and the Blowfish in 1998). And he is certainly the first American player to land a top management position with a Major League Soccer team (the San Jose Earthquakes).
''The fact that I'm a better header of the ball than the nine other club presidents does me absolutely no good,'' Lalas, 33, said in a telephone interview after he was named San Jose's president and general manager on Jan. 27. ''Just because you have had success on the field doesn't qualify you for the job.''
So what does?
Perhaps it is having a mind nimble enough to banter with David Letterman on late-night television as the face (and goatee) of American soccer. Or maybe it is having the confidence to pack up and move to Italy, where the game borders on religion.
''It's no coincidence that only two things happen in Italy on Sunday -- church and soccer,'' Lalas said. ''Soccer there is not a show. It is not entertainment. And that's part of the problem for the game here. Soccer in America is never, ever going to be the same experience it is overseas. It will always be uniquely American, and that's not necessarily a bad thing.''
Lalas strolls into the Earthquakes' boardroom with a unique perspective. Often seen as an anti-establishment figure strumming his guitar, Lalas could be the best thing to happen to M.L.S. since Freddy Adu put pen to paper last year.
Professional athletes -- like Isiah Thomas (Knicks), Larry Bird (Indiana) and Danny Ainge (Boston) -- in top management positions are nothing new. During the eight years M.L.S. has been around (and long before that), its marketing people have made the decisions, and they have been wrong more often than they have been right.
''What a lot of people fail to understand is that we've had an inferiority complex on and off the field,'' Lalas said. ''We have made unprecedented progress, but there are some new realities in 2004 in the United States and in California. I love the fact that there is diversity in this area -- it has to be nurtured and celebrated. If people have a problem with that, they're dinosaurs and will have a hard time enjoying themselves.
''The Hispanic market in the U.S. today can't be ignored. That said, if people only want to come and see a player from their ethnic group, all I can say is, 'Well, thank you.' I'm more interested in ethnic people who want to consider themselves American and come to watch a player like Landon Donovan, watch him because he's a great soccer player.''
Lalas grew up in Birmingham, Mich., playing more ice hockey than soccer. He embraced soccer when he lived for a spell in Greece in the early 1980's. For college, he came east to Rutgers and led the Scarlet Knights to the national semifinals in 1989 and 1990. He won the Hermann Trophy as the top collegiate player in 1991.
His transforming moment came in 1994, when the United States played host to the World Cup and the national team advanced precariously to the second round before losing to Brazil at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, Calif.
''My entire life changed in a wonderful way in 1994,'' Lalas said. ''I lived the power of what a World Cup can do for an individual. I ended up living in a place, Italy, where soccer was not only respected, but revered.''
He returned to the United States and M.L.S., playing for New England, the MetroStars, Kansas City and finally Los Angeles. Off the field, he took an informed and jocular voice to the broadcast booth during the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and to ESPN's short-lived ''Extra Time'' show.
He takes over a San Jose team that has won M.L.S. titles in two of the past three years but lost its coach, Frank Yallop, to the Canadian national team. Dominic Kinnear is the new coach. Donovan, a native Californian, is the team's top draw, but his rights are owned by Bayer Leverkusen of Germany and he is the constant subject of transfer rumors.
The Earthquakes, operated by the Anschutz Entertainment Group, are seeking a new stadium in the Bay Area; they have played at the claustrophobic Spartan Stadium since 1996. A.E.G., which last year sold its rights to Colorado (it runs three other M.L.S. clubs), has talked with Club América of Mexico about the Earthquakes.
''A.E.G. owns the organization, and it's been keeping us and the league afloat right now,'' Lalas said. ''As far as Club América, I'm not scared of international investment; it can only make the league more powerful.
''As for the team now, I'm smart enough to know that if it ain't broke. . . . My job is to put people into the seats.''
And if Lalas is looking for some halftime entertainment, he could always plug in that guitar and jam.
SOCCER
