Royal KPN, the Dutch telecommunications company, has not ruled out the possibility of a hostile bid for MMO2, a British mobile phone company, after a friendly offer was rebuffed Friday, a KPN spokesman said Sunday.
KPN ''never excludes anything,'' the spokesman, Marinus Potman, said when asked if the company would pursue a hostile deal. MMO2's German assets are particularly attractive to KPN, Mr. Potman said.
The two companies are the No.4 and No.3 phone carriers in Germany, respectively, he said, and ''it would make sense to join those two.'' (The No.1 and No.2 carriers are Deutsche Telekom and the Vodafone Group.) Together, KPN and MMO2 would control 20 percent of the German mobile phone market, the largest in Europe, Mr. Potman said.
KPN said Friday that it had approached MMO2 about a deal, but that talks had ceased. MMO2 confirmed the offer that day, but said no discussions were in progress. An MMO2 spokesman said Sunday that there were no further updates.
Any deal for MMO2, which has 20.1 million customers in Germany, Ireland and Britain and a market capitalization of nearly $15 billion, could be a bellwether for the European telecommunications industry.
No big cross-border deals have occurred in Europe since an industrywide shake-up in 2001. The main competitors have spent the last two and a half years selling assets and cutting costs to stabilize their balance sheets. Now analysts are predicting that these newly cleaned-up companies will start to acquire their weaker rivals or merge with other strong players.
''The measures taken by the industry have largely stabilized operators' financial positions,'' which has been positive for companies' credit ratings and shareholders, Fitch Ratings said in its most recent report on the European telecom sector. ''Nevertheless, shareholders and managements can be expected to start considering new growth and consolidation opportunities,'' the report said.
KPN will present its fourth-quarter and full-year 2003 earnings Monday, and is expected to report a sharp rise in profit from a year ago, based on a tax break and the absence of revamping charges that plagued the company in 2002. Sales, though, are expected to be flat, in part because the company added fewer customers in Germany than Deutsche Telekom and Vodafone in the fourth quarter.
MMO2 was spun off from the BT Group two years ago, and reported its first profit last November. On Feb. 4, the company said that it added 335,000 net new customers in Germany in the three months that ended Dec. 31, bringing its total customer base there to 5.59 million.
At the end of 2003, KPN had 14.7 million mobile customers in Germany, Belgium and the Netherlands.
