YOU already know tons about LeBron James, the Cleveland Cavaliers' sensational rookie. You know the type of shoes he wears and soon you'll know what gum he chews. After the Cavaliers' 92-86 victory over the Knicks yesterday, James signed a contract to endorse Bubblicious chewing gum.
Beyond the endorsements and the hype, James did a couple of things that tell you all you need to know about his roots and basketball perspective, and which make him more than a passing fancy.
Just before tip-off, James walked over to the Knicks' bench and shook hands with Lenny Wilkens. Rehearsed? Spontaneous? Doesn't matter. His gesture was an act of respect, a nod to history and Wilkens's stature. Wilkens is one of only two people inducted into the Basketball Hall of Fame as a player and a coach.
''He's a legendary coach,'' James said afterward. ''I have to pay my respects to a coach like that. He's one of the best coaches that ever coached and he played great basketball, too.''
The second snapshot came an hour after Cleveland handed the Knicks their second straight loss at Madison Square Garden. James was talking in a corridor with family and friends when Zydrunas Ilgauskas, Cleveland's 7-foot-3-inch center, emerged from the locker room and walked over. James led a round of impromptu applause for his teammate, who had stolen the thunder from James's New York debut. Ilgauskas made 14 of 22 shots and scored a season-high 31 points.
''He's awesome,'' James said. ''I know what he can do; he does it all the time in practice.''
I'm sure some fans left the Garden disappointed that James didn't jump out of the building, score 50 points (he had 22) or block a dozen shots. But at a juncture when anointed stars try to live up to their hype and wow the crowd, James, at age 19, has been notable as much for what he doesn't do as for what he does. He never hid his excitement about playing at the Garden for the first time, but he stayed out of the way. He allowed Ilgauskas to have his day. He let Carlos Boozer and Jeff McInnis to do most of the heavy lifting while he flexed his muscle only when needed.
Everyone has been raving about James, and Paul Silas, the Cavaliers' first-year coach, is his biggest booster. ''The phenomenon of this kid is overwhelming,'' Silas said. ''I've never seen anything like it.''
Silas said James's drive to win and his basketball maturity reminded him of Michael Jordan after he had played several years in the league.
''But to start out like this, to not have even shot a basket in the Garden -- they got billboards for him and all that,'' Silas said. ''I'm telling you, if he didn't know how to handle it well, this whole thing could go up in smoke. The one thing I love about him is that he's all about team, he's all about winning, and that's what makes it work. If he was a different kind of dude, it wouldn't work.''
For James, the best part of his rookie season is that Silas is his coach. Just as the first year could have been a disaster were James more egocentric, it also could have been a disaster if he had a coach other than Silas, whose career as an N.B.A. player and coach spans 40 years.
What I respect about Silas -- and Wilkens, too -- is that he understands how each generation has its own way of seeing and playing the game.
''He's great,'' James said of Silas. ''He helped me make the transition. At the beginning he stuck me in as point guard and let me run the floor. People ask me if it's a tough transition from the one to the two, but I played the two my whole life. Coach is just giving me comfort -- a bed on the court, that's how I look at it.''
Silas broke into the N.B.A. in 1964 with the St. Louis Hawks and retired as a player in 1980 with the Seattle Supersonics. He then coached the San Diego Clippers and later the Charlotte/New Orleans Hornets. Silas was known as a tough player. Now he is known as a coach who doesn't take any nonsense, but who gives players respect and space as they earn his trust.
Silas has walked a careful line with James, nurturing his brilliance while recognizing that he is still only 19. ''I give him some leeway to be himself,'' Silas said. ''You can nitpick about a whole lot of things, but he's got to learn, he's got to grow. That's where he is right now: he's in the process of really learning and growing and becoming a star.''
For all the talk about James's gifts, he is still a young player who looks for the coach's approval.
''He'll make a mistake and the first thing he'll do is look over at me,'' Silas said. ''I told him: 'Eventually you're going to stop looking at me every time you make a mistake. You can't do that -- you just got to play your game. Everything's all right -- it's O.K.' ''
All of a sudden the Cavaliers are one major player away from serious contention in the Eastern Conference -- because of Ilgauskas, James and Boozer. If they get a shooter to go with James, you might be looking at a very significant turnaround.
But I wouldn't rush things.
There's nothing worse for a coach's job security than getting too much too soon, like advancing two or three rounds in the playoffs right off the bat. If I were Silas, I'd be content if this ride went nice and slow.
Sports of The Times
