Nascar's top series has become a playground for young drivers in recent years, and Matt Kenseth has emerged as the best, winning the season points title in 2003.
But yet another wave of up-and-comers is chasing, and a rookie nearly took the Subway 400 away from Kenseth after he had led most of the race on Sunday at North Carolina Speedway. Kasey Kahne made a late charge and almost caught Kenseth on the final turn of the last lap.
Kenseth's winning margin -- a hundredth of a second, barely the tip of the nose of the racecar -- ties for the fourth closest in the Nascar series's history.
Jamie McMurray, the 2003 rookie of the year, was also in the hunt at the end and finished third.
''I expected him to make a last-ditch effort, but I didn't expect it to be there,'' Kenseth said of Kahne. ''I didn't expect him to get that good of a run, so it was kind of a surprise, and I was glad we made it back there.''
Kahne was not sure who had won when the race ended. ''Nobody told me,'' said Kahne, who was competing in his second Nextel Cup race. ''I wasn't sure until I got on the frontstretch and they said I ran second.''
It was a controversial finish to the race, in which Kenseth's Ford led for 259 of 393 laps. A crash late in the race led to a caution flag moments after the leaders, Kenseth and Kahne, went onto pit road. McMurray took over the lead as the caution flag came out.
McMurray thought he should have maintained the lead through the caution, but Kenseth and Kahne were put in front for the restart on Lap 364. McMurray's car owners, Chip Ganassi and Felix Sabates, confronted Nascar officials after the race.
But under Nascar rules instituted this year, the field position is frozen when a caution flag comes out, and it was determined that Kenseth and Kahne were still on the lead lap then. They took over the top spots when other drivers on the lead lap, like McMurray, pitted during the caution.
There was even more controversy after the caution. On the restart, with the lapped car of Mark Martin in front on the inside lane, and his Roush Racing teammate, Kenseth, on the lead lap on the outside lane, Kenseth was able to pull far ahead. It took some time for Kahne and McMurray to clear Martin's car and chase down Kenseth.
''I don't know if it made a difference late in the race,'' Kahne said. ''But I definitely could have caught Matt maybe three or four laps earlier if Mark wasn't there. But that's teammates.''
Martin and the team's owner, Jack Roush, were called to the Nascar trailer after the race and reviewed a tape of the restart.
''For there to be a question whether Mark tried to benefit Matt, that is out of order,'' Roush said. ''This is my 17th year with Mark. He doesn't block anybody or get in anybody's way and never has for all those years.''
It was Kenseth's first victory of 2004 and a chance to prove he is out to do more than finish in the top 10 each week, as he did last year in capturing the points championship despite winning just one race. Kenseth's dull consistency last season, when he ran away with the title early, helped inspire series officials to change the points system that determines the series champion.
This year, there will be a runoff among the top 10 drivers in the final 10 races of the season to decide the Nextel Cup champion. And Kenseth, who was ninth last week in the season-opening Daytona 500, is hoping to make sure he will be a part of it.
He is one of three drivers to finish in the top 10 in the first two races of the season, joining Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Jeff Gordon.
A week after winning the Daytona 500, Earnhardt finished fifth on Sunday, his best result at North Carolina Speedway. Gordon, who was seventh at Daytona, finished 10th on Sunday.
Earnhardt maintained his overall points lead for a second week, with Kenseth now behind by 7 points.
''It's been admittedly my worst track on the schedule,'' Earnhardt said when asked how important it was to come away with a top-five finish here.
''It's awesome. I think all of my fans are breathing a big sigh of relief, anyway.''
PIT STOPS
Nascar's president, MIKE HELTON, warned drivers and crew chiefs before the race Sunday to eliminate profanity when they are being interviewed. Helton cited the JANET JACKSON controversy during the Super Bowl halftime show and the ensuing federal scrutiny as a reason to be careful. . . . There was one spectacular crash in the race, CARL LONG's car flipping over several times in a four-car wreck. He was uninjured.
AUTO RACING
