Mike Weir knows how to win. He just doesn't know how to win without drama.
After holding a seven-stroke lead with 15 holes to play, he was barely hanging on when he reached the final hole of the Nissan Open on Sunday. The lead was gone; Shigeki Maruyama had pulled even by playing brilliantly, and he was on the verge of ruining Weir's goal of repeating as tournament champion.
Weir reacted the way one would expect from a reigning Masters champion.
Hitting a brilliant chip shot to save par at No. 18, he held on for a one-stroke victory over Maruyama, who made his only bogey of the day on the final hole. It was Weir's seventh victory on the PGA Tour, but his first since capturing his green jacket at Augusta National Golf Club last April.
Weir finished at 17-under-par 267 after an even-par 71, ahead of Maruyama (67) and Stuart Appleby, who finished third after a 66, three strokes off the pace. John Daly continued his resurgence by finishing fourth (13 under), after winning the Buick Invitational a week earlier. Tiger Woods shot a final-round 64 and finished tied for seventh, but he has yet to win in six tournaments as a professional at Riviera Country Club, the only site where he has played that often without a victory.
Weir has all but mastered Riviera. He is the tournament's sixth back-to-back winner, joining Mac Smith (1928-29), Ben Hogan (1947-48), Paul Harney (1964-65), Arnold Palmer (1966-67) and Corey Pavin (1994-95). It is the kind of company Weir wants to keep, but with a five-stroke lead over Maruyama when the day began, he sweated for this victory more than he had planned.
''I've been out here seven years; I've seen pretty much every situation there is,'' said Weir, whose previous six victories were come-from-behind affairs. ''When Shigeki birdied 16, I said, 'You got to love it.' If you said at the beginning of the week that we'd be tied on No. 17, I'd be happy with it. It wasn't maybe what I expected at the beginning of the day. But that's the reality right now, and I need to bear down.''
At the 465-yard No. 18, Weir put on display one of the world's best short games. Maruyama and Weir missed the green with their approach shots, but after Maruyama chipped his third shot 12 feet past the hole, Weir worked his short-game magic. Standing on a hill left of the green, about 45 feet from the pin, he sent a delicate chip shot onto the green, and the gallery roared as the ball landed softly and rolled directly toward the hole. The ball barely missed the cup and settled two feet past the hole.
''That was kind of the story of the week, my up-and-down game,'' said Weir, who had been 0 for 5 when holding 54-hole leads.
Weir's problems were partly Maruyama's doing. Weir still held a five-stroke lead at the turn, but there was a two-shot swing at No. 10, when Weir bogeyed and Maruyama birdied. At No. 13, Weir had a three-putt bogey that cut his lead to two strokes. Maruyama seemed to sense an opportunity. He birdied the 479-yard No. 15, hitting a 3-iron approach shot from 211 yards that stopped 2 feet from the cup. Maruyama has three victories on Tour, and he knew that Weir was feeling the heat.
''I'm very happy to scare Mikey,'' Maruyama, a native of Japan, said through an interpreter. ''I was seven shots down, so I was attacking.''
Maruyama pulled even with his final birdie at the 172-yard No. 16, hitting a smooth 6-iron tee shot to 8 feet, then making a difficult left-to-right putt. But after both players parred No. 17, Maruyama made a blunder at No. 18 when he missed the fairway to the right in a steady rain.
''That was the biggest mistake of my whole week,'' Maruyama said.
After hitting his second shot short of the green, and chipping 12 feet past, Maruyama still had a chance to save par and force a playoff by making his putt. But he missed wide right, and Weir tapped in for his par and the victory.
At age 33, and in the prime of his career, Weir looks capable of defending his title at Augusta. With the $864,000 first-place check he received, Weir surpassed the $14 million mark in career earnings. He has come a long way since the days when he could not afford a caddie; his wife, Bricia, caddied for him.
After winning his previous Tour titles by rallying on the final day, Weir said he was proud that he could keep his cool and the lead here, even though it was more exciting than he had hoped.
''Shigeki got on a roll, he started firing at pins and his confidence kept growing,'' Weir said. ''I had never defended a title. It means a lot. There's a lot of history at this golf course: Ben Hogan; this year's honoree was Arnold Palmer, who won multiple times here. There's some great names on the list. I'm not comparing myself to them, but it's nice that I've won a couple of times here as well.''
GOLF
