He had to hand over his tie, belt and shoelaces when he was arrested.
John J. Rigas, the 79-year-old founder of Adelphia Communications, has said that the humiliation of his arrest has haunted him since he was taken from his apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan at 6 a.m. on July 24, 2002, with two of his sons, and charged with looting Adelphia of more than $1 billion. The government described it as ''one of the most extensive financial frauds ever to take place at a public company.''
Today, Mr. Rigas -- along with those two sons, Timothy and Michael -- will go on trial in Federal District Court in downtown Manhattan to fight those charges. He may even take the stand. His lawyers have indicated that they may call him as a witness, hoping his frailty and soft-spoken manner could win over a jury that may otherwise have lumped him with the likes of L. Dennis Kozlowski and Martha Stewart, both of whom are already on trial in Lower Manhattan. Ms. Stewart's trial is in the same complex of federal courthouses on Pearl Street where the Rigas trial will be held, and Mr. Kozlowski's is in state court a few blocks away.
Corporate-scandal trial season is in full swing. Before the Rigas case concludes -- jury selection starts today and the trial is expected to last several months, with dozens of witnesses -- the same federal courthouses will also be the site for the trial of WorldCom's former chief financial officer, Scott D. Sullivan, and the retrial of Frank P. Quattrone, the former Credit Suisse First Boston technology banker, whose first trial ended in a hung jury.
''The chickens are all coming home to roost now,'' said John J. Fahy, a former federal and New Jersey prosecutor. ''We're seeing the results of things that began when Enron first broke.''
''The Department of Justice can now honestly say that they have done a lot,'' he said, adding that the trials will ease some of the public pressure on the department to act against corporate fraud.
In some ways, the Rigas case can be viewed as an amalgam of other recent cases involving corporate scandals. The prosecution's case centers on accusations of pure greed, and is similar in some ways to the charges against Mr. Kozlowski. But with its claims of accounting fraud, the case is also like that against Mr. Sullivan. And, as in so many of the corporate scandals of recent years, the Rigas case involves what prosecutors see as the blurring of private financial interests and public fiduciary responsibilities, and inadequate supervision by a corporate board. The case is also likely to reprise a common accusation in such trials: that, too often, auditors and lawyers simply looked the other way.
But as prosecutors have learned from the Kozlowski trial and others, persuading a jury to carefully weigh complex testimony about accounting rules can be a challenge.
Prosecutors contend that Mr. Rigas, the son of Greek immigrants who started with a movie theater in a sleepy town in northern Pennsylvania in 1952 and built the business into the nation's sixth-largest cable television operator, improperly used the company's money for his own purposes -- buying Adelphia stock, building a $13 million golf course and shuttling family members back and forth from a safari vacation in Africa, among other expenses.
When Adelphia, based in Coudersport, Pa., filed for bankruptcy protection on June 25, 2002, it listed $18.6 billion in debt.
In the trial, Mr. Rigas and his sons are each using their own lawyers and are said to be planning similar defense strategies. But legal experts say that, of the three, it may be Timothy Rigas who will have the toughest fight. As Adelphia's chief financial officer, he ran much of the day-to-day operations of the company and, according to the government's case, was the crucial figure in some of the most controversial decisions. Michael Rigas was the executive vice president for operations. Another son, James, who was executive vice president for strategic planning, has not been charged.
The case is likely to turn on the minutiae of accounting and public disclosure decisions related to an unusual borrowing arrangement by Adelphia that allowed the Rigases to draw on a $3 billion line of credit for which the company was liable if the Rigases could not repay.
While the arrangement was disclosed to investors, the amount that the Rigases borrowed was not -- until March 2002. That is when the company acknowledged for the first time that the family had drawn $2.3 billion and used much of the money to buy company stock. Investors dumped the stock in droves, sending the shares of Adelphia spiraling downward and with it, the collateral that the Rigases had hoped to use to repay the loan -- effectively ensuring that the loans could never be paid back.
The Rigases are expected to use an ''everybody signed off on it'' defense, presenting scores of board minutes and financial statements. And indeed, Adelphia's board, its outside auditor, Deloitte &amp; Touche, and the company's law firm, Buchanan Ingersoll, did approve the borrowing, but they say they did not know the full extent of it.
Prosecutors are planning to call as witnesses most of Adelphia's former directors, who have all indicated so far that they were unaware the family was using the loan to buy the company's stock. Adelphia, currently operating under bankruptcy protection with a new board and management, has filed its own suit against the Rigases.
Prosecutors are also expected to call James R. Brown, the company's former vice president for finance, and Timothy A. Werth, the former director of accounting, who have already pleaded guilty to charges of securities fraud and conspiracy to commit securities fraud, wire fraud and bank fraud.
When Mr. Werth made his plea in January, he told Judge Gerard E. Lynch of United States District Court in Manhattan: ''I joined Adelphia with good intentions. I had no idea that Adelphia senior officials were engaged in any sort of misconduct. After I moved to Coudersport and joined the company, however, I learned that they were, and I agreed to participate.''
The case is going to be argued before United States District Judge Leonard B. Sand, who three years ago presided over the trial of four associates of Osama bin Laden who were sentenced to life in prison without parole for their roles in the 1998 bombings of the American embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.
The lawyer for John Rigas, Peter E. Fleming Jr., is expected to set the agenda for the defense. Mr. Fleming, a 6-foot-6 longtime criminal lawyer with a booming voice, was the lead lawyer in the late 1980's for Drexel Burnham Lambert, which settled securities fraud charges for $600 million.
No matter how long the trial takes, Mr. Rigas is said to be eager to have his day in court. In a tearful interview last spring, he said: ''We did nothing illegal. My conscience is clear about that.''
