NAME ALL THE ANIMALS  A Memoir  By Alison Smith  319 pages. Scribner. $24.
EXPECTING TO FLY  A Sixties Reckoning  By Martha Tod Dudman  243 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
Of two new memoirs describing troubled schoolgirl years, Alison Smith's is the more literary and precise. It is also the more wrenching because its central event is the death of Ms. Smith's adored brother. Martha Tod Dudman's is less ambitious and more lighthearted since its main concern is the author's woozy rebelliousness against her parents and prep school. But Ms. Dudman, whose own story of trauma (''Augusta, Gone'') is already behind her, has a gift for making small details sound scarily, embarrassingly true.
Ms. Smith constructs ''Name All the Animals'' out of graceful vignettes describing her faith and her family. At the start of the book, in 1984, her 18-year-old brother, Roy, gets into his car and heads for work, never to return. ''You could almost smell the pity,'' she writes, as the police arrive at her front door to say the fateful words -- ''Mrs. Smith, there's been an accident'' -- to her mother.
Ms. Smith was 15. Her girlishness is underscored not only by an early description of ice skating, but also by her account of the last important thing she told Roy: that she had just had her first period. The conjoined thoughts of her blood and Roy's attest to the careful, sometimes self-conscious ways in which ''Name All the Animals'' is constructed. Its title comes from a reference to Adam in the Garden of Eden, linked to the way in which Alison's father clings to his Roman Catholicism through terrible times. This metaphor also gets a careful workout or two.
Ms. Smith's faith proves shakier. ''What had I done, I asked myself, to make God disappear and take Roy with him?'' she writes. The contemplation of that question sends her into a period of paralyzing grief. ''I passed entire days tracking the course of a single dust mote across the basement,'' she recounts with the kind of exacting, enhanced power of recollection that colors the book. But if its smaller details are sometimes precious, Ms. Smith has no trouble conveying the larger sensations that she experienced. She watches herself, almost as a stranger, being transformed into ''the Girl Whose Brother Died.''
Much of ''Name All the Animals'' concerns Ms. Smith's experiences at Our Lady of Mercy School for Girls. Surrounded by nuns and plagued by secret doubts, she steps outside the bounds of the permissible to have a schoolgirl romance with another schoolgirl. ''It woke me from a long sleep,'' she writes. ''For this first time since Roy left I wanted something.'' And the affair becomes part of the way she jolts herself back to life.
Roy remains real throughout the book, invoked at well-chosen intervals through memory and through his sister's acts of devotion. (She saves food for him. She regards even his worn-out running shoes with tenderness and reverence.) And the idea of punishment for her transgressions is equally substantial, giving the reader a sense of how much was at stake for her as she tried to regain her bearings. ''Hell was a real place for us, as real as the next neighborhood,'' she writes. ''In our insular Catholic world, hell practically had its own ZIP code.''
Ms. Dudman describes a different kind of purgatory at the start of ''Expecting to Fly.'' Here is Grandma, remembering Woodstock, wondering how she turned into a 50-year-old professional fund-raiser who goes for a walk wearing a pedometer every day. How did she get here? And is it possible to turn back the clock, at least in memory? This recollection of her first experiences with sex, drugs and rebellion in the 1960's manages to accomplish exactly that.
''Augusta, Gone'' described Ms. Dudman's dealings with her hell-raising teenage daughter. As it appears here, Augusta was a chip off the maternal block. When Ms. Dudman's parents found out about her dope smoking, she remembers thinking: ''I couldn't look at them. They were so stupid.'' As she courts expulsion from the tony Madeira School outside Washington (it worked; she was expelled), she shows up stoned. (''In Creative Writing class I feel like I've never been so creative!'')
And when she makes it to Antioch College, she captures the ambience simply but perfectly: ''One of us will point at something -- the way the trees are, the color of the rock, and then the other one will say Yeah Oh Yeah I see what you mean or something and then we both laugh. It's great. Sometimes I go to class.''
Ms. Dudman grew up in Washington with a summer place in Maine and a father who covered the war in Vietnam for The St. Louis Post-Dispatch. The political arena is hip and fun for her at first. (Her volunteer work for Eugene McCarthy becomes central to her social life.) Then it's not. (Her father is captured in Cambodia and remains a prisoner for a while.)
She is candid and even amusing about her general obliviousness to the wider world in those days. But it is clear that she now writes as someone keenly aware of how her actions appear in hindsight. Ms. Dudman eventually discovered, by way of Haight-Ashbury and other detours, that she would rather not spend her life in a daze.
In a risky maneuver that actually works, ''Expecting to Fly'' stages a brief confrontation between the two Marthas, young and old. If this went on for more than a page it might be painful, but it is brief. ''I'm you after all the drugs and the adventures,'' the author imagines telling her schoolgirl counterpart. ''I'm you after all the craziness is past. I'm you with what you've left me.''
And: ''Wrinkles? Of course I've got wrinkles. You laid me out in the sun for hours and hours to wrinkle me up like this.''
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
