From church services in Columbus to a packed ballroom at Ohio State University, from a meeting with locked-out workers in Niles, Ohio, to union hall rallies here, the message was the same.
''All you've got to do is look around this room, and it is clear that the people of America want this campaign to continue,'' Senator John Edwards said Sunday night at a packed union hall here, just as he had told several other audiences in recent days.
But time is running short for Mr. Edwards as he tries to erase the imposing leads that Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has in the most recent polls in virtually all 10 states voting on Super Tuesday, March 2, for the Democratic presidential nominee.
Late surges propelled Mr. Edwards to victory in the South Carolina primary and surprisingly strong second-place finishes in Iowa and Wisconsin, and he believes that he can create similar rallies in coming primaries and even overtake Mr. Kerry if time does not run out.
To that end, Mr. Edwards is soliciting support from followers of Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, who dropped out of the race last week. Echoing Dr. Dean's populist message, Mr. Edwards has taken to describing himself as the candidate of ''new ideas and a new vision.''
Mr. Edwards is also continuing to portray himself as a champion for working people, attacking President Bush as tone-deaf to the problems of ordinary Americans and ''at war with working people'' in his economic policies.
''He is completely out of touch with what's happening in people's lives in this country,'' Mr. Edwards told a gathering of steelworkers who have been locked out of a titanium plant in Niles since October.
''For me, it's not politics, it's not academic, it's personal, and I will fight for you every day that I'm president,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I understand what you are going through. My own father worked in a mill, and I saw with my own eyes what happened when that mill closed.''
Mr. Edwards, a preternaturally engaging and disciplined campaigner, hardly varies his pitch from event to event, down to the tiniest gags intended to seem ad-libbed. For instance, when he mentions former Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, a conservative Republican, there is almost always a chorus of groans to which Mr. Edwards bemusedly replies, as if it just occurred to him, ''Correct response.''
Mr. Edwards first appealed to those who had supported ''my friend,'' Dr. Dean, at a Saturday afternoon rally in St. Paul.
He went on to make the exact appeal to other audiences on Saturday night and Sunday, indicating that he intended to make a more open push for former Dean supporters.
Mr. Edwards told reporters Sunday evening that the reason he began mentioning Dr. Dean in speeches was because he noticed so many Dean supporters in the audiences.
The pitch has resonated with the overflow crowds Mr. Edwards has attracted in recent days. In the west ballroom of the Ohio Union, the crowd roared its approval when Mr. Edwards praised Dr. Dean and more than a third of them rose to their feet, applauding.
He has also spoken regularly with Dr. Dean, including conversations as recently as two days ago, and although he called the conversations ''very positive, both from his perspective and from mine,'' there was no indication whether Dr. Dean would endorse him.
Each time, Mr. Edwards said, he has conveyed the same message to Dr. Dean: ''I want your help. I want you to support me. It's not rocket science.''
Marge Romero, a secretary at the Minnesota Legislature, said she had been persuaded by other ardent Dean supporters to come hear Mr. Edwards speak.
''What really motivates the Dean supporters is 'Oh, my gosh, anybody but Bush,' '' Ms. Romero said.
After hearing Mr. Edwards speak, she said, ''Yeah, I think I'll probably go with him.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
