A Palestinian suicide bomber killed himself and at least eight other passengers aboard a crowded bus in the center of Jerusalem on Sunday, a day before the International Court of Justice was to start hearings about the West Bank barrier that Israel says it needs to block such attacks.
The rush-hour blast wounded more than 50 people. As an icy wind lashed Jerusalem, emergency workers pulled flapping plastic body bags over the remains of the dead.
''It was a fireball -- smoke, windows shattered,'' said Moshe Matitya, 38, who witnessed the attack from his car about 15 feet away. ''People fell out, bodies fell out, parts of bodies.''
Then, he said, ''People started pushing their way out, a lot of them with blood all over them.''
The wounded included teenagers on their way to school. The dead -- seven men and one woman -- were all 18 or older, the police said. They included two high school seniors.
The bombing occurred at the foot of Liberty Bell Park, dedicated in honor of the American bicentennial, and a block from the Inbal Hotel, where the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations was holding its annual meeting.
Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, a violent offshoot of Yasir Arafat's Fatah faction, claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement that called the Israeli barrier ''a Nazi wall.'' It released a videotape of the bomber, a 23-year-old man from a village near Bethlehem, and said the attack was in retaliation for the barrier and for an Israeli raid into the Gaza Strip on Feb. 11 that killed 15 Palestinians.
With his security officials, Mr. Arafat, the Palestinian leader, issued a statement condemning the attack and promising action ''as soon as possible'' against those responsible. Israel accuses Mr. Arafat of fomenting, if not directing, such violence.
The American Jewish conferees were attending a briefing in a hotel room with the Israeli chief of staff, Lt. Gen. Moshe Yaalon, when the general was passed a note informing him of the bombing.
Several of the Americans made their way through a throng of reporters and past a police cordon to survey the destruction.
Standing near the ruined bus, Representative Jerrold Nadler, a New York Democrat, said the bombing underscored the ''hypocrisy'' of the hearings in The Hague.
''Israel is being put in the dock for taking mild defensive measures,'' he said. ''Arguments are being made that the fence inconveniences Palestinians -- and I'm sure it does -- but they ought to blame their own leaders.''
Palestinian leaders say they would not object to an Israeli barrier built on the so-called Green Line, the boundary between Israel and the West Bank. But they say the barrier Israel is constructing, portions of which are inside the West Bank, amounts to a land grab that will disrupt the lives of tens of thousands of Palestinians and provoke violence, not prevent it.
Israel has built roughly 110 miles of the barrier, a network of fencing, concrete walls, ditches and guard towers that is about 165 feet wide in most places and is planned to stretch more than 450 miles. Israel occupied the West Bank and Gaza Strip in the 1967 Middle East war. The Palestinian leadership says it wants to establish a state in those territories.
Just before the bombing on Sunday, Israel began demolishing a five-mile segment of the barrier that cut a Palestinian village off from the West Bank. Officials said that section was no longer necessary because workers had completed a parallel section west of the village, along the Green Line.
Israel has built the barrier into the West Bank and around some Palestinian villages in part so that it could include some Israeli settlements on the Israeli side. The Bush administration has been urging Israel to hew to the Green Line.
The barrier is under construction around Jerusalem. Israeli officials contended that if it had already been completed here, it would have prevented the bombing.
Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades identified the bomber as Muhammad Zaoul, from the village of Hussan. Relatives said Mr. Zaoul, the married father of a 2-year-old boy, used to sneak into Jerusalem to work in the Talpiot industrial area. They said he had been shot and wounded earlier in the conflict.
''What do you expect from someone who can't find money to buy milk for his baby?'' Amjad Zaoul, a cousin, said of the bombing.
As Israeli forces sealed off the Bethlehem area, the Zaoul family evacuated its four-room house in anticipation of its demolition, a standard Israeli reprisal measure.
An Aksa cell in Bethlehem conducted the last suicide bombing in Jerusalem, killing 11 people on the No. 19 bus on Jan. 29. Israeli officials say that Al Aksa cells, including the one in Bethlehem, are increasingly financed and directed by Iran, acting through the Hezbollah guerrilla group in Lebanon.
On Sunday, the bomber boarded the No. 14 bus in Talpiot and rode it for a couple of miles before detonating his explosive, which he apparently carried in a bag packed with metal bits, said Superintendent Gil Kleiman of the Israel police.
''He traveled quite a distance,'' Superintendent Kleiman said. ''Usually they get on and blow up.'' He said it was possible that the bomber was waiting for the bus to fill with passengers.
Superintendent Kleiman said that two security guards rode the bus for portions of that trip, and that one of them stepped off just before the blast. No one noticed anything suspicious, he said.
Mr. Zaoul blew himself up at 8:30 a.m., toward the back of the then-crowded bus, at a red light just past the point where Bethlehem Road converges with a road called the Valley of the Ghosts.
David Tucker, 22, a rescue worker, arrived minutes later, as wounded people were fleeing in panic. ''There was one woman with pieces of flesh in her hair,'' he said. ''Inside the bus there was a man underneath the seats screaming. We did not hear him at first because of all the chaos. Then three or four guys got him out. He was missing a leg.''
Harvey Tannenbaum, 51, was driving on an intersecting street when he heard the explosion. He parked and rushed to help. ''I saw three women lying on the street, screaming as they were bleeding,'' he said. He said he accidentally tripped over a severed head that was also in the street.
Mr. Tannenbaum said an elderly woman called to him in Yiddish from another nearby bus stop. ''She kept asking me how many children were killed,'' he said.
He said the woman said: ''Russia, Russia, I want to go home. Israel has died.''
Within two hours, the bus was hauled away, and as traffic resumed workers speedily erased any sign of destruction. Government officials prepared for a conference beginning Sunday evening on tourism to Israel.
