The chief executive of the Halliburton Company, Dave Lesar, never imagined that he would be the star of his own television commercial. But there he is, on the airwaves in Washington and Houston, assuring viewers that his company has billions of dollars in contracts to rebuild Iraq and feed American troops ''because of what we know, not who we know.''
The unnamed ''who'' is, of course, Vice President Dick Cheney, Halliburton's chief executive from 1995 to 2000. Mr. Cheney's ties to the huge oil services, engineering and reconstruction company have become a favorite Democratic attack line in the 2004 campaign.
''He did give Halliburton a higher profile,'' Mr. Lesar said in a telephone interview last week from his company's base in Houston. ''I would never in my wildest dreams have thought we would have the profile we have today, but I think that is just part of the political process we're in.''
The advertising, Mr. Lesar added, will continue until the end of the presidential campaign ''because I don't believe we're going to disappear as a political story.''
But at a time when President Bush's own campaign commercials have yet to start, the Halliburton spots -- two are on the air so far -- have created an awkward situation for the White House, which has not fallen over itself to embrace them. Mr. Cheney's office had no comment, and neither did the Bush campaign. But one Republican official close to the administration said the company was clearly thinking of itself, not the president's re-election.
''They get a bum rap, they're acting in their own interest, and that's their prerogative,'' said the official, who did not want to be named because he did not want to be seen as intertwined with the advertisements. ''I'm not sure there's any real benefit for anyone but them.''
Among advertising professionals, the commercials, which include videotape of smiling troops in a chow line in Iraq, have created a debate about how much good they are really doing for the company. Halliburton is trying to tamp down continuing accusations and investigations into whether it is overcharging for services in Iraq.
Mr. Lesar addresses the accusations in one advertisement when he says that ''you've heard a lot about Halliburton lately'' but ''criticism is O.K. -- we can take it. Criticism is not failure.''
Mr. Lesar also says in the advertisement that the company has been in business for 60 years, working for governments led by each party. He does not point out that in the last decade the company has given more than $800,000 to Republican candidates and $80,000 to Democrats, according to Political Money Line, a company that provides campaign finance data.
Donny Deutsch, chairman and chief executive of the Deutsch advertising agency in New York, called the commercials ''insane.''
'' 'It's not who you know' -- come on, it's doth protest too much,'' Mr. Deutsch said. ''This just puts a spotlight and a megaphone on the issue. Martha Stewart would not take out a paid ad and say, 'Before you buy any of my housewares, just remember I'm innocent.' It's a bizarre media strategy.''
But Sig Rogich, a major fund-raiser for the president's campaign who was the advertising director for the first President Bush's 1988 and 1992 campaigns, said the commercials made sense: ''I think it's smart that they are reminding the world that they've been in business for many, many years, long before they became a political lightning rod. I think it's a good strategy.''
A Republican member of Congress was less charitable about the advertisements. ''They're pitiful,'' said the Republican, who did not want to be identified because he did not want the president to be angry at him. ''They're about as believable as a crocodile going onto the Senate floor and voting.''
Last week, to cite one example of the company's problems, Halliburton said that it had stopped billing the Pentagon for the cost of feeding American troops in Iraq and Kuwait until a dispute over the number of meals served is resolved. A larger question is whether a company subsidiary overcharged the government by $61 million while importing fuel to Iraq, an issue the president was forced to address. ''If there's an overcharge, like we think there is, we expect that money to be repaid,'' Mr. Bush said in December.
All of which adds up, Mr. Lesar said in the interview, to a need for the company to defend itself on the air.
''Essentially it was an attempt to clear up the record,'' he said, while declining to say how much Halliburton was spending on the campaign or in what other cities the spots would appear.
Mr. Lesar, who said he did not discuss the commercials beforehand with Mr. Cheney -- ''absolutely not, we make our own decisions'' -- would not go so far as to call the vice president a liability for the company.
But, Mr. Lesar said, ''we are in the middle of an election cycle, he is part of the election cycle and therefore we are getting a level of scrutiny that in my view is unprecedented in the history of corporate America.''
White House Letter
