The Israelis sent grieving parents and the singed shell of a bombed bus. The Palestinians sent farmers cut off from their land.
They have come for an International Court of Justice hearing that begins Monday on a planned 450-mile barrier of ditches, watch posts and concrete walls that Israel is erecting in and around the West Bank. The hearing, expected to last three days, was requested by the United Nations General Assembly, which sought an advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the barrier.
The Israeli government calls the barrier a defense against suicide bombers -- an argument it repeated Sunday when a Palestinian suicide bomber attacked a bus in Jerusalem, killing at least eight other passengers. The Palestinian Authority calls it a deceptive land grab, a violation of international law and a new form of apartheid that further oppresses Palestinians on the West Bank.
Officially, Israel contends that the court has no jurisdiction. But symbolically, the hearing has become an important variable that could complicate the stalled Middle East peace talks. A ruling that the barrier is illegal, while nonbinding, could be a public relations disaster for Israel.
''The court is being asked to take one part of the Middle East peace process and resolve it in isolation,'' said Ruth Wedgwood, a professor of international law at the Johns Hopkins University School of Advanced International Studies in Washington.
The United States and the European Union have criticized the barrier's planned path, which includes the protection of some Jewish settlements. But they prefer to see a diplomatic rather than a legal solution -- a position that is closer to the Israeli view of the hearing.
''This is not the place to solve the conflict,'' said Gideon Meir, leader of the Israeli delegation in The Hague.
Palestinian representatives disagree. ''They have no case,'' said Nasser al-Kidwa, leader of the Palestinian observer mission to the United Nations.
The suicide bombing on Sunday in Jerusalem was a reminder in The Hague that the legal issue before the court is part of a larger struggle.
''Had there been a completed fence today in Jerusalem, we probably would have been able to prevent this terror attack,'' Mr. Meir said. ''It reinforces once again why we need the fence.''
Mr. Kidwa condemned the bombing. ''Whoever is doing this is not doing it in the interests of the Palestinian people,'' he said in an interview in The Hague.
The court is to hear Palestinian claims that the barrier violates international treaties guaranteeing freedom of movement and the right to earn a living.
''This is an attempt to de facto annex big areas of the Palestinian territory,'' Mr. Kidwa said. ''This is something that, if allowed to continue, will create a walled-in Palestinian population in two or three enclaves or ghettos.''
Israel has challenged the court's jurisdiction in a written submission but has decided not to appear at the hearing. Israel says its only concern is the safety of Israeli citizens.
''We are protecting people, we are not protecting land,'' Mr. Meir said.
Over the next few days, demonstrations and news conferences are planned by the Palestinian and Israeli sides. ZAKA, the Israeli emergency aid group, has had a bombed-out bus flown in to use as a backdrop.
Two demonstrators here find themselves on opposite sides of the fence, literally and figuratively. Sharif Omar, 60, a fruit farmer and olive grower in Jayyous on the West Bank, said he had been denied access to his land since November because Israeli authorities have not issued him a permit to pass through a crossing point in the barrier. ''I can't live without my farm. It's impossible,'' Mr. Omar said in an interview. ''I'll become a beggar because I don't have any other resources.''
Arnold Roth, 52, said he came to remind the world that his teenage daughter, Malka, was killed in a suicide bombing in downtown Jerusalem in 2001. He said he was not a political person by nature but the barrier should not be the court's concern.
''As the father of a 15-year-old child who was murdered in cold blood by truly evil people,'' Mr. Roth said, ''I'm not sure anyone can tell me and my society how best to protect our children.''
