Some might say the tide is turning against same-sex marriages in San Francisco, with Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger declaring on national television Sunday that he is ''very much against'' them and lawyers for the state working over the weekend on a strategy to block them.
But 11 days into Mayor Gavin Newsom's policy of issuing marriage licenses to gay and lesbian couples, supporters put the politics and law aside for an afternoon and did what newlyweds most everywhere do.
They had a party.
''It has been a love revolution, a bloodless coup,'' Molly McKay, executive director of an organization called Marriage Equality California, shouted in a hotel ballroom packed with about 1,800 people, including 600 newlyweds. Ms. McKay was dressed in a white wedding gown, as were countless other women in attendance.
It was one of the biggest wedding events anyone could remember in San Francisco, rivaling the fuss made 50 years ago when Marilyn Monroe and Joe DiMaggio were married here. It was so crowded that dozens of invitees waited outside the Hyatt Regency because there was no more room inside.
''A wedding is always special, and it is important we celebrate these weddings,'' said Louise Zivnuska, who was invited by her son, Rob, 28, and his partner, John Wang, 29, the first male couple to be married at City Hall.
The wedding reception was open to all of the newlyweds, but the invitations mentioned the names of just two: Del Martin, 83, and Phyllis Lyon, 79, the first of the nearly 3,200 same-sex couples married here since Feb. 12.
''It is my honor to present Mrs. and Mrs. Phyllis Lyon and Del Martin,'' Ms. McKay announced as the two women entered the ballroom arm in arm behind a parade of children tossing rose petals into the air.
The two women, partners for 51 years and longtime lesbian activists, slowly made their way toward two overstuffed red chairs, where they sat and held hands. They were dressed in the same pantsuits, one lavender and one blue, that they had worn on their wedding day.
The well-wishers were so numerous that they had to be kept behind velvet railings, the kind more commonly associated with Hollywood openings. As Ms. Lyon and Ms. Martin passed them, two women in bridal veils turned to each other and kissed. Another looked as if she might begin hyperventilating, patting her chest and fighting back tears.
''You are really somebodies, you know that?'' the Rev. Cecil Williams of Glide Memorial Church told the elderly couple. ''We expect you to continue to lead the struggle for all of us.''
Ms. Lyon said the couple had essentially gone into hiding since they were married 11 days ago. She said she had considered wearing sunglasses in public as a disguise, but decided against it because it had been raining so much.
The couple made it clear that they had no interest in wedding gifts, having registered nowhere and insisting they had a small house that was already full. But Olivia Cruises and Resorts, which caters to lesbian travelers, gave them two tickets to a Boston-to-Montreal cruise, and Ms. Martin said Mayor Newsom had presented them with copies of the California and United States Constitutions.
She said she had read the California Constitution as she waited for a ride to the reception.
Just behind the big red chairs was a three-tier wedding cake made with roses (for love) and Meyer lemons (grown in many San Francisco backyards). In contrast to most wedding receptions, it was sometimes hard at this one to separate the support staff from the people doing the celebrating. The cake chef, Elizabeth Falkner, 38, was also a newlywed, but she said she would do her celebrating some other time.
''We will have a party and a ceremony where I can wear what I want to wear,'' said Ms. Falkner, who was dressed in a white chef's coat.
In other respects, this was just another wedding reception.
At a silent auction table, there were toasters, the two-slice and four-slice varieties, and blenders, both hand-held and stationary. Professional photographers worked the room, as did countless amateurs with video cameras. Guests checking in at the front door were not expected to have gifts, but they were directed to an oversize jug where contributions were being deposited to pay for the extravaganza.
''It's a bit of a spectacle, but it is high time for it,'' said Kathleen Luna, 43, a newlywed who lives near Sacramento. ''I have given one too many wedding gifts to people in my life, and for a minute I thought it was time for payback. But what I really want is the 1,049 federal rights that come with marriage.''
Many of the celebrators see the same-sex marriages as part of a broader civil rights struggle that they predict will define this generation. They compare the arguments made against them to those made 50 years ago against racial integration.
There is even a distant legal link between the two struggles, Mr. Newsom said in an interview last week. One of the judges hearing the challenges in San Francisco, James L. Warren of San Francisco County Superior Court, is the grandson of Earl Warren, the former chief justice of the United States Supreme Court, who was behind some of that court's most sweeping civil rights rulings.
But many not in attendance Sunday, including Governor Schwarzenegger, do not see gay marriage as a civil rights issue. Speaking on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, said Mayor Newsom, a Democrat, needed to be stopped.
''In San Francisco it's a license for marriage of same sex,'' Mr. Schwarzenegger said. ''Maybe the next thing is another city that hands out licenses for assault weapons and someone else hands out licenses for selling drugs -- I mean, you can't do that. We have to stay within the law. There's a state law that says specific things, and if you want to challenge those laws, then you can go to the court.''
If Mr. Schwarzenegger's perspective on the law was not popular in the Hyatt Regency ballroom, other comments he made about the marriage licenses on television also raised ire beyond here.
The governor told Tim Russert, the host of ''Meet the Press,'' that when he was in San Francisco on Friday, ''all of a sudden we see riots and we see protests and we see people clashing. The next thing we know is there's injured or there's dead people.''
The San Francisco police have reported no violence related to the same-sex marriage certificates. Hallye Jordan, a spokeswoman for Bill Lockyer, the California attorney general, suggested that Mr. Schwarzenegger might have confused his visit to San Francisco with ''part of his next movie.''
''There is no public safety emergency and we disagree with the governor's use of that type of rhetoric,'' Ms. Jordan said.
