The chairman of the Microsoft Corporation, Bill Gates, won widespread applause in January when he trumpeted an agreement to give $1 billion in software and cash to the United Nations as part of a job-training program for the developing world.
But Microsoft did not seek any attention for a much smaller amount that it contributed earlier to pay some travel expenses for a United Nations business standards group.
That payment, critics say, had a much more opportunistic motive than the big donation.
Several software industry executives and technologists contend that Microsoft has been moving behind the scenes to undercut support for a set of business-to-business electronic transaction standards jointly developed by the United Nations and an industry-sponsored international standards group.
Microsoft and senior United Nations officials said that the accusation was false and that the company's contributions were relatively modest, complied with United Nations guidelines, and did not unduly influence decision making.
Microsoft and I.B.M. have been trying to gain backing for a competing approach to writing Internet software, which the two companies argue would be a better, more general solution for business-to-business computer communications than the original United Nations-developed standard, known as ''electronic business using extensible markup language,'' or ebXML in the trade.
The previously hidden dispute may seem arcane, but it revolves around computing standards that are likely to help determine control over an emerging generation of Web services software that is designed to automate buying and selling through networks of computer connections. Many industry executives predict that the new software will ultimately supplant computer operating systems as the linchpin of the industry.
This new fight is occurring as Microsoft, the world's largest software company, moves to the final stages of its legal dispute with antitrust regulators in Europe over its right to integrate features of its competitors' products into its Windows operating system. On another front, Microsoft is being challenged by an array of open-source programs -- starting with Linux but expanding to other arenas -- that are being developed by a loosely organized group of software programmers and distributed at little or no cost.
''Microsoft would love to live in a proprietary world,'' said Robert J. Glushko, director of the Center for Document Engineering at the University of California at Berkeley and an initiator of the ebXML standards effort. ''They are finding it difficult to live in a standards-based world.''
Several technologists who have participated in the United Nations-supported standards-setting effort said the dispute was a new, critical stage in the long fight between Microsoft and its competitors over what they see as Microsoft's overly aggressive business practices. One United Nations official said the bitter industry infighting was inescapable.
''It doesn't matter which side you are on with this company,'' said the official, Klaus-Dieter Naujok, a software designer who is the chairman of the United Nations standards committee involved in the dispute. ''You're doomed if you bring them in, and you're doomed if you exclude them.'' Microsoft paid Mr. Naujok to write a position paper on Web services last year.
Microsoft executives said that their critics were complaining because they are in danger of being left behind by the Microsoft-I.B.M. push in Web services, which the executives said would be based on standards that give the two companies no commercial advantage over others.
''There has been an incredible amount of momentum around Web services,'' said Steven Van Roekel, Microsoft's director for platform strategy. ''This was about industry momentum more than anything else.''
Microsoft's critics see it differently. They point out that Microsoft did not initially participate in the development of the open ebXML standard, which does not require users to rely on its proprietary Biztalk Server product line. The standard was originally developed as a low-cost alternative to a traditional business-to-business computer standard called electronic data interchange.
But as the new standard started gathering considerable support in Asia and Europe, they say, Microsoft, which is based in Redmond, Wash., began to mount its own efforts to blunt its momentum. Despite that, the Pentagon recently adopted ebXML.
Last month, the dispute moved beyond the insular world of experts who set technical standards when Jean-Pierre Henninot, a French official who wrote a letter charging that the United Nations business standards group -- the Center for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business, or Cefact -- was privately turning its back on the ebXML standard.
The letter, which will be discussed at a United Nations meeting this spring, was prompted in part by a decision last August by the United Nations group to end its cooperation with the Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards, the industry standards body with which it developed ebXML.
Critics contend that Microsoft drove a wedge between the two groups by quietly providing financial support to several members of the United Nations standards body.
According to several people involved in developing the ebXML standard, Microsoft first hired two members of a small subcommittee of the United Nations group in late 2002 and early last year. In March 2003, a Microsoft employee introduced a software framework for electronic business to the United Nations subcommittee as an alternative to ebXML.
The issue recently came to a head after Microsoft's opponents learned that the company had paid the travel expenses to Europe and Asia for three United Nations committee members. In September the officials, including two Microsoft employees also serving on the committee, traveled to six countries on a trip that critics said was a thinly disguised effort to promote Microsoft and I.B.M.'s software alternative for developing Web services, known as the business collaboration framework or B.C.F.
I.B.M. was not involved in the travel payments.
Supporters of the business collaboration framework say that it can be used with a variety of software technologies, including ebXML. Critics respond that the Web services around which the framework has been designed are proprietary Microsoft and I.B.M. technologies rather than open standards.
Microsoft and United Nations officials acknowledge that Microsoft helped subsidize the trip, but they had different explanations of the reasons for its support.
Ray Walker, the chairman of the United Nations steering group within Cefact that is overseeing the standard setting, said that because two Microsoft employees were part of the technical group, he thought it was important to go ''along on the tour to make sure there was absolute transparency and no Microsoft input on Cefact's tours to introduce B.C.F. to Asia and Europe.''
He acknowledged that Microsoft paid part of his travel and hotel expenses on the tour, as well as those of two other participants, Mr. Naujok, the chairman of the techniques and methods group of the standards committee, and Kenji Itoh, the vice chairman of the standards committee.
Critics say that slides presented during the tour included information that favored Microsoft's approach.
''There was one slide on the Asian trip,'' Mr. Walker said. ''I still very much like it,'' he said, but he was ''subsequently told it appeared to represent a Microsoft position. I asked Mr. Naujok to check that. He said it thought it was O.K., but we changed it on the European tour.''
Mr. Walker said that the Microsoft contributions did not ''in any way give Microsoft an advantage; Web services was a portion of the larger message of the tour.''
Microsoft says it helped pay travel expenses of the group as part of its effort to gain support for the business collaboration framework.
''We have been evangelizing Web services,'' Mr. Van Roekel said, ''and we view this as part of that.''
Mr. Walker said such tours are not possible without ''contributions in kind'' from participants. About 75 percent of the cost of the September trip to Asia was picked up by governments, he said.
Mr. Walker said his employer, the British government, paid for his plane ticket from London to the first Asian destination. Microsoft paid for the flights between Asian countries and for the hotel bills. Local governments and intragovernmental agencies covered organizational costs like renting meeting rooms and sending out invitations, he said.
Microsoft also paid travel and hotel expenses during the European leg of the tour, Mr. Walker said.
''We only had that particular offer,'' Mr. Walker said. '' We are very open to being sponsored by anybody.''
''We are very aware,'' he added, ''that we have got a gorilla sitting on our arm.''
