It was a small kitchen fire, by the standards of the New York City Fire Department: only a few hoses, out in 15 minutes. No big deal.
But to the New York restaurant world, it might as well have been a towering inferno.
An electrical fire on Saturday afternoon has knocked Per Se, the ultrahyped restaurant of the celebrity chef Thomas Keller, out of business for at least two weeks. Per Se, which had opened in the new Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle only six days earlier, already boasted a two-month wait for reservations.
The damage was minimal, though again the concept is relative. The only injury was to a firefighter's finger, sprained while knocking out a wall, but among the doused objects was the Porsche of kitchen stoves: an $85,000 cooktop and oven, custom-made by the French company Bonnet (pronounced boh-NAY).
''They took their hoses and let loose on the Bonnet,'' said a weary-voiced Mr. Keller, 48, known for his much-imitated butter-poached lobster, brought to acclaim by his Napa Valley restaurant, the French Laundry. Water also hit the kitchen's ceiling and smoke filled the restaurant, which will take time to air out. ''We'll be sniffing the carpet like bloodhounds,'' Mr. Keller said.
By now, the world may be ready to assume that the Time Warner Center is cursed. In the four and a half years since construction began, a forklift driver was killed while driving on the eighth floor, a construction worker was killed by flying debris, and a space heater caused another fire, in the concert hall, Jazz at Lincoln Center. Three contractors have been fined a total of $177,000 by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Kenneth A. Himmel, the president of Related Urban Development, one of the principal owners, blamed the building's scale for the run of accidents. ''It's hard to complete a project like this, with 3,000 workers a day all over the place, without some incident,'' he said.
The exact cause of the Per Se fire, which was first reported yesterday in The New York Post, is under investigation, Fire Department officials said. Mr. Keller and Mr. Himmel said they thought it began with an electrical spark in a kitchen wall. Insurance adjusters will begin to assess the damage this week, but until they complete their reports, repairs will be stalled.
A loss of business for two weeks or more would be dire for any New York restaurant. For Per Se, the implications enter the realm of devastating.
''We have people traveling to New York, planning trips, coming from Boston and Washington just to eat here,'' said Mr. Keller, who serves tasting menus that cost $125 to $195 per person, for those who manage to score one of about 16 tables at Per Se.
The restaurant is the first of four to open in the Time Warner Center, each a showcase for a high-profile chef: Mr. Keller, Gray Kunz, Charlie Trotter and Jean-Georges Vongerichten. The restaurants are in what the developers have called ''the restaurant collection'' -- the magnet of a four-story atrium that many people have likened to a high-end shopping mall.
The mall opened this month as part of the Time Warner Center, a 2.6 million-square-foot complex on Columbus Circle that includes luxury condominiums, offices, a hotel, the concert hall and Manhattan's largest supermarket.
With only 64 seats in more than 13,000 square feet of space, Per Se is one of the largest restaurants in the complex and has one of the smallest seating capacities.
Though restaurateurs raised eyebrows at Per Se's roughly $12 million construction cost, no one is gloating over its misfortune, perhaps because the fire is now helping some competitors.
Mr. Keller's staff is scrambling to reach customers with reservations and send them to other high-end restaurants like Daniel, Le Cirque and Asiate.
''This is a major kink, but they're kind of lucky it happened early on,'' said Drew Nieporent, a prominent New York restaurateur who is an owner of Nobu, Tribeca Grill and other restaurants. ''It's another way people will be talking about Per Se.''
About 4:40 p.m. Saturday, the restaurant's staff was eating its ''family meal,'' a staff dinner in the back kitchen, when smoke began streaming from a wall, Mr. Keller said. He made sure everyone was evacuated, then grabbed a list of phone numbers for the evening's reserved guests.
About 25 firefighters arrived three minutes after receiving the call and put out the fire by 5:10 p.m., a department official said. Meanwhile, five restaurant employees began using their cellphones to call those who had reservations and break the news that they would not be eating at Per Se that night. A few guests were never reached, including Tobias Meyer, who arrived for brunch yesterday ready to celebrate his 41st birthday.
''They didn't inform us,'' fumed Mr. Meyer, who waited as friends from Boston joined him in staring at the massive wooden doors and a security guard.
All morning, shoppers and the merely curious wandered up to the fourth floor and approached the guard, who stood behind a nylon tape meant to keep the public away while the restaurant was aired through an open glass door.
''Is this Per Se?'' one man asked as the guard nodded. ''It looks like it's really unreachable. Must be really great.''
Some had been hoping for an impromptu table because the restaurant was the only one fully open in the complex, which reported 5,000 visitors yesterday.
Jean-Georges Vongerichten's cocktail food is being served at a bar, Stone Rose, on the fourth floor of the complex. His restaurant, Rare Steakhouse, is expected to open next month; Mr. Kunz's establishment, Cafe Gray, in early April, and Charlie Trotter's seafood restaurant, as yet unnamed, is to debut in the fall.
''We're doing whatever we can to speed things up,'' Mr. Himmel said.
Mr. Keller's perfectionism, which meant that some details had to be redone more than once during construction, may also delay the re-opening beyond two weeks.
The night of the fire, he drank a martini to cool his emotions. ''This is a bump in the road,'' he said. ''But it's a big bump.''
