Calgary Flames defenseman Denis Gauthier probably thought he was doing a good thing on Sunday by ramming Devils left wing Jay Pandolfo headfirst into the boards -- and getting away with it. But wait.
Devils defenseman Colin White saw the hit and immediately formed a one-man posse. He dropped Gauthier with a cross-check to the neck, receiving a five-minute penalty and a game misconduct. But the Devils had a cause, and it led to a 3-1 victory at Continental Arena.
Not only did the Devils kill off the cross-checking penalty with flair, outshooting the Flames over the five minutes, 3-0, but they also scored the winning goal 91 seconds later when Patrik Elias scored his second goal, off a perfect pass from Scott Gomez.
''Any time you have a guy sticking up for another guy on the team, killing a penalty is no problem,'' Pandolfo said.
The Devils (32-17-11-1), so lackluster in a loss to Washington on Thursday, won their second game of the weekend. The Flames (30-23-5-3) were an opponent that was much peskier than Saturday's victim, the hapless Rangers.
''At this time of year, the word of the day is consistency, and that's what you have to find,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said of playing opponents with different styles.
White left without speaking to reporters, but Devils center John Madden said without being prompted that White's act of revenge was ''totally acceptable to the Devils.''
Scott Niedermayer, the acting captain, added, ''He stepped in there for a teammate, and that's what hockey is all about.''
Burns did not seem to have a problem with White's act of revenge, either. ''The guy should be accountable for an action like that,'' Burns said.
If nothing else, the five-minute penalty turned the crowd's attention away from Calgary's game-tying goal. Flames right wing Chuck Kobasew scored at 5 minutes 9 seconds of the second period after what might have been a missed offsides call.
With Devils defenseman David Hale serving a tripping penalty, Calgary defenseman Toni Lydman appeared to take the puck outside the Devils' zone, then bring it back in. He flipped it toward the goal, and Kobasew scored on a rebound.
The crowd cheered derisively when the Flames were called for offsides a few minutes later. Then White slammed Gauthier and was sent to the Devils' dressing room. The Devils then caught the Flames on a line change and scored an all-too-rare tic-tac-toe goal. Niedermayer nudged the puck up the ice to right wing Jamie Langenbrunner. Elias was streaking to the goal, but Langenbrunner threw a cross-ice pass to Gomez.
''I saw Patty lose the guy for a split second, which he's so good at doing, and I got it to him,'' Gomez said.
Elias took a backhand pass from Gomez and rapped in his 25th goal of the season -- and his fourth of the weekend -- at 16:06 of the second period. Devils right wing Turner Stevenson scored an empty-net goal with 14 seconds left to seal the victory.
Gomez's line, which includes Elias and right wing Brian Gionta, had seven goals and eight assists in the victories over the Rangers and the Flames. They were an aggregate plus-20 in the two games.
''I think Patty's the leader on the line,'' Burns said. ''I hear what he says on the bench, telling the guys: 'Let's go here. Let's go there. Let's be on top of things.' He's a good leader for those two guys.''
When told later what Burns had said, Elias smiled and said, ''I just want them to give me the puck.''
And they are. Elias has five goals and five assists in seven games. Gomez has 3 goals and 10 assists in six games. Gionta has four goals and two assists in six games.
''We only get into trouble when one of us tries to do too much,'' Gomez said.
All of a sudden, the Devils have built a run in which they are 4-1-1-0 since Feb. 14 and are 4 points behind the first-place Flyers in the Atlantic Division.
''We don't have any points to give away,'' Niedermayer said.
Generally, the Devils do not want to give five-minute power plays to their opponents, either. But White's hit fell into a different category. As Madden said, ''He did what he had to do.''
HOCKEY
