Scott Erickson has 140 career victories, a no-hitter, a World Series championship and a minor league contract with the Mets.
James Baldwin has 79 career victories, a division championship, a winning decision in an All-Star Game and a minor league contract with the Mets.
Ricky Bottalico has 114 career saves, an All-Star Game appearance, two Rolaids relief pitcher awards and a minor league contract with the Mets.
Fans who demanded that the club sign some high-profile veteran pitchers got exactly what they asked for. They just didn't get exactly whom they asked for.
Four or five years ago, this might have been one of history's greatest free-agent classes. Today, it is a sign of the Mets' desperate attempt to find a fifth starter and an extra reliever. The club signed Erickson, Baldwin and Bottalico earlier this month. There is a strong chance that Erickson and Bottalico will make the team, and that Baldwin will also receive an opportunity.
The three veteran pitchers, totaling 28 years 262 days of major league service, sit in the clubhouse alongside other Mets who have been signed to minor league contracts. Some of those players are not old enough to grab a beer after practice.
''Nobody knows who I am,'' Erickson said. ''They all look at me like I'm some old guy who's come in here to try to steal their job.''
That is probably the most fitting description for the 36-year-old Erickson, the 34-year-old Bottalico and the 32-year-old Baldwin, who are competing mostly against the cleanup hitter known as time.
Erickson is ranked eighth among active pitchers with 17 shutouts, but only one of those has come in this century. Bottalico notched 34 saves in consecutive seasons with the Phillies, but he has not earned one in the past two years. Baldwin won more than 10 games for five seasons in a row, but his only victory last year came at Class AAA Omaha.
''When I look around at the three of us, it is kind of crazy,'' Baldwin said. ''We've been around a long time.''
While the Mets' prospects talk about their plans for the night, their elders compare scars and surgeries. Erickson has had operations to repair a torn labrum in his shoulder and replace a ligament in his elbow. Baldwin had arthroscopic surgery on his shoulder and also strained an oblique muscle. Bottalico had surgery to repair a lesion in his right shoulder.
As a result, Erickson missed two of the past three years and was not healthy enough to audition for teams until this month. Bottalico and Baldwin have each had a year to recover from operations, but Bottalico was on the disabled list in each of the past three seasons and Baldwin said he only recently reached full strength.
''Injuries have put us all in the same spot,'' Bottalico said. ''Injuries will do that to you. It wasn't very long ago that we were on top, but you get hurt and you fall to the bottom. That's why we're all here -- to work our way up again.''
Only a few years ago, these were multimillion-dollar stars, the gems of their respective staffs. Now, they are being paid $500,000 to $700,000 to battle against pitchers 10 years their junior.
''Being in this position is always a little frustrating,'' Bottalico said. ''But it's something a lot of players have had to go through. It's not just us three. There are hundreds of us. We're here to prove something and get back to the point where we think we should be. You can't just give up.''
As Bottalico and Baldwin warm up together on one of the fields at the Mets' spring training complex, they shake their heads as they notice younger pitchers airing the ball out in long toss. They used to be just like them, throwing as hard as they could in the first days of spring. That was how they wound up with arm injuries, relegated to baseball's bargain bin, out of style and potentially out of date.
The Mets maintain that their recent acquisitions do not signal a loss of confidence in their young pitchers, but rather a renewed faith in some older arms. Erickson, Bottalico and Baldwin attributed their recent struggles solely to bad health and insisted they were fully rehabilitated. Erickson said his arm felt stronger than it did when he was a rookie. Bottalico said his injury forced him to locate pitches more than he did in his prime. Baldwin called himself ''a pretty young guy.''
''We're lucky,'' Erickson said. ''With the way medicine has advanced, 15 years ago I'd have been finished.''
The Mets' aging pitchers no longer appear inspired by money or status. They are motivated simply to prove they can keep playing.
''There are three forms of motivation,'' said the Mets' new pitching coach, Rick Peterson, who tutored Baldwin with the Chicago White Sox. ''People are motivated through fear, motivated through an exchange system or motivated by fully tapping their potential. These three are at that last level. They know where they've been and they know it's still there.''
When hope gives way to doubt, they can always look back: Erickson to the 1991 World Series, Bottalico to the 1996 All-Star Game, Baldwin to the 2000 playoffs.
The Mets say they do not believe that any of these pitchers can recapture that form; they are only hoping to find a glimmer of past glory.
INSIDE PITCH
KARIM GARCIA reported to camp Sunday and said he was happy that he was no longer with the Yankees because he probably would not have been able to play regularly. . . . MIKE PIAZZA participated in fielding drills involving first basemen and pitchers. . . . Because the minor league catcher DANILO REYNOSO is having visa problems, he has been replaced at spring training by Piazza -- TONY PIAZZA, another minor league catcher, who is not related to Mike. . . . The Mets had their second-highest opening day of single-game ticket sales Sunday, exceeding last year's total of 131,000 sold tickets. They sold out all three games against the Yankees.
BASEBALL
