Juan Pierre bunted the second pitch of the World Series across the Yankee Stadium grass last October, and he scampered to first, reaching safely without a throw. He scored soon after, and later slapped an opposite-field single to drive in two runs.
The Yankees took notice of Pierre, the Florida Marlins' leadoff hitter, who helped beat them in the six-game Series. When the principal owner George Steinbrenner studied the free-agent list after the season, he demanded that the Yankees sign their own version of Pierre. He picked Kenny Lofton.
It was a curious call, because Lofton is a 36-year-old center fielder. The Yankees already had a 35-year-old center fielder in Bernie Williams. But there was Lofton at Legends Field on Sunday, reporting for spring training and pledging to play designated hitter if needed and wreak havoc like Pierre.
''He was basically doing what I did,'' said Lofton, who signed a two-year, $6.2 million contract. ''Juan was doing what I've been doing for a long time. Did you see me in the last couple of playoffs? That's what I do.''
Lofton has appeared in the postseason in eight of the past nine years. In 29 games over the last two postseasons (with the San Francisco Giants in 2002 and the Chicago Cubs last year), he batted .298 and scored 27 runs.
In the Yankees' lineup, Lofton guessed, he might score 150 runs if he leads off every day. He is used to crossing the plate. According to the Elias Sports Bureau, Lofton is the first player since divisional play began in 1969 to score 90 runs in 12 consecutive seasons. The six players who did it before him are in the Hall of Fame.
Alfonso Soriano was the Yankees' primary leadoff hitter the last two seasons. Despite his speed, it was an imperfect fit for Soriano, a free swinger with power. Chuck Knoblauch had a leadoff hitter's pedigree, but he did not run as often as expected. Lofton will bring a new look.
''Any time you have that kind of speed, you're going to alter how you pitch or how you pitch with him on base,'' Manager Joe Torre said.
''You may have to shorten up on the infield, so he opens up more holes for himself,'' Torre added. ''And if he's on base, he distracts that pitcher. He's really the first, because Knobby really didn't run as much as we thought when we got him. He's the first guy to really let it fly.''
Lofton, who has a personal K-Lo logo on the back of his spikes, said he could still run as well as he did in his heyday with the Cleveland Indians. But he is more selective now, he said, and his 30 stolen bases for the Cubs and the Pittsburgh Pirates last season equaled his highest total since 1998.
The Yankees have a power-packed lineup, and Torre said it would not be necessary for Lofton to steal many bases. But he will have chances to do so.
''A lot of times, you'll keep somebody from running because you want to make sure they pitch to the next guy,'' Torre said. ''That's not a concern here right now. Any time we can put pressure on the opponent, hopefully we take advantage of that. I don't want to be one-dimensional.''
Torre will have the delicate task of deciding whether to make Lofton or Williams the regular center fielder. Each has won four Gold Gloves, but neither has a strong arm, and each could probably benefit from rest. Lofton has been slowed by leg injuries in recent years, Williams by knee and shoulder problems.
Lofton insisted he could still chase balls and climb walls as he did for the Indians. ''I think I'm even better,'' he said. ''Before, I used my speed. Now, I use my knowledge of the game to help me out. The media will say what they say. I played in Pittsburgh and ran down balls like crazy. I played in San Francisco and ran down balls like crazy. But people didn't look at that. They always look at bad things.''
Despite his zeal for Lofton, Steinbrenner has endorsed Williams as the starting center fielder, and Torre said he would simply choose the better defensive player. Lofton has played only four career games at designated hitter and had a mixed reaction to it.
''You hit, you sit down,'' he said. ''You've got to keep your legs loose, ride the bike. It was kind of cool. But I felt like I was sort of left out. I needed to be on the field. I'm a hyper guy.''
The Yankees may still sign Travis Lee, a slick-fielding first baseman who would give Jason Giambi the chance to play designated hitter some days. That would cut into playing time for Lofton or Williams, but Torre did not want to ponder that possibility. ''Don't give me anything else to think about,'' he said.
Torre spoke briefly with Lofton on Sunday and planned to talk with him Monday about what role he may have. Lofton, who has never played for a World Series winner in all those postseason appearances, said he would be easy for Torre.
''I'll be playing every day, so it doesn't matter where I play,'' Lofton said. ''I'm willing to do whatever it takes to win.''
BASEBALL
