EVEN as Internet-based telephone services gain ground, most people still use the conventional telephone network and regular phones. An inventor working for Lucent Technologies has designed a phone handset that can switch back and forth between the two technologies.
The handset, patented by Charles Byers of Aurora, Ill., comes with a switch that allows a caller to switch manually between making a call over a standard telephone network or over the Internet, according to the patent filing. The system can also select the best option automatically, to ''route the call via the more advantageous communications link,'' Mr. Byers wrote.
The system comes with a built-in modem. Mr. Byers received patent No.6,614,786.
The day may come when callers will not need telephones sitting on their desks -- just a microphone and speaker attached to their computer. But the additional hardware now needed for Internet calling persuaded Roger M. Blood, an engineer at Dell in Austin, Tex., that some streamlining was in order.
In his patent filing, Mr. Blood explained that he was looking for a more convenient microphone and speaker for his PC. He said that he did not like relying on a speaker phone, both for privacy reasons and because there was sometimes a feedback echo from the microphone. Changing plugs to attach the speaker to the PC was another problem, he wrote, as was the desktop clutter of the switch box or headset.
''What is needed,'' Mr. Blood wrote, ''is a single device which can be used as a computer mouse and telephony handset.''
In size and shape, his invention looks like a conventional mouse. But turned over, the mouse resembles a small cellphone. The bottom panel flips open like a clamshell phone to reveal a speaker in the earpiece and a microphone in the mouthpiece.
Mr. Blood received patent No. 6,694,391.
Adding Internet phones to the communications mix only heightens what is already a challenge to the modern caller: figuring out where and how to reach a friend who has a home phone, a work number, a cellphone, a beeper, a fax line, a Web site and an e-mail address. To ease that problem, three inventors at AT&amp;T have won a patent for a system that tracks down a call recipient. Their invention consults a registry of that person's communications resources, and calls those numbers until it either finds the person or the caller chooses to leave a message that can be relayed to the recipient.
The owner of all those numbers would set up the registry, which would be maintained by an Internet service provider, according to the patent filing. The owner would tell the system which number was best for specific times of day -- work line during work hours, home phone in the evenings and weekends, cellphone during commuting time, for example -- and could also indicate preferences for temporary contact numbers while on vacation or on business travel. The system could also link with a schedule in a hand-held computer to change calling preferences automatically. And it would be possible to set up preferences according to who was calling -- a private line for family and friends, a public number for unfamiliar callers.
A caller would contact the registry by dialing through a modem to reach the registry's Web site, which would provide a menu of options to search for the person to be reached, who might be registered by name and address, as in a conventional phone directory, or by occupation or company name.
If the caller wanted to send a fax, that option could be clicked without needing to know or enter the recipient's fax number. The system could also be accessed with standard telephone service, using touch-tone buttons.
The three men, David Berkley, Lawrence Rabiner and Eric Sumner, all from New Jersey, won patent 6,546,005 for AT&amp;T.
Even if a call goes through, of course, it is possible the recipient will not want to take it. Many phone systems already block calls that do not display caller identification. Four inventors, also working on behalf of AT&amp;T, have won a patent for a system that rejects incoming anonymous calls made using voice-over-Internet technology.
In their patent, the four inventors -- Fen-Chung Kung, Jesse Russell, Spencer Wang and Hopeton Walker, who also live in New Jersey -- said the system would be useful when a friend was trying to call from a telephone that did not display caller identification. With traditional call-blocking systems, those calls would be rejected.
The team's system would intercept anonymous Internet calls and tell the caller to choose one of the following options: provide a password, send a message to an alternate phone number or e-mail address, or leave identification information to be forwarded to the intended recipient of the call, who could then decide whether or not to accept it.
They received patent 6,680,935.
Patents may be viewed on the Web at www.uspto.gov or may be ordered through the mail, by patent number, for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.
Patents
