As presidents go, nobody tops George W. in Laredo.
George Washington, that is.
After more than two weeks of partying, this flag-waving South Texas border boom town of about 200,000 people, almost all Hispanic, and closely wedded to its Mexican counterpart, Nuevo Laredo, across the Rio Grande, wrapped up its rousing annual tribute to the padre of his country this weekend.
The quirky tradition -- a kind of founding myth blending a George Washington passion play with a jalapeño-eating contest -- stretches back to 1898, when a fraternal lodge called the Improved Order of the Red Men captured City Hall in a mock Indian raid. The prize was presented to a comely Princess Pocahontas, who had nothing really to do with George Washington.
But the organizers settled on the nation's first president because at the time he may have been the only figure that Texans and Mexicans, if not the Indians, could unite in venerating.
Somehow, that became the impetus for a parade with floats and bead-flinging, a wine tasting gala benefiting the Boys and Girls Clubs, a noche de cabaret, a pepper-eating contest, a dance festival and, with a nod to another partying town to the east, a miniature Mardi Gras. There is also a Princess Pocahontas pageant and ball, this year starring Ashley Cass, a high school senior who is part Sioux.
More than 10,000 Laredans volunteer their services for the festival, which is an important draw in a city with more than its share of pawn shops and auto scrap yards. Eddie Villarreal, a member of the organizing committee, is credited with starting the jalapeño festival, with Tejano music and a pepper-eating contest, in 1979. The record, Mr. Villarreal said, was 137 peppers in 10 minutes, washed down with copious amounts of beer, a feature he said was dropped after opposition by Mothers Against Drunk Driving.
This year's festival, staged as always by the Washington Birthday Celebration Association and its ancestral hierarchy of leading Laredan families in the Society of Martha Washington, was bigger than ever. It ran for 17 days through 34 events in Mexico and the United States, including a lavish presentation of 13 debutantes in handmade ball gowns, some costing as much as $40,000, as they reprised a gala reception South Carolinians threw for George and Martha Washington in 1791.
Imprisoned in the enormous costumes under cascades of curly falls pinned to their real hair, the debutantes struggled to keep smiling as they stood beside their mostly younger, and shorter, escorts and executed complex bows in honor of the exalted Laredans who were portraying George and Martha, Federico Carlos Zuñiga, a businessman, and Lorraine Withoff Laurel, a great-great-granddaughter of a former mayor of Laredo.
''You really have to want to do it,'' said one of the debutantes, Maria Louisa Bramlett Ballas, 18, of Houston, whose pink bejeweled gown, at a mere 95 pounds, was one of the lighter ones.
This celebration's emotional peak came Saturday on the Juarez-Lincoln international bridge, where representatives of both countries, including two shy pairs of Mexican and American grade-schoolers, met in the middle to exchange small national flags and ritual abrazos, or embraces. The Americans then guided their Mexican guests back to the Texas side for a mile and a half parade of floats and cars through the narrow streets of downtown Laredo, where some 100,000 people watched from folding chairs and pickup trucks and scrambled for beads tossed out by politicians and other guests.
These included Laredo's congressman, Representative Henry Bonilla, a six-term Republican honored as this year's ''Mr. South Texas,'' a distinction previously held by George W. Bush when he was governor of Texas, and even a few women.
Before Mr. Bonilla's district was redrawn this year, it ran for 800 miles along the border and took in 23 counties in two time zones -- an expanse rivaling any state east of the Mississippi.
If land and cattle once made Laredo rich, gas and oil deposits have made it far richer, as evidenced by the selection of this year's guest speaker at the bridge, Charles R. Matthews, a member of the elected Texas Railroad Commission, which regulates petroleum exploitation.
Mr. Matthews told the crowd that he had a vision of a border ''seamless in energy,'' where electricity and fuel oil flowed back and forth without need of regulation. The warm ties between Texas and Mexico, he said, could make it happen.
Laredo's mayor, Elizabeth G. Flores, told the crowd on the bridge: ''The family of Laredo is on both sides of the Rio Grande. We are indeed two cities, united by one river.''
Certainly, cross-border commerce has showered riches on the LareDos, as the sister cities like to style themselves. Laredo has been called the nation's second-fastest growing city, after Las Vegas, Mayor Flores said, generating 1,500 to 2,000 jobs a year, largely credited here to the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Where George and Martha Washington fit into all of this is not that easy to explain.
Texas was still under Spanish rule when Washington was president, but somehow America's first couple of democracy was adopted by Laredo's social aristocracy.
In the early years, the Washington festivities lasted a day or two, enlivened by tales of how the Sons of Liberty met in the forests disguised as Indians to plan their revolution, with Washington as their chief, or sachem.
In time, the commemoration grew more elaborate, with a parade and fireworks and a Pocahontas tribute. Then in 1939, the Martha Washington Society was formed, and the celebration became an occasion to bring Laredo's privileged young women out in society.
This year's debutantes, including one from Nuevo Laredo, portrayed the colonial wives who entertained the Washingtons in Charleston. Their gem-encrusted hoop gowns were so unwieldy that in some years wearers were transported to the pageant strapped inside trailer trucks.
''We've been practicing since last March,'' said Ms. Ballas, the Houston debutante, whose grandmother's family helped settle Laredo. ''A monument, and all that,'' said Ms. Ballas, who wore an ancestral emerald-and-diamond choker.
For almost a year she and her family had been traveling to Laredo so she could learn, among other things, how to gracefully sink to her knees and bow low to the floor under her $40,000 gown.
Yet the celebration is not the elitist exercise it once was, Mayor Flores said.
''They did that,'' she said, referring to the debutante parties, ''and we went to the parade.''
But today, she said, social distinctions have fallen away. ''We all eat in the same restaurants. We see each other every day.''
