In Pennsylvania, Democrats screamed foul and filed suit last year after the Republican legislature rewrote the map for Congressional districts in a way guaranteed to cost the Democrats several seats in the House.
In Georgia, Republicans are the ones complaining. They sued over the way Democrats drew lines for the State Senate and House districts.
Both cases are almost certain to be decided by the Supreme Court. The court heard arguments on the Pennsylvania case in December, and a decision is scheduled before this summer.
When the dust has settled, the country may have new rules on partisan gerrymandering, an issue that politicians, scholars and judges have fretted over since the early days of the country.
''It could have the same force as a Class 5 hurricane,'' said Tim Storey, an expert on redistricting at the National Conference of State Legislatures, ''altering the landscape in a way not seen since Baker v. Carr.'' That was the 1962 case that imposed the one-person, one-vote rule on legislative bodies.
The three-judge federal panels that heard the Pennsylvania and Georgia cases ruled in opposite directions, although Republicans won in both.
When the Republican legislature in Pennsylvania drew new lines for Congressional districts, Democratic incumbents were placed in the same district in two instances, and another Democratic representative was placed in a heavily Republican district. Districts were given highly irregular shapes to give Republicans an additional advantage.
In the 2002 election, the state's Congressional delegation went from 11 Republicans and 10 Democrats to 12 Republicans and 7 Democrats. The state lost two seats as a result of the 2000 census.
The lower-court judges ruled that the gerrymandering was acceptable under the Constitution because Democrats had not been ''completely shut out of the political process.''
In Georgia, Democrats controlled the legislature during the redistricting session. To give Democrats an advantage in as many state Senate and House districts as they could, they crammed as many Republicans into as few districts as possible.
The three-judge panel ruled Feb. 10 that this was unconstitutional and ordered the Legislature to produce new maps for legislative districts by March 1. ''Where a state's reapportionment intrudes upon the fundamental right to vote for what can be characterized only as discriminatory and arbitrary reasons, it is our duty to step in,'' the judges declared.
The state attorney general, Thurbert E. Baker, a Democrat, filed an appeal with the Supreme Court.
Comparable cases have arisen in several other states, including New York, where Democrats have sued over Republican-drawn boundaries for State Senate seats. That trial ended in December, but the judges have not ruled.
The issue of partisan gerrymandering is as old as the Republic. The word ''gerrymander'' was devised in 1811 to mock the governor of Massachusetts, Elbridge Gerry, who drew an election district that was said to resemble a salamander.
Until the 1960's, the Supreme Court steered clear of how political boundaries were set. ''It is hostile to a democratic system,'' Justice Felix Frankfurter wrote in 1946, ''to involve the judiciary in the politics of the people.'' But in 1960, the court declared racial gerrymandering unconstitutional.
In a confusing 1986 decision, the court held that the Constitution did not bar legislative majorities from taking some measure of political advantage in redistricting but did not allow ''a manner that will degrade a voter's or a group of voters' influence on the political process.''
But the court never explained exactly what that meant, and since then, no challenge to partisan gerrymandering has ever been successful.
One reason all this is coming to a head now is that for the first time, legislatures are redrawing district lines not because of a new census but because party control changed hands between the once-a-decade censuses.
In Texas, Republicans won control of the legislature and last year, at the instigation of Representative Tom DeLay, the majority leader of the House of Representatives, the legislature carved out new Congressional districts. Those districts are expected to bring the party at least five new House seats in this year's elections.
In Colorado, the legislature has tried to impose a new Congressional plan more favorable to Republicans than the one drawn by a federal court in 2002.
How the Supreme Court will sort all this out is anyone's guess. Some authorities predict that new guidelines will be set that will strictly limit all partisan gerrymandering. Others say they expect the court to say that the 1986 decision was misguided and that political boundaries are outside its realm.
