At first glance, Britain's daily newspaper market  crammed with everything from racy tabloids to earnest broadsheets -- seems too crowded to bear yet another competitor clamoring for attention on the nation's breakfast tables and commuter trains.
But a small group of journalists and managers is seeking $29 million to start a new paper called The World. It would aim at intellectuals and other serious readers, the niche occupied in France by its namesake, Le Monde. The effort is a break from current trends as virtually all the blue-collar tabloids, and increasingly some of the white-collar broadsheets, seek to expand circulation with articles about real and would-be celebrities.
Broadsheets like The Times of London, The Independent and The Guardian have succumbed to the temptation of celebrity, according to Vicky Unwin, who would be The World's managing director. For example, she said, they are covering television game shows like ''I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here'' -- in which half-forgotten figures seek to revitalize their careers by performing odd antics in a bush camp in Australia.
The people promoting The World want to buck the trend.
''It's the anticelebrity thing,'' Ms. Unwin said. ''People just want a serious read. They don't want these people all over the front and back pages of their newspapers.''
The proposed publication is aiming for circulation around 100,000, compared with around 900,000 at The Daily Telegraph, and will try to poach readers from right-of-center papers like The Telegraph and The Times. It would compete against at least 10 major London-based dailies.
Like physically smaller editions recently introduced by The Times and The Independent, the newspaper would be published in tabloid form. A plan to print it in the longer format of Le Monde was dropped because of production difficulty, Ms Unwin said.
The paper's editor is to be Stephen Glover, a former editor of The Independent on Sunday and a founder of The Independent, conceived in 1986 on some of the same principles as The World. Mr. Glover now writes columns for two conservative publications -- The Spectator, a weekly, and The Daily Mail, a tabloid.
''It's clear that the British broadsheets have been dumbing down inexorably for the last 10 years or so,'' Mr. Glover said. ''And it seems odd to me that Britain should be the one fairly large important country in the world that cannot support an up-market quality newspaper.'' He added: ''The breakthrough for us was saying that we don't need to sell 300,000 or 400,000. We can break even on a much lower circulation and that's what our economic model shows.''
Mr. Glover acknowledged that he and his associates were still looking to secure the $29 million to start the venture. He said he thought that the newspaper could be introduced with that little because of lower technology and staff costs compared with established papers.
One challenge the new venture faces is the uncertainty surrounding the future of The Daily Telegraph, according to Ms. Unwin, the proposed managing director and a former managing director of PR News-wire.
A deal in January by Conrad M. Black, former head of Hollinger International, to sell newspapers including the Telegraph group is under challenge in courts in Delaware. If, as a result of legal challenges, Lord Black's sale of the paper to the Barclay brothers collapsed, media analysts said, there would likely be a free-for-all scramble for The Telegraph group from some of the same British papers as the planners of The World have approached for money.
''Glover and his team are very serious about it and really do believe there's a niche,'' said Roy Greenslade, media columnist for The Guardian. But, he continued, ''It's hard to imagine that a genuinely serious newspaper, which eschewed all entertainment with the information, could really succeed in attracting an audience of 100,000.''
