After Alex Rodriguez's critical words about Derek Jeter appeared in Esquire magazine almost three years ago, he was concerned enough about how perturbed Jeter had been by his remarks that he drove 95 miles from Port Charlotte, Fla., to Jeter's home here to apologize.
Rodriguez told the magazine that Jeter ''never had to lead'' on the mighty Yankees and is ''never your concern'' while scouting their talented lineup. But, after Rodriguez and Jeter talked for more than an hour in 2001, Rodriguez said he felt the matter was resolved once he left Jeter and started driving back to the Texas Rangers' spring training home in Port Charlotte.
''And from that day on,'' Rodriguez said Sunday, ''I thought it was over.''
But is it? Because Rodriguez's comment concluded a scheduled 15-minute interview and because he had previously said he and Jeter probably ''haven't been as tight in the last three years,'' he seemingly left open the possibility that Jeter might feel differently about whether the past really was history.
Associates of each player have said that after the article's publication, there was an undetermined period when Jeter and Rodriguez were chilly toward each other and hardly had much of a friendship. But when Rodriguez was asked to elaborate on Sunday's remarks in a separate interview, he said that he meant the issue had been settled in his mind and in Jeter's mind.
''It was between me and him; everyone else around has made it more,'' Rodriguez said. ''But you know what? We're great friends. We have a lot of respect for each other. That's it.''
The soap opera that is the Yankees churned out another updated story line Sunday. Rodriguez took batting practice, fielded grounders and ran sprints at the minor league complex for about an hour, then spent almost as much time answering questions. Naturally, there were more questions about his friendship with Jeter, a friendship that was once fractured and is now supposedly healed enough for the two talented, driven players to coexist on the left side of the Yankees' infield.
Rodriguez said it was futile for him to talk about his relationship with Jeter because the proof of their fondness for each other would be visible in how they treat each other, especially in front of countless reporters and fans observing the dynamic between the dynamic duo.
''We have one common goal,'' Rodriguez said. ''For him, it's to win another world championship. For me, it's to win a world championship. I think we both have great respect for each other. I think all that stuff is behind us now.''
Jeter has not seen Rodriguez since he was ordered by George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, to attend Rodriguez's introductory news conference at Yankee Stadium last Tuesday. Rodriguez has worked out for the last two days at the minor league complex, a place that is normally Jeter's home away from home. But, coincidentally, Jeter routinely takes Saturdays and Sundays off before spring training starts. Jeter was unavailable for comment Sunday.
Still, Rodriguez said they had spoken by telephone a few times since they flew together from here to New York for the news conference. Rodriguez said he had asked Jeter a lot of questions about Tampa, joked that he had already gotten lost and called Jeter, who lives in Tampa in the off-season, ''Mr. Tampa.''
Despite Rodriguez's painstaking attempts to paint his friendship with Jeter as sturdy, one Yankees official, who has spent time around both players this month, avoided a question about the two. When the official was asked how Rodriguez and Jeter got along, he declined to be specific but added that portrayals of there being tension were accurate.
The Yankees will have their first full-squad workout on Tuesday, and Jeter and Rodriguez will be separated by about 50 feet at shortstop and third base, and by about 70 feet in the clubhouse. As deferential as Rodriguez has been in his first few days as a Yankee, he acknowledged that his role stretched beyond being the mild-mannered new guy.
''Obviously, I want to fit in and I want to be one of the guys,'' he said. ''But I also know I bring what I bring. That's going to take a certain amount of responsibility and attention. And that I can't run away from.''
Rodriguez is embracing every moment of being a Yankee. He was planning to stroll into the Yankees' souvenir store while still wearing his blue practice top Sunday. But the Yankees, sensing that it could be dangerous to allow fans to crowd the $252 million man, interceded and closed the store for a while so Rodriguez could shop in peace.
Yes, Rodriguez repeated Sunday, he is flabbergasted to be wearing a Yankees uniform. Yes, Rodriguez said, he feels as if he is dreaming. Now, if Rodriguez could only convince everyone that his three-year-old apology to Jeter cleared up a concern that still hovers over them.
''At that time, I thought it was behind us,'' Rodriguez said. ''Obviously, with distance away from each other, perhaps we haven't been as tight the last three years. When we first came up, we were kind of tied at the hip in everything we did. I think a lot of that stuff is overblown.''
BASEBALL
