UNLIKE the bawdy stretch of Tampa roadway where George Steinbrenner's team trains, the area around Osceola County Stadium doesn't have a strip joint in sight. Rising above the flatness of Central Florida is a large Ferris wheel. Cows graze nearby along Boggy Creek Road. And here at the Houston Astros' spring training camp on the first day in uniform for pitchers and catchers, at least several dozen fans wait for a glimpse of the Texas-grown talent imported from New York.
''Unprecedented for the first day,'' says Gerry Hunsicker, the Astros' general manager, as Roger Clemens throws behind him to catcher Brad Ausmus. ''For pitchers and catchers, I've never seen a crowd like this.''
Almost as many reporters will push into Legends Field daily to watch the Yankees, but this, the smallest of all Florida training bases, is what Andy Pettitte bargained for and what Clemens rethought retirement for, if he ever really was sure about it. The native sons of Texas have a new look and have undergone an alteration of perspective after escaping the clutches of baseball's evil empire to set up camp in the shadow of Disney.
Here, there will be little meddling by the owner and less mystery from the manager. Here, Jimy Williams wasted no time in setting up his rotation to begin the regular season, yesterday naming Roy Oswalt to pitch Houston's opener, with Clemens and Pettitte to follow.
''Usually it's top secret, where we come from,'' said Pettitte, already sounding distanced from his biggest fan, Joe Torre, like a youth newly programmed upon running away from home to join a cult.
Maybe that is the only logical explanation as to how Pettitte, who was supposed to be a Yankee lefty for life and who was often Torre's postseason lifeline, got away. The assumption in New York, as usual, was that it was all Steinbrenner's fault, although Pettitte said yesterday he didn't think it was the Boss who ''wanted to get rid of me'' and that baseball's most obstinate owner ''listens to other people.''
Yet the more you listened to Pettitte and Clemens at a joint news conference after their first day on the field as National Leaguers, the more they sounded like a cult of two, spiritually guided by the good Reverend Roger. The more Clemens spoke of his celebrated workout regimen, in which Pettitte became a true believer several years ago, the more a devout-looking Pettitte seemed ready for another sweaty round in the weight room.
''I feel almost like we're robots, he and I are so trained in our program,'' Clemens said.
See what I'm saying? When it comes to said program, the man sure can preach. Clemens lectured us on the sins of the 20-something ballplayer, about the fast-food wrappers he finds in the clubhouse. When, asked Clemens, will they learn?
''I'm going to be 42,'' he said, ''and I want to be more than decent.''
On the subject of his disciple, he added: ''I always laugh when people say Andy Pettitte is not a power pitcher. He is a power pitcher when he wants to be. If he wants to rear back at 110 pitches and throw one by someone at 94 miles an hour, he can do that.''
And how did that happen for the man who began his career as a breaking ball pitcher, a nibbler? The gospel according to Clemens: ''Andy jumped right into the program.''
Of course, he is right that Pettitte has become stronger, better with age, but the greater revelation, as far as the Reverend Roger is concerned, is that Pettitte has found true existential career meaning. Given strict adherence to ''the program,'' Clemens maintained, Pettitte could last just as long as he has, if that's what he wants.
Clemens is sure to be a first-ballot Hall of Famer, but more than for any team he has pitched, he will be remembered for remarkable durability.
With that in mind, could Clemens's most prevailing mantra to Pettitte be that the measure of the man will be his longevity more than his logo?
All winter, they have told and retold the story of how they wound up here together, how the Yankees left the door open, how Pettitte walked out and then went to work on getting Clemens to join him in Houston.
''I wouldn't be here if he wasn't here,'' Clemens said, gesturing to Pettitte.
That's believable enough, but it is also quite possible that the Astros' acquisition of Pettitte had more to do with brainwashing than body snatching, and that the Yankee conspiracy theory, which had Clemens and Pettitte planning their Texas two-step well in advance, was true.
We'll probably never know, although Hunsicker did say yesterday that after one meeting -- despite making it clear the Astros couldn't play moneyball with the Yankees -- he came away thinking, ''Holy smokes, we have a chance to acquire Andy Pettitte.''
Clearly, Clemens has been a mentor to Pettitte. Just as clearly, Clemens seemed less like a man ready to leave the stage last fall than one who was addicted to the spotlight. He couldn't get enough applause, say enough goodbyes, so who was really surprised when he announced at least one more hello?
Who would be shocked if it turned out it was the Reverend Roger who talked Pettitte into joining him home on the range, in the Clemens cult of two?
Sports of The Times
