More than two decades ago, there was a bitter battle waged here over nickels.
In the end, Gov. Hugh Carey signed into law the so-called Bottle Bill, requiring customers to pay a 5-cent deposit on soda and beer containers that could be redeemed when the empties were returned.
As a means of brokering a deal on the bill, beverage bottlers were allowed to keep unclaimed nickels as a way to defray the cost of setting up and running collection systems.
So nearly every year since, as predictable as snow in Albany, comes a raft of proposals from lawmakers for the state to take some or all of the unclaimed nickels away from the bottlers. And just as the snow melts and spring arrives, the Legislature adjourns and the proposals fade away.
The struggle over the nickels and whether to expand the law to require deposits on more types of drinks illustrates the odd way powerful lobbyists in the capital, both for industry and for the environment, can keep an issue alive and dead at the same time.
Although the fight is over nickels, the stakes are hardly penny ante.
Since the Bottle Bill was passed in 1982, more than $1 billion in nickels has gone unclaimed.
Some 80 billion bottles and cans have been turned in for collection, greatly reducing litter on roadways and riverbanks, environmental advocates say. And the program helped raise the public's awareness of recycling as a whole. Nine other states have similar programs.
With New York looking at all manner of ways to help close a $5 billion budget deficit, from increasing gambling revenue to cutting social services, supporters of revamping the law think it is a good time to make a full push to address the issue.
''At a time when we are literally scraping for nickels, to not have this source of revenue remain in the public domain, I can't explain it or justify it,'' said Assemblyman Thomas P. DiNapoli, a Long Island Democrat and chairman of the Environmental Conservation Committee.
Mr. DiNapoli has proposed legislation that would require deposits on noncarbonated beverages, which have soared in popularity since the law was passed. The bill would also force bottlers to turn over at least some of the revenue they keep from unclaimed nickels.
Depending on whose estimates one uses, those revenues are between $85 million and $140 million annually. If more types of drinks were included, Mr. DiNapoli estimates that $170 million in revenue could be raised. The expenses of the bottlers and retailers total $167 million, industry officials say.
However, it is still a long way before the bill is even debated in the Democratic-controlled Assembly. In Albany, bills typically do not make it to the Assembly floor until their passage is assured.
''Many people have been calling for more true debate on issues, and I would not be opposed to this being one of the test cases,'' Mr. DiNapoli said. ''It may be one of the rare opportunities where we put it on the floor and see what happens.''
Bryan Franke, a spokesman for Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, said, ''The speaker has not expressed an opinion on the bottle bill.''
The two main groups vehemently opposed to the legislation, the bottling industry and the supermarkets and grocery stores, have spent lavishly to have their side heard.
In 2003, beverage interests alone spent $541,585 on lobbying, according to the New York Public Interest Research Group. Retail interests, including large grocery stores and supermarket chains, spent $267,008. Eight of the 10 most highly paid lobbying firms, according to 2002 figures, did work on bottle bill legislation last year. A former aide to Mr. Silver and now an influential lobbyist, Patricia Lynch, was hired to represent Coca-Cola in 2003.
''It really reveals the political clout of these industries,'' said Laura Haight, who works on environmental issues at the Public Interest Research Group.
In addition to lobbying, the beer and soft drink industries have also been major contributors to both political parties. For instance, Gov. George E. Pataki, over a three-year period starting in 2000, raised roughly $80,000 from beer and soda political action committees.
Asked what the governor's position is now, an aide pointed to Mr. Pataki's comment a year ago when he was asked about expanding the bottle bill law. ''I've never thought there was any merit or justification in that,'' Mr. Pataki said.
Joseph L. Bruno, the majority leader in the State Senate, voted against the original bill in 1982 and opposes any amendment to it. His spokesman said that Mr. Bruno's opposition has nothing to do with the influence of lobbyists.
''The expansion we are talking about is essentially a new tax on beverages,'' said the spokesman, John E. McArdle.
Industry advocates say that environmentalists and lawmakers proposing an expansion of the law fail to recognize the cost and inconvenience it causes. ''The bottle law has really served as a tremendous burden on grocers in the state,'' said Jim Rogers, a spokesman for the Food Industry Alliance of New York State. He said it was particularly difficult for small stores in New York City, which operate in confined quarters and pay top dollar for every square foot of space.
Under the current law, every store that sells deposit bottles is required to take back any container, provided it sells the same brand. Stores give the customers back their nickels and prepare the bottles to be returned to the distributor. For their efforts, they are given a handling fee of 2 cents per bottle, paid by the distributor.
Mr. DiNapoli and others have said that they recognize the burden this places on small stores but that the way to alleviate it would be to establish larger collection centers.
Bottlers say that the handling fee paid to stores comes from the uncollected deposits, which is part of the reason they oppose giving the money to the state. Again, lawmakers and advocates said this was a potential area for compromise.
But industry advocates say they see no room for any compromise that would include expanding the bottle bill. Besides the financial burdens, they argue that times have changed since the original law was passed and the prevalence of other recycling programs eliminates the need for any bottle bill.
''Nobody knew what curbside pickup was when they passed the bottle bill,'' said Kevin Dietly, an environmental consultant hired by the National Soft Drink Association.
Environmental advocates say the bottle bill complements curbside pickup. They noted that revenue raised from unclaimed nickels could help support such programs, like in New York City where, due to budget constraints, curbside service was suspended for the past year and a half but will begin again in April.
On the issue of including more types of drinks in the law, advocates say it is only logical to include Snapple and other drinks that have grown more popular since 1982. In 1986, the law was expanded to include wine coolers, but liquor and wine would remain exempt from the expanded bill.
''There are 2.6 billion bottles and cans that are not covered,'' said Mark A. Izeman, a lawyer at the Natural Resources Defense Council, an environmental group. As it stands, New York has a return rate of roughly 75 percent, according the state's Department of Environmental Conservation.
Attorney General Elliot Spitzer, who is considering running for governor in 2006, has strongly endorsed the expansion of the law.
Judith Enck, an environmental advocate in 1982 and now a policy advisor to Mr. Spitzer, said, ''Passing the initial bottle bill, that legislative effort took 10 years.'' The same interests are aligned against each other now as they were then, she said. ''The lesson there is that the public interest groups stuck with it.''
Since then, efforts to expand the law have repeatedly failed, even when a sitting governor, Mario M. Cuomo, was pushing for them. Ms. Enck said she was hopeful this time it might be different.
''There are not a lot of laws that you can point to that have been as effective with so little government money involved,'' she said.
