Iran's religious hard-liners seemed poised on Sunday for a sweeping victory in that country's parliamentary elections, but domestic and foreign critics called the vote a setback for democracy because the system was manipulated to prevent thousands of their opponents from running.
''By barring any other political groups from participating in the election, democracy received a strong slap,'' said Ibrahim Yazdi, the secretary general of the banned Freedom Movement, speaking on Al Jazeera satellite television network. ''The real winner in this election is the conservative right, but the real loser is the national interests.''
With 195 of 207 districts reporting, and the hand count inching slowly ahead in Tehran, the conservatives appeared clearly on their way to achieving at least a 146-seat majority in the 290-seat Parliament. Even in Tehran, considered a reformist stronghold, conservatives looked set to capture 30 of the 38 seats. A complete count was expected on Monday.
The various hard-line factions are united in their support for the absolute rule of the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, but are hardly monolithic on major issues like social freedom, economic policy and relations with the United States.
The main reformist faction, which sought to dilute the absolute power of the supreme leader, had hoped that its call for an election boycott would at least deny the religious hard-liners a mandate. But the Interior Ministry put the final turnout among the 46 million eligible voters at nearly 51 percent, the student news agency ISNA reported.
President Mohammad Khatami, who has another year to serve, was roundly criticized by reformers for not objecting more heavily after the Guardian Council, a parliamentary watchdog group controlled by the conservatives, eliminated more than 2,000 candidates. Those barred included 87 reformists in the current Parliament. The disqualifications prompted the United States and the European Union to question whether the elections, held on Friday, were free and fair.
The spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, Hamed Reza Asefi, defended the Iranian system on Sunday. ''You know that Americans do not welcome real democracy here,'' he said at a news conference. ''What they say is only to create some pressure and make a hue and cry.''
Ayatollah Khamenei issued a statement saying, ''The losers in this election are the United States, Zionism and the enemies of the Iranian nation.''
The ayatollah was the clear winner as Parliament is now in the hands of his supporters, who believe that a cleric's decisions carry the weight of religious law.
Analysts said that while still facing the reformist cabinet under President Khatami, the conservatives will probably present a unified front in trying to undermine him. Differences among them will probably appear after the 2005 presidential election.
The most important parliamentary candidates to have emerged so far come from a group called the Developers of Islamic Iran, whose leaders include Gholamali Hadad Adel and Ahmed Tavakoli, a former labor minister who ran for president in 2001. The group has been presenting a moderate image.
''Reform is a serious and valuable process and not the project of any one faction,'' wrote Amir Mohebian, a spokesman for the faction, in the Resalaat daily.
Analysts said the faction's positions on important domestic and foreign policy issues remained somewhat murky, especially because the agenda is more likely to be set by the supreme leader than by Parliament itself. The conservatives have blocked attempts to restore ties with the United States, for example, but they may just be waiting in order to take credit themselves.
Ayatollah Khamenei might oppose relations because it would trouble an important constituency -- those who still believe in the Islamic Revolution enough to show up at Friday Prayers to chant ''Death to America.'' Because Iran also considers itself a leader of the world's Muslims, not just those in Iran, it would also risk alienating the larger Muslim audience which sees the Bush administration as waging war against Islam.
But the circle around the supreme leader has shown itself to be practical on other issues, like acceding to international demands for more open inspections of Iran's nuclear program. If the pragmatic thing to do is to improve relations with Washington, then improved relations could still happen, analysts say.
On the social front, the reformists probably succeeded in banning forever the days when vigilantes drove buses through Tehran to arrest women considered to be improperly dressed. But the conservatives will be less open on equal rights and other cultural issues.
Ultimately, though, avoiding a confrontation with Iran's youthful population over social and cultural issues will allow the conservatives to consolidate their power and make sure the political role of the clergy is not diminished. Many young Iranians have expressed disillusionment with the jockeying for position among various factions and seem to be mollified as long as the government does not intrude in their private lives.
''The conservatives have co-opted the language of the reformists and it is a very popular language,'' said Reza Aslan, a political analyst who is currently writing a book about Islam. ''I think most Iranians are apathetic about who is in control -- as long as anybody gives them a little bit of freedom, they don't care.''
