A smiling LeBron James seemed to savor every scene during his Madison Square Garden debut yesterday afternoon. But as the flashbulbs captured him for posterity, the cameras might have been pointed at the wrong player.
The most telling moment of the game may have come in a quiet interlude when the Knicks were floundering and the nationally televised game was in a commercial break.
With 7 minutes 6 seconds left in a 92-86 victory over the Knicks, the Cavaliers were up by 23 points and the Knicks called a timeout. James went over to Zydrunas Ilgauskas and slapped him a high-five, the two sharing a laugh.
James had the hype, and Ilgauskas, the 7-foot-3 center from Lithuania, had the height and the healthy feet.
Ilgauskas does not have a four-story billboard bearing his likeness plastered a block from the Garden, as James does, but he almost overshadowed James with a season-high 31 points and 15 rebounds.
''I loved every minute of it,'' James said after shooting 7 of 20 and scoring 22 points. ''Especially when Z caught fire.''
James's Garden debut was solid, great in snippets and certainly promising.
''You can't even dream of it,'' he said of the Garden. ''You have to be a part of it.''
The Garden fans booed the home team and clapped politely for Ilgauskas, and the only name they chanted in thundering unison? Keith Van Horn.
The fans never serenaded Van Horn when he was a Knick, but now they bemoaned his absence and in turn derided Isiah Thomas's decision to trade him to Milwaukee last week. With Allan Houston missing his 10th game to rest and rehabilitate his knees, the Knicks are meandering awkwardly in their offense while incorporating their newest players, Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed.
''Our chemistry is thrown off because we're trying to insert Tim,'' Stephon Marbury said.
With the Knicks (26-31) finding a spark and Marbury finally finding something resembling a net, scoring 20 points in the final quarter, the Knicks cut the 23-point deficit to 4 with 17.7 seconds left, and cut it to 4 again with 6.1 seconds left.
James sank the clinching free throws after he missed two 19 seconds earlier.
''The chemistry isn't what it was four games ago,'' Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens said. ''We got to get back there because right now we're missing a lot of opportunities. We took a step back because we have new guys. We were finally getting there.''
The Cavaliers improved to 22-34 one game after James scored 32 points in a victory over San Antonio. They are climbing toward the East's eighth playoff spot on the strength of their one-two punch: James, a 19-year-old rookie guard, and Ilgauskas, a 28-year-old center who has overcome foot injuries that caused him to miss two seasons.
''He was just out there moving gracefully,'' Marbury said of Ilgauskas. ''He was turning, spinning and shooting off the glass.
''When a big guy starts shooting off the glass and far out, it's tough. The only person who really does that is Tim Duncan. The way he was playing, he was out there playing like no one else was on the court.''
Ilgauskas, who was named an All-Star last year, does not mind being a roadie on the LeBron James rookie tour. He said of James: ''All of the attention that he gets, he deserves it. I am just doing my job.''
Ilgauskas made 8 of his first 10 shots and finished 14 of 22. Marbury missed 19 of his first 23 shots (many of them wide open) before going 9 of 11 to finish with a team-high 30 points.
''I'm not going to tell him to stop shooting; nobody else was making shots,'' Wilkens said.
Penny Hardaway was 2 of 13. Kurt Thomas scored 16 points, but the bench offered only 13. The Knicks seemed to miss Van Horn's 3-point shooting.
''We definitely miss him, but that was management's decision,'' Kurt Thomas said. ''There's nothing we can do about it.''
Tim Thomas has not made an impact in his first three games. He missed a shot immediately after the fans' chants for Van Horn, and finished 4 of 10 from the field, scoring 10 points.
''It's not a personal thing,'' Tim Thomas said of the chants. ''Fans are fans, especially here. They want to win in the worst way.''
Instead, the Knicks, who also played poorly in a home loss to Utah on Friday, are losing in the worst way; they have lost four of five.
Wilkens said he was too late in putting in a zone defense to stop Ilgauskas, and Dikembe Mutombo, his primary defender, agreed.
The Cavaliers are 3-0 against the Knicks this season, and in all three games, James has displayed a remarkable potential, not necessarily a polished product. He made some eye-popping drives yesterday and one leaping save to catch a ball going out of bounds. But the only dunks he had were in warm-ups, and he failed to complete some layups.
He scored 11 points in the third quarter when the Cavaliers widened a 6-point lead to 15. ''He is really poised,'' Hardaway said. ''He is wise beyond his years on the floor.''
Before the game, James shrugged off the pressure. ''I've created the hype, I've created me being called the Chosen One because of the ability I have on and off the court,'' he said. ''There's no pressure for me because I've created everything that's happened.''
The Chosen One tag appeared on his billboard, which he had not yet seen; he planned to stop by before leaving New York. ''I like to see myself,'' he said, although he added that he had never envisioned himself four stories high. ''That might be a scary sight.''
For the Knicks, the sight of a real-life 7-foot-3 Ilgauskas was even scarier.
PRO BASKETBALL
