On Day 4 of the N.F.L. combine, Giants Coach Tom Coughlin conducted his first news conference since he was hired in early January with the kind of brusque efficiency that has cemented his reputation. He strode up to the podium on Sunday, dispatched answers to 19 questions and strode off toward the next workout at the pace of someone being stalked. The whole process lasted 9 minutes 31 seconds.
The Jets' Herman Edwards provided the other end of the New York coaching spectrum, chatting amiably for more than an hour, his digression on the improving state of minority hiring almost as long as Coughlin's entire news conference.
The Jets pick 12th in April's draft, only eight spots behind the Giants at No. 4, but did not dump their head coach, and the difference between the Jets' 6-10 season and the Giants' 4-12 record seemed a lot greater than two victories.
Coughlin described his first two weeks in his job, how he worked from 5:15 a.m. to 10 p.m. for two weeks on nothing but assembling his staff. Edwards hired several new defensive coaches, including a coordinator, but at a much lower stress level.
Edwards stood back for a few minutes Sunday to watch the coveted Miami safety Sean Taylor conducting a news conference, shook his head and said, ''He'll be long gone before we pick.''
Beyond that, neither coach gave many clues to his draft plans or his priorities.
Coughlin did express confidence in the incumbent quarterback Kerry Collins, lending credence to the idea that he would like to begin by bolstering the offensive line and will not be tempted if one of the top two quarterbacks is available.
''Kerry's a very good quarterback,'' Coughlin said. ''He's had some outstanding years, and we'd like to help him have even better years.''
Clearly, Coughlin's major project is rebuilding the line, thin at the beginning of last season and shattered by injuries as it progressed. But Coughlin would not say much about the obvious candidate to help reverse that collapse: Robert Gallery, the offensive tackle from Iowa.
Gallery won praise not only by working out here, but also by running extraordinarily well for someone 6 feet 7 inches and 323 pounds. He ran the 40-yard dash in 4.95 seconds.
''I thought he had an outstanding workout,'' Coughlin said. ''But beyond that, I think he's an outstanding player but I'm not going to make any comment on that.''
Edwards, who needs a receiver to complement Santana Moss, said he was struck by the quality and size of the receivers here. Eighteen of the top 23 worked out, a higher percentage than at most positions.
''This is probably the biggest group of receivers I've ever seen here in 15 years of coming here,'' Edwards said, noting that the talent stretches deep into the second and third rounds. ''We've got some veteran receivers, but we need another guy with some youth. You look at today's game, it helps. The thing about youth, it has no fear.''
Edwards and Coughlin relish the combine, Edwards for the opportunity to interview prospective players and Coughlin for the chance to watch them work out. Coughlin came and manned a stopwatch last year despite not having a job. His last trip around this block, as Jacksonville's coach and general manager, Coughlin built the expansion Jaguars from scratch. He has much more of a head start with the Giants, who retain many of the core players from their 2002 playoff team.
Coughlin's evaluations of the Giants' needs are complicated by injuries, particularly the 12 players who ended last season on injured reserve. Of those, three were offensive linemen. Left tackle Luke Petitgout battled back spasms. Center Wayne Lucier had a knee sprain. Guard Rich Seubert, probably the Giants' best offensive lineman before he broke his leg, is working through an arduous rehabilitation that will keep him off the field until training camp.
''He gives me great hope,'' Coughlin said of Seubert. ''I jumped on a treadmill the other day and he was right next to me. He's in there every day, pounding away. If anybody can do it, people tell me he can. We're just keeping our fingers crossed on that.''
The Giants will not hold a minicamp until after the draft at the end of April to get as many of their injured players back on the field as they can.
For his part, Edwards expects a much less traumatic off-season than last year, when the Jets were the team with bigger off-season issues: they were leaking free agents.
''What you have to understand is, that's how the league is,'' Edwards said. ''Obviously we lost some guys who are very good players, and you can retool either through the draft or through free agency. We'll probably play a little part in both of them.''
Edwards said that he and his coaches would meet with the players on Wednesday and Thursday and decide their plans on Friday. Until then, he would not comment on the Jets' interest in trading for Redskins cornerback Champ Bailey or on the future of the backup quarterback Vinny Testaverde.
But clearly, not commenting is much less of a habit for Edwards, who seemed in no hurry to get away.
PRO FOOTBALL
