The other night, a woman came up to me and said: ''Mr. Candidate  I have a 12-year-old son growing up fast. He said to me, 'Momma, I need new shoes because these old ones with the holes hurt my feet and the other kids in school are laughing at me.' But I couldn't afford no $50 on new shoes made in America.''
So I said -- what did you do, Momma?
''I took him to a factory outlet center. In the back of the Rockport store they were having a clearance of shoes made in China or Indo-someplace. I bought him a pair of fine leather shoes for $24. You shoulda seen my boy's face light up.''
Free trade is helping that lady make ends meet because her hard-earned dollar now has more buying power. If those fast-talking protectionists had their way, the high cost of living would deny her boy those shoes.
You want proof? Back in 2000, the last Clinton year, inflation jumped up toward 4 percent. Those higher prices sent real average weekly wages down by half a percent, first time in years. Her ''higher'' earnings bought less.
But today, inflation is way down. Why? Because workers have better tools and software to help them produce more in the same time, and because cheap clothes from overseas help keep prices down. Those dirty words -- ''productivity'' and ''outsourcing'' -- are raising Americans' standard of living.
Have the politicians on the stump --so certain that America cannot compete in the new, global economy -- scared you with those words? Is your job really in danger of being stolen by prisoners in China or children in India?
Fearmongers want you to believe that unemployment is getting worse. Just the opposite is true: We've come down from over 6 percent to five and a half, but the troubadours of trouble have changed the rules about what is good news. Whenever the unemployment rate drops, gloomy-Gus politicians insist ''it's because people have given up hope and stopped looking for jobs.'' But back when unemployment was going up, did you ever hear ''it's because people are hopeful and more are out looking for jobs''? Never.
And media fearmongers never report the happy decline in unemployment rates without making the lead ''but the rate of job increases is lower than expected.'' From Democrats, all you hear is the mantra ''biggest job loss under Bush since Hoover.''
But let's ask the pessimists: When did the job boom of the 90's begin to turn around? Who was in charge when that new measuring stick, ''job creation,'' started to show the news turning bad? It was in the year 2000, when unemployment was low and the stock market bubble was bursting. At the end of Clinton's last year, there were 380,000 fewer new jobs created than had been created at the end of 1999.
And where were Senators Kerry and Edwards then, when job creation started to slump? Not a peep out of either. With their fellow Democrats in charge, they closed their eyes to job growth declining and the hard time coming at us.
Only now -- when the Bush tax cuts have stimulated a solid new prosperity, and hundreds of thousands of new jobs are being created again -- have these Democrats discovered what an awful legacy their party left.
Only now is the tax-raiser from Massachusetts announcing speeches on job creation, calling low-cost producers traitors, reversing a lifetime's votes on free trade. Only now is the anti-free-trader from North Carolina reviving fears of Ross Perot's ''great sucking sound'' pulling jobs across our borders, and trying to minimize the impact of this year's bullish stock market on retirement plans of working families.
I stand here before you in my $24 Rockport shoes -- yes, I went and bought a pair; my momma didn't raise no fool -- and say yes, there are ''two Americas.''
Pessimistic America is pandered to by politicians demanding tariff walls and costly entitlements, preaching resentment, envy, anger, class war.
Optimistic America responds to competition, opportunity, openness, freedom -- ready to do the business that not only creates tomorrow's jobs but spreads the prosperity that leads to peace around the world.
My friends, I've chosen my America. I hope it's yours.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: safire@nytimes.com
