Richard May, the British judge who has led the war crimes trial of Slobodan Milosevic for the past two years, has resigned because of health problems, a move likely to bring new complications to the drawn-out proceedings against the former Yugoslav president.
The United Nations tribunal announced the judge's resignation unexpectedly on Sunday, although word of the gravity of his illness had already circulated and caused consternation. Judge May, 65, one of the tribunal's most experienced justices, had gained wide respect for his low-key skill in coping with the often unruly Mr. Milosevic since the trial started 24 months ago. The judge last appeared in court in late January and is not expected to return.
The tribunal president, Theodor Meron, said the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, would appoint a successor soon. Following tradition, he said, he expected the new judge to be from the same country, that is, Britain.
Judge Meron also said he hoped the disruption would be minimal. But legal experts said they feared that a new judge coming into a trial that has been under way for two years would face a daunting task.
He or she must be given time to read the transcripts of close to 300 court sessions involving as many witnesses and, if necessary, review videotapes to see their demeanor on the witness stand. In addition, there is the enormous volume of exhibits tendered into evidence.
This weekend, legal specialists grappled with issues of fairness.
''The question is if someone coming in at this stage can make proper findings without relying on the other two judges,'' said a former senior official of the court. ''If he must rely on the others, he risks not being an independent judge.''
The two who will continue on the three-judge panel are Patrick Robinson of Jamaica and O Gon Kwon of South Korea. The tribunal has no jury trials.
Another crucial question will be the response of Mr. Milosevic, who stands accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity for the conflicts in Bosnia, Croatia and Kosovo of the 1990's. He also faces genocide charges for the war in Bosnia.
Under the rules, if a sitting judge steps down, the court can either stop the trial and start anew, or order the proceedings to continue. But Mr. Milosevic must give his consent for the latter. If he objects, the judges may overrule him, but even then he would have a right to appeal.
The former Serbian leader, who acts as his own defense counsel, is expected to try to make things as difficult as possible for a court that he has often denounced as illegal.
An appeals court, lawyers said, is highly unlikely to order a retrial for Mr. Milosevic, whose health is faltering. Proceedings have been suspended more than a dozen times because of his chronic heart disease and high blood pressure.
Court officials are therefore expected to press hard for the proceedings to continue. The prosecution is scheduled to close its case this week. Mr. Milosevic will then have a three-month break to prepare his defense.
At the tribunal in recent days, news of Judge May's illness clearly upset members of the staff.
''He has been slowly broken by the case -- you could see him aging,'' said one colleague, recalling that the judge had been eager to take on the Milosevic case.
