Nowadays, District Council 37, New York City's giant municipal union, often seems less like a labor organization than a dysfunctional family.
Things are such a mess, many labor experts say, that the union hardly resembles its former self -- it was once the most respected, most dynamic and fastest-growing public employees' union in the nation.
But that was long before the current wackiness.
In last month's election campaign, the union's executive director, Lillian Roberts, denounced the union's treasurer, Mark Rosenthal -- who was her running mate two years earlier -- by accusing him of wanting to fix the election and remain on the union ''gravy train.'' She also attacked his $200,000-plus salary as exorbitant even though she earned more than he did.
On Thursday, in an unusual move that showed just how much union solidarity has crumbled, Mr. Rosenthal sued Ms. Roberts for libel. ''Her campaign was vicious and full of lies,'' said Mr. Rosenthal, who lost his race for re-election when Ms. Roberts and her candidate for treasurer eked out a victory.
Ensuring further divisions, Ms. Roberts's opponents won control of the union's 25-member executive board, and soon after the election, the board voted overwhelmingly to cut her $250,000 salary by 30 percent, insisting that this made sense because she had lampooned Mr. Rosenthal for earning too much.
That same night, in what her opponents assert was an improper racial appeal, Ms. Roberts told a union audience at a Black History Month ceremony that it was wrong for the board to cut her pay when she is the first African-American woman to head the union. Aggravating tensions, she says she hopes the unions' 327-member delegate assembly will vote to overturn the executive board and reverse the cut in salary.
''Right now this place is very divided,'' said Ray Markey, president of a librarians' local, one of the 56 union locals in the council. ''Lillian ran a particularly vicious campaign, and it rankled a lot of people. She needs to put the divisiveness behind her and start reaching out to everyone.''
Ms. Roberts and Mr. Rosenthal agree that the divisions are unhealthy, especially when the union is in difficult contract negotiations with the Bloomberg administration. The union's 121,000 members have not had a raise in 34 months, and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has warned that he will not grant any raises unless District Council 37 and other unions agree to labor savings to pay for them. In a move that could help open the door to raises, the union's officials say they are considering the mayor's demand to create a less generous pension tier for future city workers.
Maf Misbah Uddin, the union's newly elected treasurer -- he defeated Mr. Rosenthal -- insisted that Ms. Roberts was seeking to heal the wounds from the election campaign.
''From our side, we are bringing everybody together,'' Mr. Uddin said.
But he acknowledged, ''Those who lost the election will not be coming very quickly to support us.''
Ms. Roberts was originally elected executive director in a unanimous vote in February 2002. Union leaders embraced her at the time as a popular, unifying figure who could move the union forward after a three-year trusteeship. In the 1960's and 1970's, before she left to become state labor commissioner, she was the council's No. 2 figure and was respected for her militancy and her ability to relate to the rank and file.
The district council's parent, the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, imposed the trusteeship to put an end to the sorriest chapter in the council's history. In the late 1990's, more than 20 council officials were convicted of embezzlement or vote-rigging after the leaders of several locals stole millions of dollars and fixed elections and a ratification vote.
Charles Ensley, who unsuccessfully challenged Ms. Roberts for the executive director's position, said the union had strayed.
''The council has been distorted by all the money and perks and privileges and patronage that is passed out,'' said Mr. Ensley, who is president of the social workers' local. ''That's not what the union movement is supposed to be about.''
The unanimous backing for Ms. Roberts crumbled as many union leaders and members concluded that she lacked vision, was not forceful enough and was a poor negotiator.
A year ago, she was roundly criticized by city officials and many union leaders when she rejected a deal that would have enabled 3,000 welfare recipients to become unionized park workers. The deal fell apart when Ms. Roberts insisted that they be paid $8 an hour, while the city was offering $7.75.
Many union officials also faulted Ms. Roberts for helping to steer a $15,000-a-month legal services contract to a law firm where a nephew she raised is a partner.
''This union is doing terribly,'' said Stanley Aronowitz, a labor expert at the City University Graduate Center. ''Lillian was a great figure in the union once upon a time. But now we see that she's a bad administrator. There are many lapses in her memory. I don't think she has it to lead a union of this size and scope. I don't think she grasps all the problems.''
Ms. Roberts declined to be interviewed, but after being re-elected, she told her union's newspaper, ''I am proud that the members have acknowledged through this election that I have the knowledge, temperament and experience needed to lead this great union.''
Her spokeswoman, Donna Silberberg, said Ms. Roberts was doing an excellent job in lobbying and politics.
''We just had one of the best legislative sessions,'' Ms. Silberberg said. ''We passed almost every bill we introduced. And every single person that we supported was elected to office.''
But critics say those bills passed not because of District Council 37, but because of strong support by all of labor. Similarly, they say the council-backed candidates would have won even without the council's support.
Ms. Roberts' campaign attacks on Mr. Rosenthal have generated lasting bitter feelings. She lambasted him repeatedly for his salary and suggested that he wanted to be re-elected mainly to fatten his bank account. She accused him of seeking to fix the election even though he played a pivotal role in uncovering the embezzlement and vote fraud in the union during the 1990's. Her campaign fliers said Mr. Rosenthal could not have helped uncover the vote rigging unless he knew about it in advance or was part of it.
''I was in shock,'' Mr. Rosenthal said. ''I brought the libel lawsuit because there's no room in the union community for this type of campaign. I needed to clear my name. This lawsuit aims to make sure that a campaign like this never happens again.''
Responding to the lawsuit, Ms Roberts said in a statement: ''The election is over, and we need to move on. I'm sure our members agree.''
James Tucciarelli, a member of Ms. Roberts's slate and president of the local representing 900 sewage treatment workers, echoed many union members in voicing concerns about the divisions within the union.
''During the election, it was a civil war,'' Mr. Tucciarelli said. ''It was the North versus the South. But now we all have to come together for the sake of our members. The City's establishment is a lot more powerful than any of us. If we don't learn to play together in the sandbox, we had better get out of the sandbox or the members will be hurt.''
