VIDEO systems in today's minivans and sport utility vehicles help to keep the peace in millions of back seats, entertaining young passengers with the huge selection of movies available on DVD and videocassette. But what the video systems rarely show are television programs. Reception of local TV broadcasts is marginal even when parked, and there are definite limits to how far you can stretch the cable TV connection you have at home.
But the prospects for mobile TV are looking up -- about 25,000 miles up, in fact -- to where the satellites are. Newly developed rooftop mobile antennas are designed to pull in signals better from direct broadcast satellite systems like the Dish Network and DirecTV, and at the same time cut a lower profile on the vehicle's roof.
Simpler and less costly methods of bringing TV to the car are coming, too, from Sirius and XM, two satellite radio companies that currently offer dozens of audio channels to mobile customers. At the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas last month, both companies demonstrated how TV could be integrated into their existing systems using small antennas like the ones now used to receive radio signals.
With the addition of a video data stream to today's audio service, the amount of entertainment available to subscribers of satellite services will certainly increase. But more practical uses of the satellite's capacity are coming, too: delivery of traffic and weather data. Sirius is working with Delphi, a supplier of automotive electronics, to develop a system that will display the location of accidents and road construction on the car's in-dash G.P.S. navigation screen, alerting the driver to possible delays and offering alternate routes.
The new services mean an increased workload for satellites, which are ideal for transmitting mobile programming: they are high enough for their signals to clear earthly obstructions and their coverage is broad enough that even fast-moving cars will not drive out of range in mid-program.
The shortcoming, until now, has been the receiving antenna. Satellites broadcast with far lower power than earthbound television stations, and if the antenna's base -- your vehicle -- is turning and jouncing around, it has to be constantly re-aimed to stay on target. Conventional TV dishes, though practical when parked, are too hard to keep aimed. Dome antennas bulge prominently from the roof.
One possible solution is to use a phased-array design, in which the signals received by clusters of identical antennas are combined in different ways -- concentrating the signals from some directions while reducing the reception from others.''We'd like to do it that way,'' said Robert W. Schumacher, director of mobile multimedia for Delphi, ''but if we did it the brute-force military way, the antenna would cost so much that you'd buy that and they'd throw in the car.''
Instead, the newest low-profile vehicle antennas are hybrids, combining physical and phased-array aiming techniques: a flat multi-element antenna is mounted on a turntable that keeps it aimed at the satellite's compass direction, while the pattern in which the elements' signals are combined tilts the pickup pattern toward the satellite's vertical position in space.
Tilting the antenna's pattern, not the antenna itself, keeps the unit thin: less than 5 inches for the KVH TracVision A5, which mounts on vehicle roof racks, and about half that for the Motia Cross Country, which can be built into a car's roof.
Even these hybrid systems are far from cheap. The KVH A5 is about $3,500, plus installation, much of that cost related to keeping the antenna aimed. Future systems may link to the car's navigation system, predicting a car's path even before it enters a turn, Dr. Schumacher said.
For many car owners, though, cost and size will rule out systems like these, despite high picture quality and a wide choice of channels. The systems shown by XM and Sirius offer a lower-cost -- but more limited -- approach to in-car TV. For cars that already have satellite radio, adding television service would only require installing screens and video decoders.
The trade-off is bandwidth: the radio satellites will carry far fewer TV channels, probably three to six apiece. The picture will not be living-room quality, either. Without enough data space for full frame-by-frame video like broadcast TV, the radio satellites will carry streaming video, highly compressed like Internet video clips.
Fortunately, the relatively small screens in cars do not reveal a lot of detail anyway. Both Sirius and XM mentioned cartoons prominently among their program options. Sirius says it hopes to have its video service operating in 15 to 18 months, but XM has not announced its schedule.
Technology
