Senator John Kerry wants to prove he can win in the South, and on Sunday hundreds of voters mobbed a theater here in the heart of a wealthy Republican neighborhood for a town hall session that quickly turned into a rollicking lovefest.
Nearly 1,000 people crowded inside, eavesdropped from the lobby or strained to hear from the sidewalk on Peachtree Street.
''We're here to mark the beginning of the end of the Bush presidency,'' Mr. Kerry said, a standard line from his stump speech, and the crowd went wild.
But the crowd's response may not have shed much light on whether Mr. Kerry, who is from Massachusetts, could win the South: this was not an average audience for Buckhead, the wealthy district of shopping malls, manicured lawns, sprawling mansions and solidly Republican politics.
''You're missing the right wing: the Republicans, the rich people,'' Julie Sullivan said after listening on her feet as Mr. Kerry spoke for an hour and a half.
Atlanta, in any case, is hardly representative of Georgia, let alone the South at large: the first question Mr. Kerry faced was from a transgendered veteran who wanted to know whether Mr. Kerry would leave no transgendered American behind. Mr. Kerry said he favored hate-crime legislation and the proposed Employment Non-Discrimination Act.
At the very least, though, the campaign stop may have showed that Mr. Kerry has no trouble winning over audiences of blacks and liberal voters, as well as those who are angriest about President Bush's leadership.
Doris Bennett, for example, declared herself a ''recovering Republican'' before asking in a shaky voice about the USA Patriot Act.
''I have a single-step program for you: vote for Kerry,'' the candidate replied.
On Sunday, Mr. Kerry also faced stepped-up attacks from allies of President Bush, whom Mr. Kerry accused on Saturday of initiating a smear campaign against his patriotism and commitment to the nation's defense. But his swing through Atlanta was anything but hostile.
At Ebenezer Baptist Church, the congregation of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Mr. Kerry prayed alongside another church member, Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia, a leader in the civil rights movement who endorsed Mr. Kerry last week.
Mr. Kerry did not speak, but the senior pastor, the Rev. Dr. Joseph L. Roberts Jr., told his flock to learn ''about his vast experience in foreign policy, about the fact that he turned down the Appropriations Committee to work in foreign policy -- and certainly, if anything is in need of assistance, it is America's posture in foreign policy.''
Shortly before the service ended, Coretta Scott King, Dr. King's widow, quietly took a seat in the back row, where she was noticed by almost no one. In what appeared to be a prearranged encounter, Mr. Kerry and Mrs. King greeted each other warmly as he was ushered out to the lobby.
At the town hall meeting in Buckhead, another royal Atlanta widow made an unadvertised appearance: Valerie Jackson, whose husband, Maynard, the legendary former mayor of Atlanta, died last year. But she spoke of an earlier love, a marine who was killed three days before he was to have come home from Vietnam.
''All I got to greet was a coffin box with a flag draped over it,'' Ms. Jackson said. ''We need a president who is courageous enough to say from personal experience that war is not the answer.''
It was a liberal crowd, with questions about the ''prison-industrial complex,'' for example, and Mr. Kerry did his best Phil Donahue, darting here and there with microphone in hand.
It was also a very friendly crowd. An 18-year-old asked what the economy would be like when she graduated college ''after your first term.'' And a man urged Mr. Kerry to ignore Republican attacks.
''Stay on point, don't be reactive,'' the man said. ''We love what you're doing.''
Mr. Kerry turned to the crowd and pleaded innocent: ''I didn't plant him here,'' he said.
As Mr. Kerry stumped in Atlanta, the chairman of President Bush's re-election campaign, Marc Racicot, redoubled Republican attacks on Mr. Kerry's military voting record but denied that to do so was to question Mr. Kerry's patriotism.
''I also ask you to elevate the remarkably negative tone of your campaign and your party over the past year,'' Mr. Racicot said in a letter to Mr. Kerry that cited Democratic attacks on the president that went largely unanswered until the last few weeks.
On Saturday, after similar criticism from a Bush ally, Senator Saxby Chambliss of Georgia, Mr. Kerry challenged the president to a debate on the Vietnam War era and ''the impact of our experiences on our approaches to presidential leadership.''
After the town hall meeting, Mr. Kerry was reminded of the audience member who had urged him not to take Republicans' bait.
''Well, you've got to push back a little bit to make sure people understand,'' he said. ''I voted for the strongest defense budgets in our country's history, strongest intelligence budget. People need to know it, to be certain. That's why they're raising the issue, to cast a seed of doubt. I'm not going to allow that doubt.''
Mr. Kerry said the election would come down to ''a matter of trust and vision: where you want the country to go and whether you can be trusted to take it there.''
''The president promised he'd create several million jobs; he's lost several million jobs,'' Mr. Kerry added. ''He promised he would have fair trade; he's never stood up and fought for trade. He promised that he wouldn't dig into Social Security; he is. He promised 'leave no child behind'; he's leaving millions of children behind. He promised he would have health care that's affordable; he's lost, two million people have lost their health care, and it's becoming less affordable.
''So I think it's a matter of keeping your promises,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''of whether you say one thing and do another, which is what this administration has done.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
