The global village is breaking into its global parts.
Walk around the immigrant quarters of Jackson Heights or Flushing in northern Queens, and televisions are tuned to shows from other countries.
In Jong Ro Barber Shop, on Union Street in Flushing, customers waiting for $17 haircuts watch soap operas from South Korea on the tidy shop's Samsung television, riveted by melodramas with the same languid pace, low-rent sets and overwrought music of American soaps, but in a language that lets them feel at home. ''I do watch American TV, but for an emotional outlet I need Korean TV,'' said Soo Oh Choi, the shop's owner, speaking through a translator.
In Jackson Heights, Aashish Patel and half a dozen compatriots gathered this month at a local motel for a Super Bowl party of sorts, complete with beer and potato chips. The world-class game they watched until dawn was not football, but cricket between India and Australia beamed from abroad.
''We feel we are in India like that,'' Mr. Patel said.
Hundreds of thousands of immigrants in New York and millions more across the United States receive these foreign channels. UHF long ago expanded into the ethnic market with Spanish-language channels and stations like KTV in New York, which has been broadcasting Korean programs since 1995. But the number of international channels has mushroomed in the past five years because of the feverish competition between satellite and cable companies.
Immigrants who arrived in the 1950's and 60's often used television to learn American idioms and mores; baseball alone was a master teacher. But some scholars worry that the availability of international channels makes it too easy for immigrants to continue to cling to their homelands. Neal Gabler, senior fellow at the Norman Lear Center for the Study of Entertainment and Society at the University of Southern California, said that although the phenomenon of foreign channels produces many benefits, it chips away at the ''common cultural references'' that have allowed for whatever melting is supposed to take place in the American pot.
''The things that unite us will be lost in another competing identity,'' Mr. Gabler said.
The satellite provider Dish Network offers 50 international or foreign-language channels, including Polish and Portuguese. Across the country, Time Warner Cable offers 37, including channels in Arabic, Russian, German, Greek, Persian, Filipino and Vietnamese. In New York City alone, more than 90,000 of Time Warner's customers get the international channels.
These channels are laying another set of bridges between immigrants here and their native lands, joining jet planes, cheap long-distance calling and the Internet. Immigrants can follow the same catastrophes and laugh at the same homespun jokes as their kin and friends overseas. Relative newcomers can relax in front of a television without being baffled by English. They can also immerse their children in their native tongues, narrowing the generational distance typical in immigrant families.
Pyong Gap Min, a Korean-born professor of sociology at Queens College who speaks English fluently, watches Korean soap operas and movies almost every night with his wife. ''It's very special to me,'' he said. Still, he worries that some immigrants may be using television to isolate themselves.
''In a foreign environment they live comfortably, enjoying Korean food, going to Korean churches, working in Korean businesses and now seeing Korean television,'' he said. ''This frees them from learning American English and American customs.''
But other immigrants think such concerns are unwarranted.
''During the day you're surrounded by American culture,'' said Mudassar Khan, 27, a Pakistani who runs an electronic appliance store in Jackson Heights. ''The only time you feel Pakistani culture is when you're home watching TV.''
Even before cable and satellite television became widely available, Puerto Ricans, Mexicans and other Hispanics watched television in Spanish over UHF networks based in the United States, like Telemundo and Univision. These networks proved that a mix of soap operas, entertainment, game shows and news in a native language can draw a profitable audience. By the late-1980's, recalled Barry Rosenblum, president of Time Warner Cable of New York and New Jersey, his company was hearing from Greek, Korean and Indian businessmen who also wanted to start channels that would package programs from overseas, supplemented with news of their New York ethnic neighborhoods.
For roughly $9.95 a month above the price of a standard cable package in the New York-New Jersey region, Time Warner offers two Chinese, two Indian and two Korean channels, and individual channels in Italian, Russian, Arabic, Greek and Japanese and a catch-all Latin American channel. It also offers a separate package of about 15 channels from Spain and Latin America.
The satellite dishes sprouting over the roofs of Queens testify to the growing popularity of a younger technology. A division of EchoStar Communications, Dish Network, which has been broadcasting foreign channels since 1996, now offers 50 channels. DirecTV, controlled by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, offers 45 Spanish-language channels and several channels originating in China, Taiwan and Hong Kong. Stephanie Campbell, its senior vice president for programming, said ''we are definitely looking to expand'' into other ethnic niches as the company develops more satellite capacity. Both companies declined to say how many customers they had for their ethnic channels.
Michael Schwimmer, senior vice president for programming of Dish Network, pointed out that foreign television stations are eager to broadcast in the United States. ''Networks are always looking for eyeballs,'' he said. ''Traditionally they look in their own country, but if they can get eyeballs outside the country and a company like EchoStar can help them do it economically, they'll want to do business with us.''
Some channels are beamed directly from abroad to providers here and then quickly distributed to home televisions. Others are repackaged here by local entrepreneurs from either satellite feeds or videotapes. The foreign broadcasts are usually delayed, timed to American hours and cleansed of advertising for products that immigrants here cannot buy. Cricket games, broadcast live by Dish Network with an eye on its South Asian audience, are a separate paid offering.
Mr. Rosenblum of Time Warner does not accept the criticism that ethnic channels impede assimilation. ''My sense is that nobody sits down and just watches the Greek channel or the Indian channel,'' he said. ''They're part of packages widely available to people, so it gives people a connection to where they're from, but it doesn't cut them off from where they are.''
Mr. Choi, the Korean barber who is fond of Korean soap operas, said he also likes to watch golf, basketball and the programs on Animal Planet.
Mr. Khan, the electronics store owner, who immigrated here as a teenager 12 years ago and graduated from Bryant High School in Queens and Baruch College, said he mostly watched American television. Still he orders the Dish Network's South Asian package of Indian and Pakistani channels for his parents, Mohammad and Sanjeeda Khan, with whom he lives.
They like to watch Pakistani news, a Pakistani soap opera called ''Lab-e-Derya'' and two popular Indian serials about working women, ''Jassi Jaissi Koi Nahin'' and ''Kkusum.'' (The spoken forms of Pakistan's Urdu and India's Hindi are closely related.) He often watches the soaps with them and has noted the differences from American television.
''When a guy gets married, he usually lives in the same house with his parents,'' Mr. Khan said, citing one example. ''In the English soap operas, the kids move out.''
Anil Merchant, who came here 19 years ago from Bombay, keeps the television in his beauty salon on 74th Street in Jackson Heights tuned to an Indian TV channel that broadcasts a stream of MTV-like songs expressed in sinuous dance numbers, and he also likes to keep up with the doings of Indian politicians. ''This goes into the small towns and interior in India,'' he said of the Indian channel. ''CNN doesn't cover it.''
''We don't know John Kerry,'' he said. ''We heard about him, but we're more interested in Indian politics.''
