Vaslav Nijinsky, ballet's most legendary superstar, is the subject of more than one ballet. But none has the vision, passion and detail that John Neumeier has poured into ''Nijinsky,'' the two-act dramatic spectacular he presented with the Hamburg Ballet over the weekend.
It is a pity that this engagement, with outstanding casts on both Friday and Saturday nights, ended yesterday at City Center, but there is time to catch ''Nijinsky'' this week at the Kennedy Center in Washington.
It is not a perfect work, but its flaws are swept away by the phantasmagoria, with just the right music, that soars onstage into highly potent imagery.
Harem girls from ''Schéhérazade'' rush onstage with 19th-century ballerinas from the Maryinsky Ballet. Nijinsky simulates masturbation with a tennis racket instead of the scarf he used in his ''Afternoon of a Faun'' because ''Jeux,'' his tennis ballet, is depicted here as a love triangle made up of himself, Serge Diaghilev and Léonide Massine.
The ballet, an annotators' dream, sometimes feels like ''This Is Your Life,'' as characters from Nijinsky's biography (1889-1950) and art intersect.
Ideas often have it over choreography in Mr. Neumeier's ballets, but here they fuse with the dancing. Occasionally the choreography turns into thin soup when he is not openly quoting familiar passages from Diaghilev ballets by Michel Fokine, Bronislava Nijinska and Nijinsky himself. Nor does Mr. Neumeier reach for the heights of metaphor in what is an illustrative work with multilevel references. He depicts Nijinsky and his brother's going mad through realistic fits and twitches.
Yet for the most part, thankfully, realism yields to fantasy in the work, which tries to explore something of Nijinsky's creative spirit and inner demons. Some of the cross-references may be a stretch for the audience. The same dancer, Carsten Jung, appears briefly as Nijinsky's dancer father, Thomas, and also as a doctor in a white coat, courting Romola, Nijinsky's wife. Infidelity is identified in both instances. Thomas left the mother of his three children (Vaslav, Bronislava and Stanislas), and Romola is said to have had an affair with a doctor treating Nijinsky, who was considered insane after 1919.
An American whose ballets have been seen in New York with several companies, Mr. Neumeier has been artistic director of the Hamburg Ballet in Germany since 1973. He knows how to work on an opera-house scale, and although he adapted his sets to the relatively small City Center stage, his reproduction of the ballroom (or a corner) in Suvretta House, a Swiss hotel, is a picture in white loggia splendor. This is where Nijinsky last danced in public in 1919.
On Saturday night Alexandre Riabko, trained in Kiev, could not help showing off his mind-boggling classical form as Nijinsky in a childlike portrayal. On Friday night Jiri Bubenicek had strong bravura and a more angry intensity.
The first act deals mostly with Nijinsky's ballet world, while the second deals with family problems and the correlation between Nijinsky's ground-breaking ''Rite of Spring'' in 1913 and his horror at World War I. Shostakovich's Symphony No. 11 in G minor couldn't be better suited to the second act.
Yukichi Hattori was superb in an impossible part as Stanislas, the brother gone mad. Chopin and Schumann, played by Richard Hoynes on the piano (the rest is on tape), introduce Fokine's Harlequin, whose leaps and claps are echoed by the Nijinsky figure.
From then on Mr. Neumeier will offer variations on the original work of others as well as his own choreography. In most cases layers of identification are evoked. Nijinsky's partner Tamara Karsavina is seen in a romantic tutu in a pose with him from ''Les Sylphides.'' Later Romola (Anna Polikarpova on Friday, Heather Jurgensen on Saturday) will strike the same pose with him to show a tender wife with her husband.
Mr. Neumeier leaves the stage characters more or less intact, although Otto Bubenicek (Jiri's twin) does brilliantly with his own bravura and ornamentations as the Golden Slave and the Faun. Ivan Urban on Friday and Lloyd Riggins on Saturday were both fine as Diaghilev. Mr. Riggins and Mr. Urban were also alternating Petrouchkas, ingeniously presented as washed out in black and white during the war scenes of Act II.
Act I introduces Bronislava in an unintentional parody of modern dance; the vigor of Niurka Moredo on Saturday was better suited to the role than the refinement of Elizabeth Loscavio.
Nothing tops the gorgeous phantasmagoria to the strains of Rimsky-Korsakov (''Schéhérazade'') at the end of Act I. But the end of Act II comes close, and there is a marvelous scene reproducing the actual moment when Nijinsky stood on a chair and shouted out the counts to his dancers in ''Rite.'' Jiri Bubenicek counted in Czech, Mr. Riabko in Ukrainian.
Mr. Neumeier suggests that Nijinsky's personality encompassed aspects of his roles, but perhaps the opposite is true. He was a thorough professional, and his genius lay not in impersonating characters but in personifying them.
BALLET REVIEW
