Picture it as the Michael's of the mid-Atlantic. After the second day of testimony in the trial that could decide whether Conrad M. Black can sell his stake in Hollinger International, the troubled newspaper holding company, the principal combatants settled in on Thursday evening in the dining room of the Hotel du Pont here.
In this city of more than 70,000, where the chartering of companies and the resolving of their disputes is a cottage industry, there appeared to be few other acceptable dining options. And so the room became the local equivalent of Michael's, a restaurant favored by the rich and powerful of the media industry in Manhattan.
In one corner, his back against a wood-paneled wall, sat Lord Black himself, Hollinger International's founder and ousted chairman, dining with three lawyers on the night before he would take the witness stand.
In the other corner along the same wall was Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the counsel to the independent directors who are investigating millions of dollars in questionable payments the company made to Lord Black. Mr. Breeden, who only a few hours earlier had completed his own testimony, much of it sharply critical of Lord Black, ate with several associates and with Gordon A. Paris, Hollinger International's acting chief executive.
Diagonally across the room from the Breeden table, under high ceilings hung with massive chandeliers, were two experts on corporate governance: Charles M. Elson, a professor at the University of Delaware, and Herbert Denton, president of Providence Capital, a New York investment fund, and an informal adviser to Hollinger shareholders. A lawyer representing Henry A. Kissinger, the former secretary of state and a Hollinger director, chatted nearby. (Mr. Kissinger was absent from the trial, but the testimony of others indicated that he had played an active role in the work of the independent directors in recent weeks, acting at times as a mediator between the board and Lord Black.)
The tension in the dining room was already palpable when a member of the Breeden party approached a table where two reporters and a pair of publicists for the Hollinger board were eating and said, ''Stand by.'' Not long after, a lawyer working with Mr. Breeden, holding a sheaf of papers behind his back, strode over to Lord Black and thrust out the documents, serving him with a copy of a $200 million lawsuit that the independent directors of the company had filed in federal court last month.
One of Lord Black's lawyers grabbed the papers, briefly examined them and then dropped them, showily, on the floor beside the table.
An associate of Mr. Breeden said later that he chose to serve the papers at that moment because Lord Black had been out of the country and had not been seen by representatives of the directors for several weeks. But an aide to Lord Black disputed that, saying he was known to have been staying at the du Pont for several days and before that had been in New York City, where he was questioned at a deposition for the Delaware case by a Hollinger lawyer.
During coffee and dessert, Mr. Breeden and his party pulled up chairs to the table of Mr. Elson and Mr. Denton, who were joined now by the reporters, the publicists and Robert E. Curry Jr., a lawyer representing the investment firm that first raised questions about million of dollars in payments to Lord Black.
As Mr. Breeden told war stories about his days at the S.E.C., the members of the Black party, one by one, quietly left the room.
MEDIA
