He trains hard every day with runners roughly half his age. He races almost every weekend. He is running faster and faster in his 40's. His schedule goes like this: Run. Eat. Sleep. Repeat.
He is Eddy Hellebuyck of Albuquerque, who, at 43, could become the oldest runner to earn a berth on a United States Olympic track and field team when he competes in the men's marathon trial today in Birmingham, Ala.
The top three finishers will qualify for the American squad for Athens this summer provided they meet the Olympic standard of 2 hours 15 minutes. Time should not be an issue for Hellebuyck (pronounced HELL-uh-buck), who won the Twin Cities Marathon in St. Paul in October in 2:12:47, a record for United States masters (40 and older).
That performance highlighted a fall tear in which Hellebuyck set four national masters road records in six weeks. The others came at 5,000 meters (14:13) and 10,000 meters (29:05) and in the half-marathon (1:05:20).
Hellebuyck, a native Belgian who became a United States citizen in 1999, set the half-marathon record a week after the Twin Cites Marathon, when most runners would have been laboring in recovery. His frequent racing and his ability to train hard day after day defy not only aging but also fundamental principles of running.
''He recovers faster than anyone I've ever seen,'' said Teddy Mitchell, 27, Hellebuyck's training partner in Albuquerque, who is also entered in the trials. ''Eddy weighs a little more than 100 pounds, and with less muscle mass he's able to recover quickly.''
Hellebuyck, 5 feet 4 inches and 107 pounds, says his smooth running style helps him bounce back. But there are other graceful marathoners who cannot sustain Hellebuyck's relentless pace. No world-class runner has tried to run 40 to 45 races a year as Hellebuyck has.
Hellebuyck's résumé also boasts 130 marathons, including 29 victories, from Antwerp to Bangkok, Maui to Manila.
Hellebuyck has been running since his high school days in Belgium, when he decided he was too small for soccer. His size has proved to be advantageous in the marathon.
''When you're carrying heavy muscle mass, it makes sense you do more damage,'' said Peter Snell, a three-time Olympic gold medalist in the middle distances for New Zealand in the 1960's who is now an associate professor at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas. ''Bigger people tend to have more injuries than little people.''
Snell also said the marathon offered an excellent proving ground for older runners. He said that the decrease in cardiovascular function that comes with age was less of a performance factor than the ability to burn fat, conserving muscle glycogen, critical fuel for the marathon distance of 26 miles 385 yards.
Hellebuyck has also been training with Ryan Shay, 24, another trials contender. They are among 104 American men who have run 2:20 or faster to qualify for the marathon trial.
With the former world-record holder Khalid Khannouchi, a native Moroccan who became a United States citizen in 2000, sidelined with injuries, the field is wide open. In addition to Hellebuyck and Shay, other top contenders include Alan Culpepper, who ran 2:09:41 in his only marathon 15 months ago; Dan Browne, whose best of 2:11:35 was also run 15 months ago; and Meb Keflezighi, the United States 10,000-meter record-holder with a 2:10:03 marathon run last fall. Keflezighi has been hampered by injury.
''Experience in the marathon helps a lot,'' said Hellebuyck, whose main rivals have run only a handful of marathons among them. ''I have a good chance. I'm aiming for the top three.''
If he is successful, he will earn his second Olympic berth; he ran the marathon for Belgium at Atlanta in 1996.
It is the rare athlete who can sustain his competitive desire into midlife, but Hellebuyck surrounds himself with young runners and operates like one of the boys.
''Eddy's like a 22-year-old,'' said Shay, the 2003 national marathon titlist in 2:14:29. ''When my coach told me I'd be training with him in California I thought, 'Great, I have a 2:12 marathoner to run with.' ''
Shadrack Kiptoo, an 18-year-old Kenyan who came to the United States in 2002, feels the same way. He runs for La Cueva High School in Albuquerque, which is coached by Hellebuyck.
In Kenya, Kiptoo ran a 3:41 1,500 meters, equivalent to a 3:59 mile. Hellebuyck and Kiptoo often train together. Hellebuyck helped Kiptoo win the 5,000-meter state cross-country title last fall by 82 seconds. Kiptoo has helped Hellebuyck regain his speed.
''Instead of just running miles and miles, we do high-intensity training, including speed work, hill repeats and diagonals on a soccer field,'' Hellebuyck said. ''Shadrack has helped me get a lot faster.''
TRACK AND FIELD
