His true age is a mystery, his name another. A few guesses at each are on file with the State of California, in whose custody he now resides.
His work, though, has been tasted by patrons at some of the most exclusive restaurants in Manhattan. In the kitchens of the city, he was known as Eric Meas, prodigy with a pan, rising star whose congenital sense for cross-continental flavors and textures won him quick acclaim.
There were stints at Daniel, Le Regence and 44, and to each he carried a fairy-tale background story of coming to New York as a refugee from Cambodia and teaching himself his trade at a roadside International House of Pancakes in Queens.
There was more to the story, though, and in the parts Mr. Meas left out can be found the reason he is in prison. There, too, can be found a New York fable, for Mr. Meas has lived the dream that made the city.
New York, after all, is a place of reincarnation, where a person can pull a whole new existence from the bang and clatter of rough streets and capricious commerce. It will give a new life to just about anyone who comes looking. And it gave Eric Meas two.
The first began after 1975, when the Khmer Rouge took over Cambodia, instituting rule by murder. The father of a boy then known as Mary Lan Meas was killed, and the mother and the child ultimately escaped as refugees to the Bronx. The mother, Maryan Nop, who still lives in the Bronx, said in an interview translated by her brother, Boreth Nop, that she and her son entered Thailand in 1979, moving from there to the United States in 1981.
In the Bronx, Ms. Nop says, her young son flourished, briefly. There were accolades for grades and attendance and a grand prize in a storytelling contest. But the Bronx streets were rough.
''I asked my mother, 'why did you give me the name Mary?''' Mr. Meas said in a written statement provided by a friend. ''Everyone makes fun of me.''
Soon enough, he was involved in a street gang, and calling himself Eric. In his mother's view, the boy was throwing away the new life he had found in New York. Her response was a maternal classic: ''The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'' solution.
''In desperation,'' she said, ''I sent him out to Fresno to live with distant relatives for a short time, in the hopes that I could remove him from the connections he had established here in New York.''
Instead, he made new connections. According to law enforcement and corrections officials who have access to Mr. Meas's criminal records, he became affiliated with a gang called Cambodians on Cocaine, a violent outfit specializing in home invasions and burglaries. In 1989, he was convicted of attempted robbery in the first degree and sentenced to three years and four months in prison in Los Angeles County, state records show.
It was at this point that the mystery surrounding Mr. Meas's name and age began to take form. In a telephone interview a few weeks ago, he said that his real birthday was Sept. 3, 1973, making him 30 now and only 16 when he entered the adult corrections system.
By Mr. Meas's written account, he gave the police a false year of birth, 1967, because he was scared. Asked in a telephone interview to elaborate, he said that he had hoped that by claiming to be an adult, he could keep his mother from learning that he was in trouble.
And so it was the adult prison system that admitted a man referred to in letters and in official documents as Meas Waye and Marylan Meas on Nov. 17, 1989. The prisoner says in his legal statements that his legal name is Mary Lan Measnd that he prefers to be called Eric.
Whatever his real name, to California he became inmate No. E37326 forever after.
The prisoner was released on parole in 1991, after serving a year and a half of his sentence. He told parole officials that he planned to go to New York, where he had relatives, but he violated parole by never again checking in with those assigned to supervise him, said Agent Michael Rose, a California parole officer assigned to interstate cases.
Mr. Nop, Mr. Meas's uncle, said in an interview that he had spoken to parole officers in the Bronx upon Mr. Meas's release and had come to believe that Mr. Meas did not have to check in. Mr. Nop said that he could not remember the names of the person or the agency he consulted.
''I felt like, O.K., let it go, one day, one year, until now,'' Mr. Nop said.
Despite Mr. Meas's status as a fugitive, he plunged into an effort to redeem himself in New York. Records show that he completed a 300-hour training course to become a nursing assistant in 1992. He received a high school equivalency diploma the next year. He was starting a new life, again. He was becoming Eric Meas, again.
And in this new life, Eric Meas was a runaway success. After IHOP, he landed jobs at some of the finest and most expensive restaurants in the city, finding a place among people who think of civility as an art form. He worked as a sous-chef at Le Regence and 44 and as a saucier at Daniel.
His big break came in an offer to be executive chef at the Palmetta Plantation House, which opened in the summer of 1998 on the Upper East Side.
''The Cambodian-born Mr. Meas, 25, has an extraordinarily light touch with seafood and a gentle way with herbs,'' Eric Asimov wrote in The New York Times. ''If only the fish that is served in the Caribbean were as juicy and delicious as what comes from Mr. Meas's kitchen.''
With a pedigree from some of Manhattan's finest kitchens, Mr. Meas eventually returned to California, applying for work at a new place called Venture Frogs Restaurant in San Francisco, a distinctively Northern Californian operation that proclaimed an intention to ''embrace and embody the Internet start-up culture.''
Of all the candidates for an executive chef, the standout was this exuberant young man with tales of a boat trip from Cambodia and life on the tough streets of New York, as well as an estimable New York résumé, said Richard Hsieh, manager of Venture Frogs.
''We wanted to find a chef who was young and energetic and outgoing,'' Mr. Hsieh said.
Mr. Meas went to work, and the menu he created included dishes with names like Netscape Pan-Fried Noodles. But the whole thing could hardly have been more poorly timed, as the last half of 2000 ushered in the decline of so-called Internet start-up culture. Critics were harsh, but the restaurant has survived.
Mr. Meas acquired more responsibilities, becoming the father of a young girl named Ireena. He went on to draw raves from the Asian press for his work at Dot, a restaurant in the Radisson Miyako Hotel in Japantown.
By this time, a dozen years had passed since his release from prison.
''We just lost track of him, and he fell through the cracks,'' said Agent Rose, the parole officer. ''Then, bam, there he was.''
On Aug. 22, 2003, San Francisco police officers were called to a possible attempted burglary at an apartment building near the Embarcadero. The suspect had a home address in the same building, so his explanation that he had simply locked himself out of his apartment made sense. But the officers became more interested in another detail, a police report shows. Their suspect was wanted on a longstanding parole violation warrant.
The police booked him, listing in their report that their prisoner had two aliases, was 35, stood 5-feet-8 and weighed 135 pounds.
The man they took into custody is known as inmate No. E37326 at the Sierra Conservation Center, a camp 60 miles east of Sacramento in the foothills of the eastern Central Valley. He is scheduled to serve four years. After that, the inmate said in a telephone interview, nothing stands in his way.
''I want to open a restaurant in San Francisco, but New York is my home,'' he said. ''I want to open a restaurant there. Give me a few years. I'll be back.''
Officials at the prison describe their charge as an unremarkable inmate.
''He doesn't have a real big record; he's pretty typical,'' said Lt. Kenny Calhoun, a spokesman for the warden. ''Apparently, he has claimed to be an executive chef, or something.''
