The National Football League will seek to stay a judge's ruling that overturned the league rule restricting the eligibility of players who enter the draft, raising the possibility that Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett could still be shut out of the April 24 draft.
The league spokesman Greg Aiello said yesterday that the N.F.L. would ask United States District Judge Shira A. Scheindlin to stay her ruling. She declared that the league rule that prohibited players from entering the draft until three years after their high school class graduated was a violation of antitrust law. She could reject the league's request, but it could be granted by an appellate court before the draft date.
Even as the league laid the groundwork for an appeal of Scheindlin's ruling, it began to plan for a draft that could include some players who had been ineligible, setting March 1 as the deadline for college underclassmen and high school players to apply for eligibility.
Although Clarett, a sophomore, would not say Thursday whether he would enter the draft, the league received a faxed letter from Clarett's lawyers on Jan. 12 requesting inclusion in the draft. It was unclear how many other players in Clarett's position will try to follow him into the the N.F.L.
For now, it seems likely that Clarett and a handful of other players will join the 41 college players who had been granted special eligibility for the draft. Those 41 met the league's eligibility rule and had submitted a written application to enter the draft by Jan. 15.
On Thursday, the league also granted special eligibility to Pittsburgh receiver Larry Fitzgerald, a sophomore who attended a military academy after transferring from a Minneapolis high school midway through his senior year.
The 41 players who have been declared eligible have been advised by the league's personnel experts, who, at the request of the players, have told them of their projected draft spot.
If a player did not like what he heard, he could return to college.
It is unlikely that the undergraduate advisory committee would have time before the new deadline to assist the new batch of players who might enter the draft.
Once a player puts himself in the draft, he has 72 hours to withdraw without forfeiting his college eligibility.
For this year at least, N.F.L. teams will scramble to scout a player who applies for eligibility by March 1.
After a player applies for the draft, interested teams will have to find tape of the player and go to his campus to work him out. The scouting combine for college players begins Feb. 18, and the league said yesterday that any players who apply for special eligibility under the Clarett ruling by Feb. 15 will be considered for invitations to the combine.
''They're not going to be evaluated in the same time frame that the seniors or some of the juniors are,'' said one team executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
''You're pretty much on your own. In the future, if the ruling holds, you're probably going to have to have a couple of guys who evaluate junior college players.
''That's an area where there will be academic casualties, and you may have guys totally responsible for that, just like in baseball.''
Few people involved with the sport expect a flood of young players to enter the draft, as they have in the National Basketball Association, largely because of the greater physical demands of football. The number of juniors who have entered the draft has remained steady for a number of years -- between 40 and 50. This year, perhaps fewer than 10 of those will be selected in the first round. Another 15 might not be drafted at all.
Almost nobody expects a player to jump from high school to the pros, a common occurrence in the N.B.A., where a player like LeBron James can face N.B.A.-caliber players in summer leagues; there is no off-season equivalent in football.
''Just say a guy was a running back,'' said University of Virginia Coach Al Groh, the former coach of the Jets. ''Last year, he was riding the yellow school buses. Next year, he's getting hit by Ray Lewis.''
One team executive dwelled on the difficulties young players will face breaking into the N.F.L.
''Look at how difficult it is for guys who are third-year juniors,'' the executive said. ''There are only a handful of guys who will make that jump. At some point in time, there will come a 6-8, 350-pound kid who doesn't want to go to school.''
Most football observers agree that the players who make it after only a year or two of college football are likely to play only a few skill positions.
Nobody believes a quarterback can make the jump, although they speculate that a receiver could do it. Some believe a running back could be successful, although running backs must do much more pass protecting in the N.F.L. than they do in college.
''I remember Bill Parcells said, 'With all due respect to the college game, the difference between the two is the difference between checkers and chess,' '' said Groh, who worked in the N.F.L. with Parcells, now the Cowboys' coach. ''Even an N.F.L. team that takes a player so they can eventually have him, if he's on the roster and not producing, that's a dead salary-cap spot. How many can a team afford? He better be an immediate contributor.''
PRO FOOTBALL
