Facing a winter of unrelenting breakdowns and delays, Connecticut and Westchester commuters on Metro-North's most troubled line are now being told they will be the last ones to see any replacements for the aging trains that are failing at levels that are angering and frustrating regular riders.
Railroad officials say that because Connecticut has not come up with money to share the cost of new trains with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, the commuters on Metro-North's New Haven line will not be receiving any of the 300 shiny new cars that are supposed to be able to withstand the cold and snow better than the current ones. All those cars will go instead to the Harlem and Hudson lines, even though the New Haven line has the oldest cars and the worst record this winter of keeping cars in service.
To make matters worse, Gov. John G. Rowland this week proposed a fare increase of 5.5 percent for Connecticut riders, following a 15 percent fare increase last year for trips from Connecticut to and from New York City.
''Commuters are a stoic bunch,'' said Jim Cameron, vice chairman of the Connecticut Metro-North Rail Commuter Council, a watchdog group created by the state's legislature, the General Assembly. ''They'll put up with a lot. But this, I think, has broken the back of indifference and everyone who rides the train is angry enough that they are going to take some action now.''
Mr. Cameron said his group's Web site has received three times the usual number of complaints in the past month. Commuters buttonhole him in the station, on the platform, on the train and at cocktail parties. Lawmakers, too, have heard an earful. ''The level of frustration is extraordinarily high,'' said Andrew J. McDonald, a state senator who represents parts of Darien and Stamford. ''People are disillusioned and rightfully so.''
Service yesterday was typical of recent weeks. Of the New Haven line's 343 cars, 120 were out of service, contributing to the cancellation of 12 trains. About half of those cars would have been removed from service for normal maintenance and inspection, but the other half were awaiting repair from the damaging winter weather, said Daniel Brucker, a Metro-North spokesman.
The New Haven line trains -- many dating to the early 1970's -- are easily damaged by powdery snow, which is ingested by the motor as the train races along. Despite the rising thermometer this past week, the damage from the earlier snowfalls has continued to sideline cars because the repairs are time-consuming. Many parts must be custom-ordered, and there are only 18 service bays for 343 cars.
What makes the New Haven line stand out from the Hudson and Harlem lines is its reliance on two types of power, a catenary wire system in Connecticut and part of Westchester and a third rail line in southern Westchester and New York City.
The overhead wires, the oldest dating to 1913, become brittle in extreme cold, Mr. Brucker said. To preserve them, the railroad cuts train speeds on straightaways from 90 miles an hour to 50 or 60 miles per hour. And the overhead arm attaching the train to the wires, which is usually lowered electronically, must sometimes be manually lowered in the ice and snow, ''a delay that can easily cost anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes,'' Mr. Brucker said.
Commuters say the crowded conditions are just as irritating as the tardy and canceled trains. ''During rush hour, there are a large number of people standing up,'' said Ken Weinrib, a lawyer who lives in Mamaroneck, N.Y. ''It's like taking a subway for 35 or 40 minutes.''
The preliminary findings of a study by the Connecticut Department of Transportation indicated a need for 350 to 400 new cars, at an estimated cost of $4.5 million a car. But officials say any such order will have to wait. ''We do not have the money to buy new equipment now,'' said Harry P. Harris, chief of the agency's bureau of public transportation.
Instead, officials have embarked on a $150 million, seven-year program to rehabilitate 242 antiquated train cars, with 19 completed so far. Mr. Harris said the ''rehab program'' would ''buy an additional 10 years out of the equipment.''
Last year the Connecticut General Assembly approved the purchase of new rail cars with 2,000 seats, although not before 2006. That translates roughly into 18 to 20 cars, barely a dent in the overall fleet, critics say.
''Absolutely, it is not enough,'' Mr. McDonald said of the planned purchase. ''There has to be a recognition that train service is no longer a matter of convenience, but of utter necessity. The health of the regional economy is intertwined with this issue.''
