At the obvious risk of sounding like Carrie Bradshaw from ''Sex and the City,'' Kenneth Cole yesterday composed an interesting aphorism. ''Reality TV is now the most popular way to escape reality (not drugs),'' read a caption that shimmered across a screen at the foot of Mr. Cole's runway in Bryant Park, an observation even more apt than Mr. Cole's socially aware slogans typically are.
The facts about the fashion cycle are these. For the next four weeks a select group of high-priced human clothes racks will clock the equivalent of the earth's diameter strutting catwalks. An equally small collection of well-ornamented editors will make minutely calibrated judgments on what the clothes racks are wearing.
These transactions will be recorded with a lavishness rarely directed at natural catastrophes or war. They will then be replayed incessantly, first on television, then on the Internet and then in glossy magazines. Perhaps science will one day explain what causes people at home to become transfixed by images of people in tents watching other people walk around in circles. New York Fashion Week is upon us. Set the TiVo to ''reality.''
''They're obviously short of people if they asked me,'' said Ben Chaplin, who is starring on Broadway in ''The Retreat From Moscow.'' Mr. Chaplin was in the front row at Mr. Cole's show, officially the first of some 100 that will continue through next Friday. ''I don't have any strong feelings about fashion,'' said the actor, surprised to be mobbed by paparazzi. Not all of the photographers were quite sure what Mr. Chaplin is known for, but they were drawn to him, mothlike, by light from their competitors' strobes.
''I like clothes that are simple and preferably cheap,'' Mr. Chaplin said as motor-driven camera shutters whirred. ''Unless I'm being given it for free'' -- in which case the taste level automatically goes up a notch.
For insiders, Fashion Week is something of a freebie bonanza, what with all the goodie bags, lent or free clothes and jewelry, tickets to hot runway shows, cocktail parties, dinner parties, after-parties and after-after-parties that sometimes run so late there's barely time for guests to dash home for a cat bath before going out to be fabulous all over again.
The party for Valentino's new R.E.D. line on Wednesday night was such an occasion, held at Lot 61, the Chelsea nightclub, which was decorated in mirrored high-70's style by Valentino's ''atmosphere consultant,'' Carlos Mota, then roughed up a little by members of Irak, a legendary underground graffiti crew. The 30 artists of Irak support themselves by shoplifting from uptown boutiques like Valentino, Dash, the group's vice president, explained. ''Whatever you want, we can get,'' he said.
The second syllable in Irak is slang for thieving, Dash said, as another graffiti artist, who goes by a name not seemly to print, sipped Champagne and showed off a mouthful of 18-karat-gold caps. ''They wanted us to do some runway,'' said this soft-spoken man, referring to a fashion show that was part of the evening's entertainment. ''We went as far as doing fittings,'' Dash continued, ''but then we said, 'This is ridiculous. Who needs to walk a runway for Valentino looking like idiots when we already get free suits from Agnès B.' ''
One might imagine that Dash's approach would cause offense to his host, Graziano de Boni, president of Valentino's United States operations. But that is far from the case. ''I love it,'' Mr. de Boni said. ''We just did an event in Palm Beach that was very glamorous, very old money, very uptown. Now we're here, and it's very downtown and supercool.'' To Mr. de Boni's mind, Valentino's hot new R.E.D. line balances at precisely that intersection of high and low. ''Either uptown or downtown,'' he said. ''There is no midtown with me.''
There will be no Midtown this season for the Brazilian designer Carlos Miele, either, or at least no Bryant Park. A household name in his country, he is bidding to bring his brand of samba-school evening wear to an international clientele. To that end he has opened a store in the meatpacking district and was scheduled to show a collection on Tuesday in the tents, with the vintage supermodel Naomi Campbell, among others, doing the sashaying.
Yesterday Mr. Miele abruptly pulled out of the tents, citing his ''wish to support the editors and buyers,'' who, in turn, have supported him for years. In the interest of global diplomacy, this columnist will translate. Mr. Miele was unlucky enough to have scheduled his show on the same night as the 150th-anniversary gala for Louis Vuitton, to be held at its brand-new 57th Street flagship. Equal parts celebration and corporate command performance, the Vuitton party is certain to be Fashion Week's best-attended event. When Mr. Miele found out that he had been gazumped, to use the real estate term, he backed out. Who can blame him? And who can doubt the despair of others along the fashion food chain, people like the Twinkle designer Wenlan Chia, who found herself competing for the same Thursday time slot not just with Mr. Miele but with a dinner party given by Calvin Klein.
The Miele show will now take place at Gotham Hall, a few blocks south of Bryant Park and roughly in the purgatorial ZIP code that Mr. de Boni of Valentino disdains. Ms. Campbell's fans will be relieved to learn she has not canceled her appearance, despite the downgrade in venues. But then, she can't, since Mr. Miele is represented by NC.Connect, a publicity firm she owns.
FASHION DIARY: NEW YORK COLLECTIONS
