A tactic used by institutional investors seeking to influence shareholder votes has been temporarily blocked in court in a controversial insurance industry merger.
At issue is whether institutional shareholders can send out copies of a company's proxy ballot card when they send letters recommending a vote against management in a proxy battle. That can make it easier for shareholders to change their vote, or to vote for the first time if they have not already done so.
The MONY Group, which is seeking shareholder approval to be acquired by AXA Financial, the large French insurance company, for $31 a share, filed suit against Highfields Capital Management, a Boston hedge fund that opposes the merger and tried to use the tactic to persuade shareholders to reject the deal because it considered the price too low.
Judge Loretta Preska of Federal District Court in Manhattan issued a temporary restraining order against Highfields on Wednesday night after a telephone hearing. Yesterday, another judge, Richard S. Holwell, left the order in effect but promised a written opinion on Wednesday on the meaning of a Securities and Exchange Commission rule that the agency has informally interpreted until now as allowing the tactic. He said his decision yesterday should not be viewed as an indication of how he would ultimately rule.
Dennis Garris, a lawyer who formerly headed the commission's office of mergers and acquisitions, said last night that he hoped the court would allow the tactic, saying that a decision against it would damage the ability of shareholders to communicate with one another. He said the tactic had been used in other takeover battles without being challenged in court.
Under an S.E.C. rule adopted in 1993, investors can send communications to one another recommending votes without having to go through a complete proxy solicitation process. It would be too late for Highfields to do that now because shareholders are scheduled to vote on the deal on Feb. 24.
Without going through that process, it would clearly be improper under the rule for Highfields to send out its own proxy card, asking that it be allowed to cast votes on behalf of other shareholders. But it wants to send out a copy of the card sent by management, making it easier for the shareholders to cast their votes.
At a hearing yesterday, James P. Smith III, a lawyer with Dewey Ballantine who represents MONY, the former Mutual of New York, argued that the S.E.C. rule should be interpreted as barring the sending of such cards and that the judge was not bound by the S.E.C.'s informal opinion.
R. Todd Cronan, a lawyer with Goodwin Procter who represents Highfields, said that it had acted only after learning from S.E.C. staff members that its actions were proper and said the wording of the rule did not bar such offers.
A detailed ruling by Judge Holwell would be the first on just how that rule should be interpreted and could have a significant effect on how easy it would be for shareholders to campaign against management in shareholder votes.
The S.E.C. has never formally interpreted the rule, but Mr. Garris, who until last spring was the head of the commission's officer of mergers and acquisitions, said the commission staff thought the important issue was whether the dissident was seeking to have proxies sent to himself.
''Here what they are doing is just facilitating the ability of the shareholders to change their minds, and providing a copy of the company's card,'' said Mr. Garris, who is now a partner in Alston &amp; Bird, a Washington law firm not involved in the MONY litigation. ''Legally, it does not give them proxy authority.''
Because MONY has a large base of individual shareholders -- in part because shares were distributed to policyholders when the company converted from a mutual insurer to a stock company -- the ease with which they could change their votes could be crucial if the election is close.
Shares of MONY have been trading slightly above the offer, and closed at $31.70 yesterday, up 14 cents.
For the merger to go through, the company needs the approval of a majority of its outstanding shares at the annual meeting. The fact the company has chosen to sue Highfields to try to stop the cards from going out may indicate that it is worried that getting that vote will be difficult.
The argument over the merger has produced a role reversal for management and dissident shareholders, in which the dissidents see a bright future for the company and the managers warn of impending disaster if AXA's offer is not accepted.
In a court filing, MONY quoted its president, Samuel Foti, as saying that the failure of the merger would most likely result in ''a melt-down scenario'' in which the company's credit rating would be lowered, its stock price would plummet and its sales force would ''basically flee the company.''
By contrast, the dissidents argue that the $31 price is too cheap. Third Avenue Value Management, which has written to shareholders but was not sued by MONY because it did not include a proxy card, argued that ''the reason for this low valuation is a function of the poor job the MONY management team has done over the past five years.'' It argued that new management was needed.
Market Place  Correction:  February 10, 2004, Tuesday  The Market Place column in Business Day on Saturday, about a court decision related to the proposed acquisition of the MONY Group by AXA Financial, misstated the headquarters location of AXA Financial. It is New York; France is the base of its parent, AXA.
The related picture caption misstated the title of an AXA official, Claude Bébéar. He is chairman of the supervisory board of the parent company, not chairman of AXA Financial.
