St. John's administrators vowed yesterday that the men's basketball team would continue its season tomorrow with eight players in the wake of an incident that began at a Pittsburgh-area strip club, the latest black eye for a program that has had a swift fall from prominence to embarrassment.
The events early Thursday, which included accusations of rape that were ultimately discounted by the police because of one player's video cellphone recording, led to swift discipline by St. John's on Thursday. One player was expelled, and two were in danger of expulsion; they are all starters. Three reserve players were suspended from the team.
''Unfortunately, poor decisions led to this incident,'' Athletic Director David C. Wegrzyn told reporters in the basketball wing at Alumni Hall. ''There was institutional control.''
Wegrzyn said ''there was never a thought'' of forfeiting St. John's remaining eight regular-season games because there were enough players to field a team. He said he met with the interim coach, Kevin Clark, and the eight remaining players yesterday morning. Four of the eight remaining players are not on scholarship; one scholarship player, Andre Stanley, was previously a walk-on; and another scholarship player, 7-foot-3 Curtis Johnson, averages less than six minutes a game.
Wegrzyn said the players involved were responsible for the incident in Pittsburgh, not a lack of oversight by the coaching staff.
The team has had a staff of three coaches since the December firing of Coach Mike Jarvis and his son, an assistant.
''This is not a situation relating to university staffing,'' Wegrzyn said. ''Decisions were made by student-athletes not to adhere to policy, not to adhere to the university rules and regulations to be in an appropriate location and engage in activity that was not in concert with the code of conduct.''
This is only the latest turmoil in a program once regarded as among the elite of the Big East Conference and a national power that five years ago fell a victory short of making the Final Four. St. John's has the fifth-most victories in Division I history.
But this season alone, the head coach, Jarvis, was fired; a player, Willie Shaw, was suspended from the team for his second marijuana-related offense; and the team is enduring the worst season in its history. St. John's, which is 5-14, is assured of its second losing season in four years and, at 0-8, is the only team in the Big East without a conference victory. The Red Storm is all but certain to miss the Big East tournament.
The university's president, the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, did not attend yesterday's meetings with reporters at Alumni Hall. A spokesman said that Harrington was cutting short a fund-raising trip to Florida to return to New York. He will conduct a news conference today and attend St. John's game against Boston College tomorrow at Madison Square Garden in support of the team, the spokesman said.
Clark said he was upset by the incident. ''The actions are not, I don't think, indicative of my character,'' he said.
Wegrzyn, while sitting next to Clark, said he did not believe the various controversies and mounting losses would cause any potential coaching candidates to lose interest.
But others in New York basketball circles questioned how this might affect St. John's recruiting.
Bob Oliva, the boys' basketball coach at Christ the King High School in Queens, has sent several players to St. John's, most recently Omar Cook.
''I think they hit rock bottom,'' Oliva said by telephone yesterday. ''You can't get any lower than that. It's a shame. It's a once-proud college that once represented a lot of us in the Catholic schools. This will turn around, but it's going to take a lot of time.''
Oliva would not say if he would push to send a player to St. John's now, but said he hoped a new coach would put St. John's in a position that he would want to send players there in the future.
Oliva said the university required a coach with a good reputation to re-establish contacts with the high school and amateur coaches in the city. That reflects criticisms that Jarvis distanced himself from many of the established city programs in his five-plus seasons.
The starting forward Grady Reynolds, who last season was charged with assaulting a female student and had the case settled when he agreed to take anger management classes, was expelled on Thursday.
Elijah Ingram, the team's leading scorer, and Abe Keita, the starting center, were suspended from the university, which is seeking their expulsion. They will have a hearing about the expulsion, most likely next week, before a panel of faculty members and students.
Two reserve players, Lamont Hamilton and Mohamed Diakite, were suspended from the team for violations of undisclosed team policies. Another reserve, Tyler Jones, is suspended for tomorrow's game, and a student manager, whom the university did not name, was also suspended.
The university's actions came after an incident involving a 38-year-old Queens woman, identified by the police as Sherri Ann Urbanek-Bach, that began at Club Erotica, a strip club in the Pittsburgh suburb of McKees Rocks. The club has become a popular destination for men's college basketball players passing through Pittsburgh.
Unlike the upscale nightclubs favored by professional athletes, Club Erotica draws a significantly younger crowd, offering free beer and loud music until 4 a.m. for a $15 cover charge. It is about 15 minutes from downtown Pittsburgh. During the N.C.A.A. tournament two years ago, one Pittsburgh taxi driver said he was spending much of his time sneaking players from their team hotel to the club.
Urbanek-Bach told the police at 4:15 a.m. Thursday that she had been raped by five members of the St. John's team and an unknown man. The incident took place at the Westin Conventional Center Hotel, where the team was staying after its loss to Pittsburgh on Wednesday night, according to a copy of the probable cause/criminal complaint affidavit, a summation of the Pittsburgh police report.
The St. John's players were interviewed by the police and released without being charged.
At 6:30 p.m. Thursday, Urbanek-Bach told the police that she had lied about being raped and admitted to having consensual sexual intercourse with an undetermined number of players after agreeing to be paid $1,000, the affidavit said. When the players refused to pay her, it said, she threatened to have them arrested.
The police charged Urbanek-Bach with fictitious reports to law enforcement, prostitution and criminal theft by extortion. They determined that she lied about her claims after a player revealed a cellphone video of portions of the encounter, a police officer said Thursday.
Urbanek-Bach was arraigned yesterday in Pittsburgh City Court. She was freed after posting $20,000 bail, The Associated Press said.
Jarvis said he hoped the players would learn from their mistakes.
''That's a life lesson we try to teach kids,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''I feel bad for the parents and for the teachers and coaches the kids have had throughout their lives. Thank God they are young and they, like all of us, can learn from mistakes and move forward. I hope they will move on and work toward getting their degrees and being responsible and productive citizens.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
