Start and stop, frantic then boring, big jokes and sudden earnestness: ''Just Desserts'' proceeds with the libido-erasing rhythm of a pointless date.
It's meant to be a comic love story about pastry chefs, with gooey erotica to sedate the lonely chocoholic. But ugh.
It's instructive to notice that the Hallmark Channel still churns these dodo chicksploitation flicks, packaged like a brownie sundae that you're not meant to tuck in to without protestations about how sinfully indulgent it is. But you go for it anyway. And there's a big Italian hunk baking in the kitchen on which you might feast your eye. Oh gumdrops, this was so worth missing the gym for.
Grace Carpenter (Lauren Holly, looking nice), the character who serves as proxy for the female viewer, is a workaholic with no visible family or friends. She has a rich boyfriend, who has two private planes, from which a metaphor for compartmentalization is grimly wrought.
But Grace, who's coiffed to look rich herself, also has a cooking partner, Marco Poloni (Costas Mandylor), a handsome working man from the sexy, real Bronx who's all heart and no planes. (Check out those cute ethnic locutions: ''Dio mio!,'' ''Madonn'!'') After a few fights that might merit an award for Most Perfunctory Mean Banter Before Guards Are Dropped in a Love Story, they swoon. The private-plane man ultimately backs off in a display of major, unmotivated noblesse oblige.
Grace and Marco also encounter preposterous melodrama in the person of Jacques, a saboteur in a ludicrous international televised bake-off. The movie mostly satirizes this interaction, but also doesn't, leaving it a tonal mess. The sweethearts have to deal with a scary Delilah who gets Marco drunk and extracts his special lower-class Italiano secret baking ingredient. (Spoiler: it's amore.)
Who watches this stuff? The obvious target audience for the movie (written, produced and directed by men) is ravenous, housebound women. But could any in that demographic respond to this kind of cynicism? It seems more likely that preteenagers tune in for a glimpse of what's ahead. But they'll get no good look at the future: ''Just Desserts'' -- a pun the movie adores -- is a throwback to the first wave of chocolate-is-better-than-sex hilarity.
Of course, this movie is also kitsch, replete with old Euro slurs that at their best recall ''Tintin'' (the Germans say ''Verboten''; the French have names like Fragonard). As kitsch, it might be watched in mixed company, over scotch, with a couple of loudmouths shouting down the dialogue. That might not work either, however, because in such a group you'd have no loneliness to offset. And then you wouldn't need the movie at all.
JUST DESSERTS  HALLMARK, Sunday at 7, 9 and 11 p.m. Eastern and Pacific times; 6, 8 and 10, Central time
Directed by Kevin Connor; written by Joseph Tropiano; Larry Levinson and Robert Halmi Jr., executive producers; Nick Lombardo, co-executive producer. A Mat IV production in association with Alpine Medien and Larry Levinson Productions.
WITH: Lauren Holly (Grace Carpenter), Costas Mandylor (Marco Poloni), Brenda Vaccaro (Lina), Wolfgang Puck (himself), Andy Lauer (Jacques du Jacques) and Dorie Barton (Candy).
TELEVISION REVIEW
