Dee Dee Bridgewater helped open a jazz club this week, Le Jazz au Bar, at 41 East 58th Street, near Park Avenue. It is a swell, old-school aristocratic kind of place, with rugs, gilt-frame pictures and a library in back. The occasion called for some overdoing it, and overdoing it is Ms. Bridgewater's thing.
Yet she seemed to rise even a notch higher than usual in a long, hardworking set of music from her last album, ''This Is New,'' which rearranges Kurt Weill songs for jazz. Ms. Bridgewater, a 35-year veteran of jazz and musical theater, has an excellent voice, strong and unfailingly on-key with an unusually wide pitch range. But it is possible to listen to her for two hours and still feel as if you haven't gotten to appreciate the quality of that voice. In her stagy, erotic agitation and her hyperactive use of vocal devices, she seemed ready to catch fire, a supernova of mannerism. The arrangements, by Cecil Bridgewater, a former husband, take the songs away from Weill's stiff oom-pah rhythms, fitting difficult melodies into what have become fairly standard jazz vehicles: four-four swing, jazz adaptations of Cuban and tango rhythms, scatting and instrumental solos. Ms. Bridgewater has been playing this material for two years, and the band had the songs down tight.
Tuesday's set included ''Lost in the Stars,'' ''Speak Low,'' ''I'm a Stranger Here Myself'' and a version of ''Bilbao Song'' with a kind of one-minute tour through Gypsy music in its voice-and-percussion introduction. You might marvel at the songs' metamorphoses with a slow-going singer, but she pours so many extras into each line (burrs, radical vibrato, vocal slides) that the songs become nearly unrecognizable.
During songs she stole kisses from sidemen; in between songs, she cooed to couples at tables and hectored them to kiss each other, furiously nudge-winking about marital sex and masturbation; and she habitually ran her flattened palms down the sides of her Issey Miyake dress. This must be genuinely sexy for some people, but it is also an outrageous satire, a comedy show about an attractive woman who can't get over her own libido. And as such, it was a fairly remarkable performance.
She is scheduled to perform at the club through tonight.
JAZZ REVIEW
