A judge has ordered the Westchester Joint Water Works, which provides drinking water to 46,000 customers in six suburban towns, to build a $25 million filtration plant to ensure that the water is safe to drink.
Justice Louis A. Barone of State Supreme Court in Westchester County declared on Tuesday that the nonprofit water supply corporation was jeopardizing the health and safety of its customers by refusing to filter its  water. He rejected the argument by the water works that a filtration plant was unnecessary because it had corrected the pollution problems detected by health authorities in the early 1990's.
Though the company had agreed in 1993 to build a filtration plant, it never went forward with the construction. It found that problems were caused by polluted storm runoff from nearby Westchester County Airport and Interstate 684 getting into Rye Lake, from which the corporation draws water. In 1998 it installed a filter between the intake in the lake and the area affected by the storm water runoff.
Philip H. Gitlen, a lawyer who represents the water works, said yesterday  that since 1998 ''the water supply meets all the safe drinking water act criteria'' and should be exempt from having to build the filter, just as part  of New York City's system is exempt.
Justice Barone disagreed and set a rigid construction schedule that gave  the water works 13 months to submit plans for the filtration plant to the  state for approval.
Mr. Gitlen said he could not comment on the decision because he had not yet seen a copy of the court order.
In 1999, when the Westchester Joint Water Works still had not complied  with its earlier agreement to build a filtration plant, the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, filed a lawsuit to force it to begin the project.
The attorney general's office said yesterday that this week's court decision  was a significant victory for residents of Westchester County, even though it will increase the cost of water.
''Building a plant would be expensive but not break-the-bank expensive,'' said Judith Enck, a policy adviser in the attorney general's environmental protection bureau.
She estimated that the cost to the average customer would be about $80 a year, bringing the average water bill to about $300 a year.
The Westchester Joint Water Works would ''go from being one of the cheapest companies in Westchester County to being one of the most moderately priced companies in the county,'' Ms. Enck said. ''We thought the benefits to building the plant were pretty obvious. But they didn't.''
Rye Lake is an arm of the Kensico Reservoir, which gets most of its water through pipelines from the part of New York City's drinking water system that lies west of the Hudson River. Those parts of the city's reservoir system are considered clean enough to have been granted a waiver by federal authorities  and will not have to be filtered so long as they meet clean water standards.
