Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany, facing disaffection within his own party and hampered by persistently low public approval ratings, announced Friday that he would step down as chairman of the Social Democratic Party while remaining chancellor.
Mr. Schröder said that the move, which surprised members of his party and political analysts here, would enable him to concentrate all his efforts on the economic reforms, called Agenda 2010, that he has made the centerpiece of his chancellorship.
''I am committed to this process of reform,'' Mr. Schröder said at a news  conference here Friday afternoon. ''I am convinced it is necessary.''
Alluding to growing dissatisfaction with his leadership within his party, Mr. Schröder said: ''There have been difficulties of getting these reform policies across to the people. There have also been problems of conveying the need of reforms within the party.''
Mr. Schröder said he would propose that Franz Müntefering, 64, the party's parliamentary floor leader and a close ally, succeed him as party chairman.
Indicating the depth of the shake-up within the S.P.D., the party's secretary general, Olaf Scholz, also announced Friday that he would give up his post.
Opposition leaders were close to jubilant at Mr. Schröder's announcement. ''This is the beginning of the end of the federal chancellor,'' said Angela Merkel, the chairwoman of the conservative Christian Democratic Union, ''and the beginning and the end of this government.''
Edmund Stoiber, the governor of Bavaria and another leading figure in the opposition, said, ''Somebody who can't convince his party also won't be able to convince the people.''
For a chancellor not to be chairman of his party is unusual in Germany, though not unprecedented. Mr. Schröder's decision to give up the post seems an acknowledgment of his lack of popularity inside the party, which holds only a slim majority in Parliament in coalition with the Green Party.
Several times in the past year, Mr. Schröder has threatened to resign as chancellor if he did not receive backing for his reform program from his own party. The party has always voted to support him. But it has been clear that some parts of its core constituency, especially the powerful labor unions, have been deeply unhappy with such aspects of the reform program as cutbacks in unemployment and health benefits and efforts to make it easier for employers to fire unwanted workers.
In recent weeks, there have been increasingly outspoken criticisms of Mr. Schröder's leadership and demands for a major reshuffling of his cabinet as a way of restoring confidence both within the party and the public. One immediate concern is that Germany faces a record number of state and local elections this year, 14 in all between now and September. A bad record in those contests would make it very difficult for the Social Democratic Party to hold on to national power later.
''Some faces have been used up,'' Wolfgang Jüttner, the party leader in Mr. Schröder's home state of Lower Saxony, told the German edition of The Financial Times. ''I don't think we can go on without a reshaping of the cabinet.''
But Mr. Schröder, at least for now, seems to have opted not for a cabinet reshuffle but for a division of responsibilities between the chancellor and party leader. His hope seems to be that Mr. Müntefering will be more effective in winning support inside the party even as Mr. Schröder concentrates on persuading the larger German public.
''It's certainly a surprise,'' Uwe Andersen, a political scientist at Ruhr University in Bochum, said in a telephone interview. ''I'm sure you'll read tomorrow that most observers see it as a step of despair, and I'm not so sure it will pay off.''
''If you look at the polls, you will see that it really is a situation of despair for the S.P.D., and Schröder has to do something about it,'' Mr. Andersen said.
The latest poll figures, put out last week by the research firm Forsa, indicate that only 24 percent of voters would support Mr. Schröder if elections were held now.
One powerful sign of this disaffection within Mr. Schröder's own ranks has been a sharp decline in S.D.P. membership, from nearly a million in 1990 to about 650,000 today.
''Maybe Schröder feels, as he has said, that he doesn't have enough time to do both things, to go to the public and to convince party members at the same time,'' Mr. Andersen said of Mr. Schröder's decision to turn the party job over to Mr. Müntefering. ''But whether it will really work out, I doubt it.''
