Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark engaged in a war of words Friday over whether the senator had let down veterans, and Mr. Edwards's pollster said he faced an uphill battle in the primaries in Virginia and Tennessee next Tuesday.
Mr. Edwards and General Clark are both banking heavily on these states, where, the Edwards campaign said, the two candidates are trailing Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts in the polls. Mr. Edwards has staked his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination on the claim that as a son of the South, he would defeat President Bush in the region, which has been pivotal in past Democratic victories.
But General Clark, campaigning aggressively, has vowed to win Tennessee, and it was here that he mounted his latest attack on Mr. Edwards.
''When veterans were facing deep cuts in health care, John Edwards wasn't there to support them,'' the retired Army general said on a Nashville radio program. He referred to three Senate votes by Mr. Edwards favoring trims in government spending on veterans' health care.
At a news conference after an appearance in Bristol, Mr. Edwards called the remarks ''the kind of attacks that people are sick of.'' Pressed to explain the votes, he said they had been cast against broad appropriations bills that included provisions harmful to North Carolina farmers and other interests in his state.
''I have supported veterans consistently,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I have voted dozens of times for benefits for veterans. I am the person who co-sponsored the legislation in the Senate to give veterans the same health care that members of the United States Senate get.''
The back-and-forth came on a day when Mr. Edwards's campaign ramped up an effort to counter the impression that he must win the primaries here and in Virginia to stay in the race. The campaign's pollster, Harrison Hickman, said an analysis of public polls and the campaign's internal surveys suggested that Senator Kerry was leading in both Virginia and Tennessee, with General Clark second.
But ''I have no question we would win in both states if we had two weeks to campaign instead of one,'' Mr. Hickman said. The campaign's internal polls show Mr. Edwards gaining fast on General Clark in both states, he said, making aides confident that Mr. Edwards will overtake the general, though less certain that he can beat Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Hickman also said that in the latest round of contests, this Tuesday, Mr. Edwards won more votes of independents and people who had voted Republican in previous elections than had Mr. Kerry. He suggested that Mr. Edwards could carry on even with losses next Tuesday and said the goal was to finish in the top two.
Both Mr. Edwards and General Clark have opted essentially to skip contests in Michigan, Washington State and Maine this weekend in order to focus on Tennessee and Virginia, and, they say, head for a showdown in Wisconsin on Feb. 17.
Asked on Friday whether attacks between himself and Mr. Edwards might improve Mr. Kerry's chances in these two Southern states, General Clark replied: ''That's too sophisticated for me. All we can do in an election is let the people make the choice.''
Mr. Edwards, meanwhile, said he would continue to cast himself as a positive campaigner focused on improving the economy and bringing together a nation he sees as divided by class and inequality.
''I'm going to continue running the campaign I'm running,'' he said.
While Mr. Edwards and General Clark campaigned in the South, Howard Dean suggested in Wisconsin that he would accept the No. 2 spot on a national ticket if it was offered.
Acknowledging that his being chosen as the presidential nominee is ''a longer shot than it was,'' Dr. Dean said on a morning radio show in Milwaukee, ''I would, to the extent, do anything I could to get rid of President Bush.''
''I'll do whatever is best for the party,'' he added. ''Obviously I'm running for president, but whatever's best is what I'll do. Anything. We've just got to change presidents.''
Asked whether he would endorse any of his opponents if forced from the race, he said, ''We are planning on winning, so we're not thinking about endorsing anybody else.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
