Lennox Lewis, the first Englishman to win the heavyweight boxing title since Bob Fitzsimmons more than 100 years ago, promised on Friday to become only the third reigning heavyweight champion to retire and not come back.
''Lennox believes it is now time in his life to start raising a family,'' said John Hornewer, a Chicago lawyer and a longtime adviser to Lewis.
At a news conference in London on Friday, Lewis, 38, also announced his engagement to Violet Chang of Jamaica. Lewis's Jamaican-born mother is also named Violet. Both women were strong advocates of his retirement.
It will take time to establish Lewis's proper place in boxing history. Ross Greenburg, the president of HBO Sports, said wryly that it would probably ''take even more time'' to establish a heavyweight successor.
No matter where anyone ranks him, no one -- from Muhammad Ali and Joe Louis, the consensus top two heavyweights, on down -- would have had an easy time handling Lewis, 6 feet 5 inches and 250 pounds with agility and a big right hand. He compiled a 41-2-1 record with 32 knockouts and an estimated $150 million in earnings.
''I hope someone emerges, the way Joe Frazier emerged when Muhammad Ali was in exile,'' said Greenburg, who had been hoping Lewis would pass the torch to Vitali Klitschko, a 6-7 Ukrainian who led on all scorecards against Lewis after six rounds in June before losing by technical knockout. ''I'm not saying we're going to get another Joe Frazier, but someone will emerge.''
There was talk of staging a Lewis-Klitschko rematch, but Lewis said he no longer felt the hunger.
''I am sad to hear that Lennox Lewis had decided to retire,'' said Klitschko, the top-ranked contender for the World Boxing Council title, the only title Lewis retained, ''but I respect him for his decision. Lennox was one of the greatest heavyweight champions of all time and I am very proud and honored to say that I was able to fight him. Lennox was a credit to the sport for many, many years and his presence will be missed.''
Klitschko figures to wind up facing the No. 2 W.B.C. heavyweight contender, Corrie Sanders of South Africa, who is coming off a second-round knockout of Klitschko's ''little'' brother, 6-5 Wladimir.
With Roy Jones Jr. giving up his claim to the World Boxing Association heavyweight title to defend the light-heavyweight title against Antonio Tarver in April or May, John Ruiz loses the ''interim'' around his W.B.A. title and will probably defend it in April or May -- or whatever date Jones decides against -- in a Don King-produced pay-per-view show from Puerto Rico against Fres Oquendo.
It is expected that King's other heavyweight champion, Chris Byrd, will put the International Boxing Federation belt on the line that same night, probably against Jameel McCline of New York or King's latest prospect, the undefeated Gerald Nobles of Philadelphia.
Larry Holmes, who, like Lewis, did not receive his due while heavyweight champion, said, ''Lennox couldn't have carried Rocky Marciano's jock strap''.
Marciano and Gene Tunney are the only heavyweights to retire and not come back.
The 185-pound Marciano ''would have gotten underneath and tore Lewis up,'' said Angelo Dundee, Muhammad Ali's former trainer. ''So would have Joe Frazier.''
As for Ali, or Holmes, ''Lewis never would have touched them,'' said Gene Kilroy, a former aide to Ali.
Emanuel Steward, who took over Lewis's corner after leading Oliver McCall into the ring for a 1987 knockout that was the first of the only two losses by Lewis, said Lewis ''never dodged anyone'' and ''you can't fight in other eras.''
Lewis was physically gifted, smart and decent. In the 1988 Olympic final, he was hurt in the opening round by Riddick Bowe but came back to win in the next round.
How great was Lewis? That the arguments have already started is a sure sign that he will eventually be fondly recalled, and not just because he was a straight citizen who never brought disrepute to a sport that has had its fill.
BOXING
