American authorities are investigating the extent to which companies, individuals and foreign banks helped the former Iraqi government flout United Nations economic sanctions.
Stiff international sanctions on oil exports from Iraq were imposed after Saddam Hussein ordered the invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Beginning in 1996, they were replaced with the oil-for-food program, which permitted Iraq to sell its oil only for food, medicine and equipment to maintain its oil industry.
Since the collapse of Mr. Hussein's government in April, both Iraqi and American officials said they had found evidence that hundreds of companies that had done business with Iraq had paid kickbacks and illegal surcharges into secret bank accounts outside Iraq.
''Everything in Saddam's days was organized looting,'' said Ali Allawi, the interim minister of trade, one of the officials working with investigators to identify corrupt practices under the former government.
Officials in Iraq's Oil Ministry have also said that several hundred companies, businessmen, politicians and journalists received oil coupons, or the right to buy Iraqi oil, as gifts from Mr. Hussein and his top aides.
''There are investigations from the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement looking at possible violations of U.S. law,'' said Juan C. Zarate, a deputy assistant secretary in the Treasury Department who specializes in investigating terrorist financing.
American companies that violated the United Nations sanctions on Iraq could face civil or criminal charges for transferring funds to Iraq, he said. Foreign companies could also lose the privilege of exporting goods to the United States if they are found to have breached the sanctions.
Mr. Zarate said that he could not discuss any investigations but that the United States had been helping the provisional Iraqi government locate and recover money in foreign bank accounts and embassies around the world.
During the oil-for-food program, the legal sale of Iraqi oil generated $65 billion, according to the United Nations. A compensation fund for victims of the Iraqi invasion received one-fourth of the money. The rest was paid to suppliers of food and other assistance to the Iraqi people, weapons inspections and the United Nations' administrative costs of running the oil-for-food program.
But the sanctions were never assumed to be airtight. The proof was visible to any Iraqi who saw the lavish palaces that Saddam Hussein built in his last few years in power. His hidden sources of income, experts said, came mainly from the smuggling of oil outside the supervision of the United Nations and the diversion of oil-for-food money into secret accounts.
A General Accounting Office study in 2002, for example, estimated that Iraq had received some $4.3 billion from the illicit sale of oil through Jordan, Iran, Syria and Turkey. The study estimated that kickbacks from suppliers and surcharges paid by buyers of Iraqi oil had generated at least an additional $2.3 billion.
More details of the smuggling business, as well as Iraq's demands for kickbacks, have been emerging over the past weeks in Baghdad as newly appointed ministers plumb records of evidence of fraud.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: OIL-FOR-FOOD PROGRAM
