Once upon a time the name Cavendish referred solely to a family of English aristocrats. A century and a half ago it began a long association with cardplaying when Henry Jones of London, the best whist player of that period, adopted it as his nom de plume and produced a series of major books. He also staged the first duplicate game.
Now clubs around the world have named themselves Cavendish. The most important of these was founded in Manhattan in 1925. For the next 66 years, at locations that drifted uptown, the Cavendish was where the top players congregated, primarily to play rubber bridge.
The club closed its doors in 1991, but the name continues in two ways. The Cavendish, a tournament that began in Manhattan, is played annually in Las Vegas in May and attracts many of the world's best players. And a successor club continues to use the Cavendish name. It moved to a new location this week, at 177 East 87th Street, and offers duplicate games Monday to Saturday at 12:30 p.m. and Monday and Friday at 6:30 p.m. Rubber bridge is played daily. Information: (212) 876-2196.
The link between the two Cavendishes is Bjorn Fallenius. With his wife, Kathy, he owns and manages the club, and he won the main event at the tournament, the pairs, in 1988. Playing in it in 1995, before the move to Las Vegas, he faced a problem on the diagramed deal. In four hearts he received a diamond lead. He was forced to win this in dummy, since he could not afford to have East win and shift to a trump.
If you were in his place, what would you lead from dummy at the second trick? It is a tricky question. If you lead the heart jack and the finesse loses, you will concede a trick in each suit unless the defense is very helpful. If you lead the club jack, you will succeed with the actual distribution. But if this finesse loses, you will have to ruff a club winner in dummy to be able to try hearts. With only one trump remaining in the dummy, you would not then be able to collect K x x in the East hand.
Fallenius made a much better play that gave him the maximum chances. At the second trick, he called for the club six from dummy and played his queen. When this won, he could ruff a club in the dummy. If the finesse had failed, he would have been able to use the club jack as an entry to the dummy and then lead the heart jack.
BRIDGE
