Taking their lead from what they saw as waning state support for a proposed sports arena in Newark and a glimmer of renewed state enthusiasm for the 23-year-old Continental Arena, business owners and elected officials from areas near the Meadowlands complex formed a committee Friday to pressure the state to keep the arena open.
Because most economic studies indicate that two arenas located within 12 miles of each other and competing for similar events would bothfail, any decision to keep the Continental Arena would almost certainly doom the proposed Newark arena.
Calling themselves the Saving the Arena That's Real task force, the group said James Kirkos, the president of the Meadowlands Regional Chamber of Commerce, would pressure the state to keep the arena as an element of a planned $1.3 billion family entertainment complex at the Meadowlands. That complex, called Meadowlands Xanadu, when proposed a year ago, was intended to replace the arena as an economic engine for the region and to pave the way for the state to give its blessing to the relocation of the New Jersey Devils and New Jerseys Nets franchises to the proposed Newark arena.
But many things have changed in a year, said Mr. Kirkos, pointing to the sale of the Nets last month to a developer who plans to move them to Brooklyn and new and aggressive marketing of the Continental Arena, by the state agency that runs it, that says it could be profitable without two sports teams. The heart of the group's argument is that the Meadowlands site already exists, while the Newark proposal remains just that and one with a lot of contingencies.
"Because of everything that has happened in the last year we are unwilling to let the arena go," said Mr. Kirkos, applauding the new energy and marketing of the arena by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority and its president and chief executive, George R. Zoffinger. "A year ago we didn't think there was much in our control and we were willing to take the Xanadu proposal not so much as a consolation prize but as backfill."
Both Mr. Kirkos and Mayor James L. Cassella of East Rutherford credited Mr. Zoffinger with the turnaround in the Continental Arena's fortunes. His strong and vocal advocacy in recent weeks for keeping the arena open, they said, encouraged them that Gov. James E. McGreevey, once an ardent supporter of Newark's proposed arena, had also changed his view. The governor, however, remained silent Friday and a spokesman contacted for comment continued, as he has done in the last week, to refer all such questions to Mr. Zoffinger.
At a news conference Friday, Mayor Cassella, a Republican, found himself standing next to a Democrat, State Senator Paul A. Sarlo. They are two of the four co-chairmen of the Save the Arena that's Real group. He noted that in the past, his allies in keeping Continental Arena open and opposing the planned Newark arena were all Republicans.
"I think the governor has come to realize the truth of what the polls say," said Mayor Cassella, taking note of the new bipartisan accord on the issue. "Those polls say that people in Bergen and Hudson County don't want their arena taken away."
Mayor Cassella said that although Newark, the state's largest city, envisioned spending some $200 million of its own money from airport lease revenues to help build an arena there for the New Jersey Devils, city officials should instead spend that money on education and lessen the $600 million in state education aid sent to the city annually.
