A nonprofit Washington-area group has filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission, seeking to block the Rev. Al Sharpton's presidential campaign from receiving tax dollars. It is a potentially crippling blow to a candidacy already deep in debt and facing increasing criticism over its relationship with the Republican operative Roger Stone.
The group, the National Legal and Policy Center, which says it promotes ethics in government, filed its complaint on Thursday, charging that Mr. Sharpton's campaign expenses have been improperly subsidized by his not-for-profit civil rights group, the National Action Network, and by Mr. Stone, who has a reputation for questionable political tactics.
''The F.E.C. has an obligation to safeguard the integrity of the matching-funds process,'' said Ken Boehm, chairman of the National Legal and Policy Center. ''If there is an effort to defraud the taxpayer, we seek to stop it.''
The complaint comes at a difficult time for Mr. Sharpton, whose success at the Democratic presidential debates has not been followed by success at the polls. He has so far failed to pick up more than one delegate in the states that have held primaries, his campaign is about half a million dollars in debt and his relationship with Mr. Stone has even supporters questioning his credibility.
Mr. Sharpton's campaign manager, Charles Halloran, said yesterday that the complaint was without merit and amounted to ''harassment by a right-wing demagogue group.''
Mr. Sharpton submitted paperwork to the Federal Election Commission in January stating that he qualified for federal matching funds because he had met the fund-raising threshold of $5,000 in donations of $250 or less in 20 states. If those papers are certified, Mr. Sharpton will receive $150,000. The commission said yesterday that certification was not ''imminent.''
Not only does Mr. Sharpton need to be certified to have any hope of keeping his campaign afloat, but he has also already borrowed against the 150,000 from Amalgamated Bank in New York, according to his filing with the commission. The loan is due March 15, according to the commissions papers, and if the matching funds are not available, Mr. Sharpton's campaign could be in default.
The election commission said it was unusual for a candidate to use an application for matching funds as collateral for a loan before the application had been certified. Mr. Sharpton's case is unusual in another way, said Robert Biersack, a spokesman for the commission. Candidates who have received matching funds may later be disqualified from additional payments if they do not get 10 percent of the vote in two consecutive primary rounds. Mr. Sharpton has not yet been certified as eligible for the funds, and has not yet reached the 10 percent threshold.
The National Legal and Policy Center, in its complaint to the federal agency, also criticizes Mr. Stone's role in financing and staffing Mr. Sharpton's campaign and loaning money to the National Action Network. Some of the financial details were reported in The Village Voice this week. The complaint also suggested that the National Action Network was improperly covering the cost of Mr. Sharpton's campaign travel, as well as his use of consultants and contractors.
Mr. Sharpton dismisses the allegations.
