Stocks and bonds rallied yesterday on a January jobs report that offered something for investors in both equities and Treasuries.
While the government reported the addition of 112,000 jobs, the increase was less than the 175,000 expected, a positive for bonds because slower growth means interest rates will rise more slowly. But the report was still the biggest monthly job gain in three years, a positive for stocks because more jobs mean more consumer spending.
Such a market response is not unusual at a time when investors are expecting a significant change in policy by the Federal Reserve -- in this case, a rise in interest rates -- but are confused about the timing.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 97.48 points, or 0.9 percent, to 10,593.03, while the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose 14.17 points, or 1.3 percent, to 1,142.76. The Nasdaq composite index finished 44.45 points, or 2.2 percent higher, at 2,064.01. All three market gauges, however, are still below the highs touched last month.
In the Treasury market, the price of the 10-year note rose 23/32, to 10112/32, while the yield, which moves in the opposite direction, fell to 4.08 percent from 4.17 percent Thursday.
Several analysts said the smaller-than-expected job growth meant that the Fed would be able to wait a little longer before it finally begins raising its benchmark rate on overnight loans between banks, which is at a 45-year low of 1 percent.
''This morning's data was a signal that people could take their fingers away from the panic button,'' said Ward McCarthy, managing director at Stone &amp; McCarthy Research Associates.
A small change in sentiment was also reflected in the fall of the yields on futures contracts on the federal funds rate.
The dollar plunged 1.2 percent against the euro, another sign that many investors decided that the weaker job data made action by the Fed less imminent for now. In late trading, the euro was worth $1.2697, up from $1.2542 on Thursday.
At the same time, the job growth, while not as robust as expected, does show that hiring is picking up, which is crucial for the consumer spending that is powering the economic rebound and the growth in corporate earnings.
Over the last five months, 366,000 jobs have been created, compared with a loss of 517,000 in the previous 12 months.
Mr. McCarthy said that bonds also rallied yesterday because bond dealers came into work after selling a lot of Treasury bonds and notes in anticipation of a sell-off after a strong jobs number.
Some were apparently foreseeing a stronger-than-expected report after comments on Thursday from Ben S. Bernanke, a Federal Reserve governor. In a speech in South Carolina, Mr. Bernanke said that hiring would increase to meet growing demand. ''I am pretty confident we'll see some big numbers fairly soon,'' he said, according to Bloomberg News.
In addition, dealers had reduced their inventories of Treasury securities ahead of next week's Treasury auctions, when they expect to buy up the new issues.
So when the jobs number was weaker than expected, ''it was a pleasant surprise,'' Mr. McCarthy said, and dealers bought Treasury securities.
Fed officials contributed to the uncertainty about their intentions in the statement they released Jan. 28, after their most recent policy meeting. In that statement, the central bank removed what had been a security blanket for investors: a promise to keep the benchmark interest rate low as the economy picked up steam.
That pledge was made in August, when members of the Federal Open Market Committee added these words to a statement after their meeting: ''The committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.''
Fed officials replaced the ''considerable period'' language with a promise to be ''patient'' with any move to raise its short-term interest rate benchmark.
Mr. McCarthy called this a ''baby step'' toward a rate increase that has put the market on edge because participants now have to reassess their expectations for the timing of the rate increase based on the strength or weakness of each month's economic data.
''This subtle change has elevated the significance of these data releases,'' he said. ''It means that market players will be continually revising their expectations as to the timing of the rate increase.''
This means that the stock and bond markets could be volatile over the next several months as investors decide to buy one day when new economic data appears to delay Fed action and then sell the next day when new data appears to make a rate increase more imminent.
THE MARKETS: CURRENCIES
