In the waning seasons of his career, Giants defensive tackle Keith Hamilton spent time between practice drills sitting on a cooler on the sideline. None of the other Giants dared sit down during practice, but no one gave Hamilton, the team's elder statesman, a second look.
Hamilton had earned that seat during his 12-year career. When he announced his retirement yesterday, he ensured that the seat on the cooler would be empty next season.
His decision to retire was not a surprise. He had hinted near the end of the 2003 season that he might not want to start over with a new coach after being one of Jim Fassel's biggest supporters. And he left the field after the Giants' final game to rounds of hugs and tears.
''I've been thinking about it since I walked off the field against Carolina,'' Hamilton said in a statement. ''It took me a while. I've been going back and forth with it for a couple of weeks. I've talked about it with my family, and it's time for me to move on.''
Hamilton, 32, spent all 12 of his N.F.L. seasons with the Giants, unusual in the modern era of free agency and the salary cap. His 6-foot-6 frame became a fixture along the defensive line after the Giants drafted him in the fourth round from Pittsburgh in 1992.
''Keith Hamilton was a throwback football player,'' Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said. ''He could have played in the 50's with the Gino Marchettis, the Len Fords, the Big Daddy Lipscombs and the Andy Robustellis, or in the 60's with Joe Greene, Deacon Jones and Alan Page.''
Hamilton played in 173 games, tied with linebacker Harry Carson for sixth place in Giants history, and started 157. His 63 sacks place him fourth on the team's list. He had 526 tackles and was instrumental in the Giants' last three playoff runs.
But the man who was known as Hammer never defined his career by statistics. He was, even while playing alongside the Pro Bowl defensive end Michael Strahan, the heart of the defense. Strahan often said that many of his sacks would not have come without Hamilton drawing a double team away from him.
Accorsi said: ''He provided a lot of toughness but also emotion for this football team, particularly on our drive to Super Bowl XXXV. His talent and probably more importantly, his spirit, will be missed.''
Hamilton, who grew up in Paterson, N.J., has been facing drug possession charges since an arrest in Paterson before last season. His lawyers had the trial delayed until after the season, knowing Hamilton's retirement was very likely and would cause less disruption for the Giants.
But Strahan said last week that he would come home after tomorrow's Pro Bowl game and try to talk Hamilton into continuing to play. Strahan has played 11 seasons with Hamilton, the longest stretch current teammates have played together in the N.F.L.
Strahan said he was convinced Hamilton could still play at a high level. ''Keith is truly one of a kind, a very unique individual,'' Strahan said. ''He's tough and he's mean, but he's also one of the most gentle individuals you could meet. He's very logical about everything.
''It's amazing to have discussions with him and see him get fired up because he's one of the funniest guys you could ever be around. I'm going to miss his uniqueness. He made it fun for me to play the last 11 years.''
Hamilton played in 2003 after missing the last 11 games of the 2002 season with a torn Achilles' tendon. Many of the Giants believe his absence was a big reason they lost a wild-card playoff game to San Francisco that season. Before their collapse, the Giants had a 38-14 lead late in the third quarter.
Hamilton went through a strenuous rehabilitation to return for this season, only to have it end with a 4-12 record.
''I planned on coming back and getting to the Super Bowl,'' Hamilton said. ''I wanted it to be a storybook ending. But sometimes in life things don't always work out the way you planned.''
PRO FOOTBALL
