Two days after Gov. John G. Rowland introduced his proposal to adjust the state's budget, prominent Democrats criticized his suggested cuts on Friday and questioned whether he could pay for the increases he had promised.
The governor, a Republican in his third term, proposes adding almost $179 million to the $14 billion general fund budget adopted for the 2005 fiscal year, which begins on July 1.
Two months ago, many legislators predicted that Mr. Rowland would be especially weak during budget negotiations with the Democrat-controlled legislature after he admitted on Dec. 12 that he had lied about accepting free work on his lakeside cottage from people doing business with the state.
That prediction appeared to have been confirmed on Friday. Although most Democrats said they had not finished studying the governor's proposals in depth, their immediate reaction indicated that his peacemaking gesture of increasing money for some favorite Democratic programs had failed to impress.
''Some of the proposals are clearly a gesture to reach out to the real people of Connecticut, but the question is, can he keep the promise?'' said Moira K. Lyons of Stamford, the speaker of the House.
This year's deliberations concern adjustments to a budget adopted last August after a bruising set of negotiations. The General Assembly finally adopted a two-year budget in August, six weeks past the constitutional deadline, approving $13.5 billion for the 2004 fiscal year and $14 billion for the 2005 fiscal year.
The budget adoption followed months of bitter disagreement between Mr. Rowland and the Democrats. He vetoed several Democratic budgets. For eight weeks, the state was without a budget, with Mr. Rowland issuing executive orders to meet expenses. Before the budget was approved, the legislature was called into six special sessions.
In August, the legislature approved $921.7 million for transportation for 2005. The governor proposed cutting that budget by $6.6 million.
On Wednesday, when Mr. Rowland opened the legislative session, he said his budget proposals support transportation programs started by Ms. Lyons. But she said his plan would reduce money in a fund she created last year to ease congested roads, a problem that is particularly critical in Fairfield County.
''Transportation is married to economic development,'' she said. ''I see no need to raid the fund this year, when the state is facing a much smaller deficit than last year.''
When the 2004 fiscal year ends in June, the state is expected to face a $41.1 million deficit. Last fiscal year's deficit would have been as much as $756 million if not for a special session that increased taxes and reduced spending by $650 million.
The governor's proposal calls for $11 million to be cut from the budget of nearly $73 million for magnet schools. Such schools were part of a remedy to address a 1996 court-ordered desegregation of Connecticut schools. The State Supreme Court found that children in urban schools were not offered the same educational opportunity as their suburban peers. About 11,300 children attend 36 magnet schools; some 15,000 are expected to attend 48 schools in 2005.
Thomas P. Gaffey, a Senate Democrat who is chairman of the Education Committee, said the proposal undercut the court order. ''Magnet schools were the marquee response to the Supreme Court decision, and to have to cut the programs so drastically is troublesome,'' he said.
But Marc S. Ryan, who prepares the governor's budget, said the reduction was misunderstood. Fewer magnet schools than expected were created for the 2005 fiscal year, saving about $4 million. About $7 million is saved by compelling the City of Hartford to pay more of its share of the cost of sending its children to magnet schools. Mr. Ryan said the city has been unfairly getting about $3,000 more state money per child each year than other cities.
To help close the deficit, Mr. Rowland proposes raising taxes on alcohol and cigarettes and other tobacco products by April 1. The increase is expected to yield $35.4 million.
But Martin M. Looney, a Democrat who is the Senate majority leader, said an increase in such taxes could make Connecticut merchants less competitive than those in neighboring states. Rather, Senate Democrats plan to revive the so-called millionaire's tax, devised last year but ultimately defeated. (Instead, taxes were raised to 5 percent from 4.5 percent on incomes across the board.)
The Democratic plan would increase taxes by 1 percent on any income over $500,000 for individuals and over $1 million for couples. Mr. Looney estimated that such an increase would raise $170 million a year in revenue. ''The additional tax liability on this income would be offset by the federal tax structures that benefit such earners,'' he said.
In a move that might have pleased Democrats in a year when Mr. Rowland was less vulnerable, the governor's budget sits just $58 million under a spending cap required by the State Constitution. In other years, the margin was as high as $100 million.
Mr. Ryan dismissed the Democrats' criticism as merely their first impression. ''No doubt they will come up with a few plans of their own,'' he said, ''but when is all said and done, they'll see our budget is the best.''
