The recent thaw may have relieved New York streets of much ice and snow, but it has created havoc along the city's waterways. As warmer weather melts the thick ice, chunks break loose and, swept by currents and wind, slam into shore. The ice floes have splintered bulkheads, destroyed hefty pilings, uprooted docks and dislodged buoys.
On the Hudson River, thick floes, loosened from heavy ice packs many miles upriver, have drifted down with the current. On Tuesday, some of them destroyed two heavy-duty stanchions, called icebreakers, built to protect the 79th Street Boat Basin on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. A sturdy protective cluster of seven pilings, known as a dolphin, was also knocked down, leaving docks and possibly the boats behind them vulnerable.
''The marinas across the city are taking a severe hit,'' the city's parks commissioner, Adrian Benepe, said yesterday. ''There's so much ice this year that you have ice slabs almost a foot thick coming down the river. We've become a victim of time and tides.''
Mr. Benepe said he asked the Coast Guard yesterday to protect the marina from more ice floes by stationing a vessel where the icebreakers had been. ''We hope it doesn't warm up too quickly, because more ice could break off and really damage the marina.''
In upper Manhattan near the Cloisters, the Dyckman Marina sustained about $70,000 worth of damage, said Jerry O'Rourke, who operates the marina. Mr. O'Rourke and his dockmaster, Capt. Michael T. Byarard, gazed yesterday at the damage: seven uprooted pilings, several damaged docks and 15 heavy mooring anchors dragged down the river to oblivion.
''We have no icebreakers, so we get hit by everything that floats this way,'' Mr. O'Rourke said.
Petty Officer Mike Lutz, a spokesman for the Coast Guard, said yesterday that many buoys marking channels in the Hudson and in New York Harbor had been pulled off course, along with their mooring anchors.
At the Hudson River Yacht Club, an 80-boat marina in the Mill Basin section of Brooklyn, heavy ice this week dislodged about 20 large pilings, damaged several docks and apparently sank one member's boat, a 33-foot Silverton, said Steve Visco, the club's commodore.
''We've had a tremendous amount of damage, at least $50,000 worth, easy,'' he said. ''I'm here 38 years and, except for the winter of '75-'76, I've never seen this kind of damage. It happens when it thaws, because the heavy slabs of ice around the shoreline are pulled out with the outgoing tide, and they snap the dock supports like pretzels and this is thick galvanized metal pipe.''
Each icebreaker at the 79th Street Boat Basin consists of a dozen or so pilings braced together by I-beams and railroad ties. The pilings, similar to telephone poles, can run 70 feet long and are driven 40 feet into the river bottom, said Gregory P. Smith, the marina's supervising dockmaster. Yet the ice floes wrenched them out of the muck like reeds.
On Wednesday, an ice floe rammed into a dock at the marina and laid waste to dozens of planks. The 4-inch-by 8-inch lumber was splintered like matchsticks. Mr. Smith estimated that the ice caused about $130,000 in damage this week.
