A woodcut of Elmer Fudd in hunting gear sits in the upper corner of Scott Stevens's locker at the Devils' training center at South Mountain Arena, as if waiting patiently for Stevens, a defenseman and the team's captain, to return.
His gear continues to be laid out for each Devils practice, as if Stevens will be putting it on any minute, preparing for the 1,636th game of his 22-year career in the National Hockey League.
But the odometer is stuck. No one really knows, or at least no one will say, when Stevens will be able to resume playing. Stevens, who has been out with what he has said may be postconcussion syndrome, could not be reached for comment this week.
Coach Pat Burns said earlier this week that he had no information about Stevens, other than that Stevens would probably be back. He said he could not provide even a general timetable.
Stevens, 39, has missed 14 games, his longest absence since he joined the Devils in 1991. And he will miss the N.H.L. All-Star Game on Sunday in St. Paul; he had been voted a starter for the Eastern Conference team and would have been making his 14th All-Star Game appearance.
Stevens has not played since Jan. 7, in a 4-2 loss to Pittsburgh. He was placed on injured reserve Jan. 20.
''It's been a while,'' Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer, the acting captain, said. ''Everybody's confident in what's going to be asked of them. I think now everybody realizes what they're going to have to do.''
That may be the most surprising development, because Stevens's absence could have ruined the Devils' season. Even his teammates thought Stevens was virtually indestructible. He had missed only two games in the previous three seasons.
''He was always here,'' Devils defenseman Colin White said. ''He never missed games since I've been here.''
As much as the Devils say they miss Stevens's leadership and ice time -- he was averaging 24 minutes a game -- they are somehow surviving without him.
There have been ugly games, most recently a 4-0 loss Thursday to Vancouver, but the Devils (28-14-10-1) remain one of the top teams in the Eastern Conference.
''Now, we've made it to this point; he's not here,'' goaltender Martin Brodeur said. ''Let's play hockey.''
The Devils have gone 8-5-1-0 without Stevens. They were in fifth place in the conference standing when he last played, and they are in fifth place now.
''We've always had Marty back there, and we still have the system,'' said Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski, who will replace Stevens in the Eastern Conference starting lineup at the All-Star Game. ''And guys have been able to step up, so far.''
The Devils still have the best defense in the league, allowing 1.89 goals a game. They are still disciplined; they have been short-handed only 176 times this season, the fewest in the league.
The Devils have allowed only 23 power-play goals, best in the league, and they have killed off 86.9 of their penalties, second only to San Jose. They have won 23 games in which they have scored first, which leads the league.
''If you're sitting around waiting for Scott Stevens to come back, then I'd think you'd be setting yourself up for a big letdown,'' center John Madden said. ''If he comes back, it's going to be a big bonus.''
The Devils say Stevens is probably missed the most when they kill penalties. Vancouver scored two goals in three power-play chances Thursday. The Devils have an 84.2 penalty-killing percentage without Stevens. Before he was hurt, they were at 87.7 percent.
As a result, Madden said, the Devils have focused more on not taking any penalties at all. They do not want to be short-handed without their best penalty-killer. They have averaged 2.7 power plays in his absence; they had 3.5 before his injury.
''When he's around, it's a little different,'' Brodeur said, smiling. ''Guys think twice about setting up camp in front of the net.''
Burns has had to divide the ice time among his defensive corps differently. Sean Brown, a 27-year-old in his first season with the Devils, has played 9 of his 14 games since Stevens's injury.
''The workload has been taken on,'' Burns said.
The Devils acknowledge that the intangibles Stevens brought to the team have been harder to replace. Madden remembers when he first joined the Devils in the 1998-99 season and watched Stevens solemnly and deliberately prepare for a game.
''When you see your captain getting ready like that, it's contagious,'' Madden said.
But the way they have resolved to play through his absence has been contagious, too. They trail the Philadelphia Flyers, the conference leader and their opponent Tuesday, by 5 points, but the Devils have played three fewer games.
Somehow, they are winning games. ''But I think we'd all give our roles back to get him back in the lineup,'' White said.
HOCKEY
