A Brooklyn missing-person case was reclassified a murder yesterday when the victim's ex-boyfriend confessed to killing her and dumping her body in a neighborhood trash pile, the police said. But when detectives went to the spot, the pile had already been cleared away by the New York City Sanitation Department.
And so began an all-day search of 13 tractor-trailers carrying household garbage collected from dozens of city sanitation trucks to out-of-state landfills. Investigators combed their contents for the body of Jacqueline Roman, 28, a mother of three who lived on 46th Street in the Sunset Park section and was reported missing by her family on Wednesday.
''The body was transported out of New York,'' said Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, possibly to a landfill in Pennsylvania.
On Friday evening, however, the police said they had found human remains in the garbage at the Sunset Park transfer station and they were working to identify them.
Nonetheless, the police charged Ms. Roman's ex-boyfriend, Raul Hernandez, 25, of 4509 Sixth Avenue in Brooklyn, with murder. Ms. Roman's family said he had been behaving violently toward her since they broke up a month ago, and that he was jealous of someone she recently met.
''We want this to end. We want her at peace,'' said her sister, Cathy Crespo, 24. ''Whether she's alive or dead, we want her at peace.''
Ms. Roman was last seen on Wednesday morning, dropping her youngest daughter at school. She had three children, ages 11, 9 and 4, with a former husband from whom she had separated two years ago.
Mr. Hernandez was waiting for her outside the school, Ms. Roman's mother, Carmen Crespo, 44, said.
The school principal told her he saw them arguing outside, Mrs. Crespo said. ''There was a lot of movement,'' she said. ''Both of them were really loud and he was cursing her out.''
Ms. Roman and Mr. Hernandez had been dating for two years, and when they broke up, Mr. Hernandez smashed glass in the family's empty aquarium and in the front door, and broke Ms. Roman's cellphone, Mrs. Crespo said.
Ms. Roman's former husband called her on Wednesday morning and asked her to pick up their middle child, a 9-year-old boy, at his school, and Ms. Roman said she would, adding: ''Don't worry.'' It was the last her family heard from her, family members said.
Ms. Roman lived with several family members, including her children and her parents, who reported her missing on Wednesday when she did not pick up any of the children. They told detectives to speak to Mr. Hernandez.
''Under questioning, he confessed to strangling her,'' Mr. Kelly said, and dumping her body in a ''trash heap'' about half a mile from his apartment, on 45th Street and Ninth Avenue in Brooklyn.
Neighbors said a large pile of trash near a school on the corner is routinely picked up on Wednesday nights. The trash was dropped at a transfer station in Brooklyn.
From the station, the garbage is loaded onto tractor-trailers and sent to landfills out of state.
It was unclear yesterday where the trucks were stopped and searched, or if any of the trucks had already delivered their loads.
