It's a presidential election year, so the economy is being described as both feast and famine. The Bush administration would have you believe that the good times are roaring back, while Democrats paint a bleak picture of a broken nation, about to export its last few jobs to India and China.
Neither portrait is accurate or conducive to a sound policy debate. Though there is a real recovery under way, the growth has yet to be translated into an equally robust expansion of corporate payrolls. The economy added 112,000 nonfarm jobs for the month -- a decent number, but far below expectations. The administration, which has presided over the loss of some two million jobs, predicted last fall that the economy would soon be creating some 200,000 new jobs a month. That target has not been reached, despite overall economic growth of 6 percent in the second half of 2003. The pace of growth is slowing, in fact, and public anxieties about the job market remain high.
It will be interesting to see how the president characterizes the economy when he appears on ''Meet the Press'' tomorrow. Mr. Bush would be wise to start tempering his triumphalism, lest he appear as out of touch as his father did in 1992. Republicans are stubbornly opposing an extension of federal unemployment benefits. Mr. Bush also exaggerates the short-term stimulative impact of his tax cuts, while denying the long-term threat posed by the resulting deficits.
Because the White House's view of the economy is driven by a political narrative, little effort is made to grapple with some of the thorny questions posed by the slow job growth. Has technology-driven productivity growth and outsourcing placed a new speed limit on the rate of job creation? Can the government raise this speed limit?
The Democrats are enamored of their own narrative of corporate robber barons' conspiring with low-paid overseas workers to destroy the American middle class. So the Democratic candidates also fail to engage the complex reality and are too quick to resort to protectionist demagoguery.
The Federal Reserve Board, by necessity, is grappling with the new disconnect between tepid job creation and far frothier indicators. Alan Greenspan and his colleagues are keeping short-term interest rates at record-low levels, though earlier this month they signaled that the status quo could not last forever. Unable to indulge in political fables, the Fed, like many Americans, is clearly torn about how to react to this stingy recovery.
Today's Editorials
