President Bush created a bipartisan commission on Friday to investigate the quality of the intelligence used to justify the Iraq war and to address problems posed by weapons proliferation. He gave the panel until March 2005, well after the November elections, to submit its conclusions.
Mr. Bush selected Charles S. Robb, the former Democratic senator and governor from Virginia, and Laurence H. Silberman, a Republican appeals court judge who was named to his job by President Ronald Reagan, as chairmen of the commission.
The president named an eclectic group to serve on the panel, including Lloyd N. Cutler, a former confidant of President Bill Clinton, and Senator John McCain, Mr. Bush's bitter rival for the 2000 Republican presidential nomination. Only one, Adm. William O. Studeman, a former deputy director of central intelligence, brings extensive professional experience in intelligence matters.
Mr. Bush had strongly resisted the idea of appointing such a panel. He relented last weekend, however, under pressure from both parties, as the inability of American inspectors to find evidence of illicit weapons in Iraq emerged as a political liability.
In a hastily arranged appearance in the White House briefing room on Friday afternoon, Mr. Bush said the commission will ''look at American intelligence capabilities, especially our intelligence about weapons of mass destruction.''
Along with a speech on Thursday by George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, Mr. Bush's decision to name the panel represents an implicit acknowledgment that the prewar intelligence assessment that Iraq possessed illicit weapons may have included serious misjudgments.
With the panel not due to report its findings until March 2005, the naming of the commission may also help Mr. Bush to deflect election-year questions about why and how the administration and the intelligence community misread the Iraqi threat. But the panel's lack of experts in the murky world of intelligence gathering drew some immediate criticism.
''These are certainly prominent and well-respected Americans,'' said Jeffrey H. Smith, a former general counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency. ''But it is in my view unfortunate that there are no former cabinet officers, no former commanders in chief and no former senior ambassadors on the panel. This is a group that has limited experience in dealing with intelligence and foreign policy at the highest levels.''
On the campaign trail and in Congress, Democrats swiftly questioned whether the panel appointed by Mr. Bush would delve sufficiently into whether the president and his top aides misused intelligence in building a case for war against Iraq.
Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, issued a statement saying that ''I still believe we need a comprehensive, genuinely independent inquiry to provide our troops and all Americans the answers they deserve.''
Others named to the panel include Richard C. Levin, the president of Yale University, and Patricia M. Wald, a Democrat who is a former appeals court judge who left the court to sit on an international tribunal investigating war crimes in the former Yugoslavia.
Two other members of what will be a nine-person group will be named later, Mr. Bush said.
In a written statement on Friday night, Mr. Robb said he looked forward to conducting ''an independent review and assessment'' of intelligence efforts.
In a separate statement, Judge Silberman said, ''The country and the president must maintain confidence in the intelligence community, and I will do all I can to serve that goal.''
American intelligence agencies are already under scrutiny from the House and Senate intelligence committees, which are examining their work on Iraq, and from the Congressionally appointed commission that is looking into the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States. Some of those inquiries may be completed before the presidential election in November.
Even so, the commission's extensive mandate gives its review of American intelligence agencies the potential to be the most significant since the inquiry completed in 1976 by the Senate select committee headed by Senator Frank Church, Democrat of Idaho.
Mr. Bush said the panel would be allowed complete access to intelligence agencies and to the work of the Iraq Survey Group, which is continuing its hunt for weapons in Iraq. He said it would seek ''to figure out why'' prewar intelligence about Iraq's illicit weapons had not yet been confirmed by facts on the ground.
More broadly, Mr. Bush said, the group ''will examine intelligence on weapons of mass destruction and related 21st-century threats and issue specific recommendations to ensure our capabilities are strong.'' He said its work would include a look at intelligence on weapons programs in North Korea, Libya, Afghanistan and Iran. Mr. Bush did not mention Pakistan, which has emerged as the base for a black market for nuclear weapons materials.
The Church committee, which looked into abuses involving intelligence activities and recommended reforms for the future, was composed almost entirely of senators with extensive experience in intelligence matters, including Mr. Church, then the chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, John Tower of Texas, Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee and Walter F. Mondale of Minnesota.
The White House said over the weekend that the new commission would include people with extensive experience as producers and consumers of intelligence, and it had widely been expected in Washington that its members might include former directors of central intelligence or national security advisers.
But in naming two judges and a lawyer to the panel, Mr. Bush may have been acknowledging the intersections between intelligence and the law in a time in which individuals, rather than countries, have increasingly emerged as American foes. Judge Wald was a candidate to become attorney general in the Clinton administration.
Among other members, both Mr. Robb and Mr. McCain have served on Congressional committees that oversee intelligence agencies within the military and the intelligence community. Mr. Levin, the Yale president, is an economist and Rhodes scholar who attended Oxford University with Mr. Clinton and was President Bush's first overnight guest at the White House.
Mr. Bush created the commission by executive order, a step that deprived Congress of a role in choosing its members. A draft of the order that was released by the White House on Friday night said the commission would examine ''whether American intelligence agencies are sufficiently authorized, organized, equipped, trained and financed to identify and warn in a timely manner'' and able to support American responses to ''the development and transfer of knowledge, expertise, technologies, materials, and resources'' associated with illicit weapons and related threats of the 21st century.
Correction:  February 10, 2004, Tuesday  A front-page article on Saturday about the independent commission named by President Bush to examine American intelligence agencies misidentified a scholarship awarded to one panel member. Richard Levin, the president of Yale University, attended Oxford University on a grant from the English-Speaking Union; he was not a Rhodes Scholar.
