She has a name that in the West follows her like a bad odor, stopping immigration officials in their tracks, drawing frowns in banks and causing consternation when she simply introduces herself as Carmen bin Ladin. ''People sometimes even look at me as if I'm joking,'' she said.
Mrs. bin Ladin, who was born Carmen Dufour, to an Iranian mother and a Swiss father, acquired her name through love. It happened in 1974, when she married Yeslam bin Ladin, son of one of Saudi Arabia's richest men. (She uses her husband's spelling of the family name.) Soon after, she first met her new brother-in-law, Osama bin Laden.
She does not claim to be an authority on her infamous brother-in-law, because, she said, she met ''the tall man with a commanding presence'' only a few times. But for 14 years, she said, she was a member of one of the country's most secretive and powerful clans, observing its inner workings, its rigid social code, the quarrels among its members and, ultimately, its common front.
She has now chronicled her Saudi life in ''Inside the Kingdom,'' a book that has just been published in Europe. In France (Lafon), it shot straight onto the best-seller list. The English edition is to appear in London (Virago) in August.
Mrs. bin Ladin, who is separated from her husband, calls the book an expurgated memoir because she has changed some royal names, withheld many details to spare the feelings of people she remains in touch with and, not least, she says, because she is still involved in a protracted divorce battle and a fight for her children's inheritance.
But the book oozes frustration and anger and, it would seem, enough detail to upset much of her extended family and the Saudi elite. Mrs. bin Ladin tells tales about the envy among the clan's women and the squabbles and rivalry among the bin Laden brothers, about their ties with senior princes who grant contracts and expect kickbacks. Other ''delicate subjects'' as she calls them, in the book, include abortion, secret drug use and homosexual affairs among the bored, depressed or discarded wives of the upper crust.
Despite its slow pace, the book makes a fiery case against what its author calls the oppression and fanaticism that dominates much of Saudi society. Her unabashed conclusion: ''The Saudis are the Taliban, in luxury.''
Mrs. bin Ladin, a granddaughter of Persian aristocrats who was raised in wealth in Switzerland and Iran, comes across not as a warrior but as rather shy and vulnerable. She is in her late 40's, with heavy-lidded, warm green eyes. Settled on a sofa in a lakeside hotel in Geneva, not far from her villa, Mrs. bin Ladin smokes one ultrathin cigarette after another during the first of several interviews. Her clothes are tight, very tight, an antidote perhaps to the bulky black shrouds under which she had been forced to hide.
She wrote the book to explain to her three daughters why she had to break with Saudi culture: she did not want to lose her children or see them turn into the ''faceless and voiceless women I lived among.'' She wanted them to understand why their family rejected them, she says.
As the conversation wove on, Mrs. bin Ladin revealed another strong motive: a kind of warning to the West against trusting ''that self-assured, merciless culture.''
''I wanted to give a glimpse of how Saudi culture works on the inside, how their fanaticism works,'' she said. ''They will not show an outsider their true face. To know them you have to be part of them.''
Repeated phone calls for comment to Mr. bin Ladin's office in Geneva were not returned. But his estranged wife now expects pressure from him, noting that this week she was informed of a hefty cut in her alimony, which she also uses to support the couple's children, Wafa, 26, Najia, 24, and Noor, 16.
The fairy tale gone sour began in 1973 when she met Yeslam while he was vacationing in Geneva. The two fell in love, married and spent almost two years in California, where he studied business and she took English courses. In 1976, they settled in Jidda, headquarters of the mighty Binladin construction group.
The family patriarch, Muhammad bin Laden, an illiterate worker from Yemen who created the business empire, had already died. But Mrs. bin Ladin began to meet his offspring: 25 sons and 29 daughters, begotten with 22 wives. Osama was just another brother, although more devout than most, Mrs. bin Ladin said. That changed in 1979, when the Soviet Union invaded Afghanistan and he joined the volunteers to fight Communism with the support of the Saudi government. ''The family talked a lot about him then. They admired what he was doing, he became a hero,'' she said.
SHE has met Osama bin Laden a few times. At their first encounter, Mrs. bin Ladin was at home, in Jidda, when he came by looking for his brother, Yeslam. As soon as her brother-in-law saw her, she recalled, he turned his head and angrily waved her away. ''My face was not covered by a veil,'' she said. ''He couldn't bear it and walked off.''
Other relatives knew how stern and ostensibly pious he was, she continued. Once, during an outing to a family country home, she said, ''Osama and his wife Najwah were there.'' Their infant son, Abdallah, was practically dehydrated in the 100 degree heat and the baby was howling, too small to take water by spoon. But he could not be given water from a bottle because ''Osama had some dogmatic idea about not allowing the baby a rubber teat,'' said Mrs. bin Ladin, who protested. ''The child's mother, the grandmother and none of the other women dared to intervene.''
To find some respite in her stultifying world among women who ''did nothing, read nothing, and were like pets kept by their husbands,'' she organized weekly dinner parties, attended by diplomats and Western and Arab businessmen.
''After everyone left, the Saudis would stay behind and take off their masks,'' she said. They would gloat about their oil power, she said, and talk about their concerns, ''not about human rights or democracy but about how to retain their power over Europe and the United States.''
The book dwells at length on women's lives, ''like being under an anesthetic,'' she writes. Although women may not travel without permission from a man, those who can afford to, do. They fake illnesses and say they must travel abroad for treatment. ''There exists an underground women's network to trade passports and permissions,'' she writes.
Over a salad lunch, she talked of the bin Laden brothers, who, she said, to the outside world presented a united front but constantly bickered, undercut one another and shifted allegiances. Each brother, she said, would cultivate personal and business ties with members of the royal family.
The couple moved to Geneva in 1985, she said, because she could no longer stand the oppression of Saudi society and its ''decadence.'' ''Yeslam could not bear to continue the struggles with Bakr,'' the head of the clan.
In 1988, the couple separated, because, she said, ''Yeslam was seeing other women.'' She said she decided not to change her name, ''because it is also my daughters' name and because we have nothing to hide.'' The name, she said, ''will follow us anyway.''
As for her crusading brother-in-law, Mrs. bin Ladin said, she has reason to believe he or his family still receive a portion of the company's enormous dividends. Osama bin Laden now has four wives and 16 children, she said.
''I'm sure he is still alive,'' she said. ''Knowing the family clan, they would make it known if he was not, to take the pressure off. They have to live with the stigma.''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
