Cleanup crews were expected to work through the weekend to clear the last remaining splotches of crude oil that began to wash up on Monmouth County beaches on Tuesday.
It had been feared that a storm would wash some of the oil back into the ocean Thursday night, but Cindy Zipf, director of Clean Ocean Action, an environmental organization based at Sandy Hook, said winds were not as high as anticipated and the oil stayed on the beach with no new accumulations washing in. Officials have yet to determine where the oil came from.
Crews will continue to groom the beaches until the shoreline from Sandy Hook in northern Monmouth County to Brick Township in Ocean County can be declared clean, a standard that requires only dime-size pieces of oil scattered infrequently along the sand. The mayor or a representative of each affected municipality will be asked to inspect the beach before work will be halted, said Petty Officer Third Class John Edwards of the Coast Guard.
About 80,000 pounds of oily sand and other debris, containing 200 to 500 gallons of actual oil, had been picked up as of Friday, Petty Officer Edwards said. Because the air and water are cold, the oil, which is fuel oil for ships, congealed into sticky lumps ranging from a foot across to tiny pieces.
As of late Friday afternoon, Sea Bright, Monmouth Beach, Long Branch and Deal beaches had been declared clean. Beaches farther south in Ocean Grove, Bradley Beach, Avon-by-the-Sea and Belmar were the hardest hit and crews were still there and on beaches in Spring Lake and in Mantoloking in Ocean County.
Work went on into the night Thursday under large spotlights, but cleaning now is being confined to daylight hours, and the number of cleanup workers has been cut from a high of 150 on Thursday to about 50 on Friday, said Fred Mumford, a spokesman for the State Department of Environmental Protection.
Twenty more dead birds were found, bringing the number killed to 70, while about 35 have been taken to the Tri-State Bird Rescue sanctuary in Newark, Del. Most of the birds affected were sea gulls or cormorants.
Numerous agencies patrolled the ocean, but no oil slicks were reported.
