For years, driving a livery cab was one of the most dangerous occupation in the city, with dozens of drivers killed each year. Yesterday, however, the police, politicians and industry officials claimed a victory of sorts: 12 months without a single murder of a livery-cab driver.
''In the last 30 years, there has never been a 12-month period in which no livery driver was killed,'' Fernando A. Mateo, president of the New York State Federation of Taxi Drivers, said yesterday in a telephone interview. ''This is the first time in 30 years we can say we feel a lot safer than we felt before.'' Mr. Mateo and others credit several measures for the decline in killings, including making bulletproof partitions obligatory in all livery cabs and using police decoys to pick up fares. The last livery drivers to die on the job were Fausto Arias, 47, and Alpha Balde, 44, in late January 2003. Mr. Arias was shot and killed in the Bronx on Jan. 27. Two days later, Mr. Balde died after a fistfight with a female passenger in Washington Heights.
In contrast, during the early 1990's, more than 30 livery drivers were killed every year. Even as the city enjoyed an extraordinary decrease in crime of more than 10 years, the murder of livery-cab drivers remained a stubborn problem. While murders of yellow-cab drivers had plummeted to almost none, nine livery-cab drivers died in the first few months of 2000 in a string of killings that confounded the police and garnered headlines.
The spate prompted a flurry of law enforcement and industry changes that helped improve the safety of the drivers, who often work in some of the city's most violent neighborhoods.
''It was a confluence of policy and law enforcement,'' said Matthew W. Daus, chairman of the Taxi and Limousine Commission.
The commission's board voted in an emergency session in 2000 to require livery-cab drivers who had previously been exempt to install bulletproof partitions or surveillance cameras in their cars. Livery-cab fleets, which account for only one-third of the industry, had been required to install partitions, which were mandated for yellow cabs in 1994. But owner-operators, the vast majority of drivers, did not have to have them.
The city also provided the industry with $5 million, or $325 for each car, to help pay for the equipment. Partitions cost about $275; cameras, $700. In the end, more than 16,000 cars got one or the other, officials said.
In Albany, lawmakers took the unusual step of passing tougher sentencing laws, adding three to five years to the minimum sentences for anyone convicted of a violent crime against an on-duty livery-cab, yellow-cab or limousine driver.
On the law enforcement side, the police started a decoy program in May 2000 in which officers began posing as livery-cab drivers, cruising neighborhoods and picking up fares. They also formed a task force to aggressively investigate armed robberies of drivers, which averaged more than 2,000 per month in the early 1990's. Last year, there were 455.
Finally, they encouraged drivers to sign up for a special decal that allowed police officers to pull them over to make sure they were all right and to check their passengers for weapons. In 2003, the police made 6,211 of these stops, resulting in 50 gun arrests.
''We've kept livery and taxi protection high on the radar,'' Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said in a statement yesterday. ''The mayor's made it a priority, and we are following through by stopping vehicles and putting decoys out on patrol.''
The changes have apparently worked. Since 2000, according to numbers released by the livery-cab industry, only six drivers have been killed.
Mr. Mateo was quick to praise the Police Department yesterday, saying that relations between drivers and the police had improved markedly since the mid-1990's. Now, whenever there is a spate of armed robberies of drivers in a particular neighborhood, he said, the police are quick to warn drivers and distribute descriptions of the suspects.
''We've never had an administration so cooperative with issues pertaining to the cab drivers, he said.
Jose Viloria, 48, a livery-cab driver for the last 15 years, said yesterday that his family used to be terrified every time he drove, and that after being held up twice, he stopped working at night. Many of his friends quit the industry, and his wife urged him to do the same.
But he told her, ''This is the only thing I know to do,'' he said yesterday.
Recently, he went back to working at night, while working another job during the day.
''I feel safer,'' he said.
