Beyond a chain-link fence, in woods behind a church, investigators found the body of 11-year-old Carlie Brucia early on Friday. Hours later, officials charged Joseph P. Smith, 37, an auto mechanic with a long criminal record, with first-degree murder and kidnapping, and vowed to seek the death penalty.
''He will pay the ultimate price for what he did to her,'' said Jeff Bell, a sheriff's captain.
Mr. Smith was arrested on Tuesday after tips were phoned in to investigators by people who recognized him from a surveillance video that captured Carlie's abduction behind a carwash on Sunday.
Mr. Smith refused to talk to investigators. But he confided in someone, the police said, and that person led investigators to the body, about three miles from the carwash. Investigators would not say how Carlie was killed or comment on their source.
She was last seen about 6:15 p.m. Sunday leaving a friend's home after a sleepover, headed for her home about a mile away.
In an arrest report, officials said a security camera behind the carwash captured a yellow Buick station wagon driven into the parking lot three minutes before the abduction.
''The defendant observed Carlie Brucia walking home through the parking lot,'' the report said. He ''maneuvered the vehicle he was operating to a location, in a premeditated manner to conceal his actions, where he was able to approach Carlie.''
At 6:21, the video camera captured a man approach Carlie, take her by the wrist and lead her away. The video, which was repeatedly played on newscasts across the country, fueled national interest in the case.
At a news conference on Friday, Carlie's father, Joe Brucia, thanked investigators and called on Gov. Jeb Bush to investigate whether judges had been too lenient in dealing with Mr. Smith's previous arrests.
''In my opinion, he shouldn't have been out on the street,'' said Mr. Brucia, who is divorced from Carlie's mother and lives on Long Island.
Mr. Smith's defense lawyers declined comment.
A friend, Edward Dinyes, said that Mr. Smith had learned Sunday that his wife was filing for divorce after six years of marriage. Mr. Dinyes said he was one of the people who called the authorities to identify Mr. Smith after watching the video tape Monday on the news.
''Just by his gait, I could tell it was him,'' Mr. Dinyes said. ''I never would have thought he was capable, but then I read about his history. It's a big pill to swallow.''
Mr. Smith's arrest record includes a violent attack and numerous drug charges. In 1993, he hit a woman in the face with a motorcycle helmet and was sentenced to 60 days in jail. In December 2001, he went to prison for 13 months for drug possession and prescription fraud. Ten days after his release, in January 2003, he was arrested on drug charges and sent to drug treatment.
He violated his probation twice last year, but probation officers did not recommend jail time, and he was not arrested for the violations. On Friday, state probation officials and Judge Harry Rapkin of Circuit Court, blamed each other for lapses that let the violations go unpunished.
''People are calling my office to say I let him go,'' Judge Rapkin said. ''All I did was follow the law.''
Investigators will not say what evidence, other than the video, they have linking Mr. Smith to the abduction.
They collected carpet fibers and hair samples from the home where Carlie stayed Saturday night, and gathered evidence on Wednesday at the home where Mr. Smith was arrested.
Dave Monda, the owner of Nick's Bar, a block from the carwash, said Mr. Smith occasionally visited there. He said Carlie's mother, Susan Schorpen, visited once or twice a week. Mr. Monda said he did not know whether Ms. Schorpen and Mr. Smith were acquainted. Sheriff's officials do not think Carlie knew Mr. Smith.
Carlie had spent Saturday night at a friend's house. The friend's mother, Connie Arnold, said Carlie wanted to walk home on Sunday and said she had permission from her mother. After the girl left, Ms. Arnold said, she called Carlie's house and found she did not have permission.
Carlie's stepfather, Steve Kansler, said he immediately went to look for her. When he could not find her, Carlie's mother called 911.
Friday morning, Mr. Kansler met with friends and family members at the church where Carlie's body was found. They put down Styrofoam cups of coffee and joined hands to pray in front of the church, separated from reporters by yellow crime scene tape. After hugs, they climbed into their cars and pickups, declining to comment as they drove away.
