NATO defense ministers agreed Friday to take specific steps to strengthen the alliance's reconstruction role in Afghanistan with an eye toward eventually taking over most of the security and rebuilding tasks in the country.
At a closed, three-hour meeting here, Britain, Italy, Turkey and Norway committed themselves to leading four of five new NATO teams of soldiers and civilians that will fan out beyond the capital, Kabul, and assist local authorities with security and rebuilding, a senior American official said. The Netherlands, Romania and Lithuania also indicated interest in contributing forces to the new teams, the official said.
The United States, Britain, New Zealand and Germany are now operating eight provincial-reconstruction teams, but Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and other top American officials have been pressing to create as many as 10 more before Afghanistan holds national and regional elections this summer.
''A number of countries volunteered to lead or participate in new provincial-reconstruction teams in Afghanistan,'' Mr. Rumsfeld told reporters. NATO already fields a 5,500-member peacekeeping force in and around Kabul, which operates separately from about 13,000 American-led troops that are mainly focused on hunting down pockets of Al Qaeda terrorists and Afghanistan's former Taliban government.
But military commanders and diplomats have expressed concerns that since NATO decided in principle in October to expand its force beyond Kabul, its political commitments have outstripped its willingness to supply troops and equipment for the new missions.
NATO officials, for instance, fretted for weeks about whose troops would replace the German forces operating Kabul airport when Germany's tour there ends soon. After most nations declined, Iceland finally agreed to supply most of the necessary firefighters and airport specialists, although the mission is still short a handful of air traffic controllers, a senior NATO official said Friday.
David Pratt, the defense minister of Canada, which assumes control of the NATO peacekeeping force from Germany in the next few days, said in an interview that the alliance's effort to reach out into the Afghan countryside would require thousands of additional troops to ensure ''that not only Kabul enjoys a high level of security but also some of the outlying areas in the north, in the south and in the east.''
The new NATO secretary general, Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, has said that the credibility of NATO is ''on the line'' in Afghanistan -- its first mission outside the European Atlantic area -- and he underscored Friday that ''it's very important the political commitment NATO entered into be fulfilled.''
That may be easier said than done. Since NATO decided in October to expand its force beyond Kabul, many nations have begged off sending more troops, citing other commitments. Some countries have even proposed hiring civilian contractors to fulfill their promises in Afghanistan.
This reluctance has frustrated NATO's military commander, Gen. James L. Jones, a former commandant of the Marine Corps, who has urged members to put up the additional troops as promised or scrap their ambitious plans.
