Job creation revived in January after an abrupt year-end slowdown, with employers adding 112,000 jobs last month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported yesterday.
It was the job market's best performance since the economy started pulling out of recession in 2001. But the growth in employment was well under the 175,000 jobs expected by forecasters, and short of the 150,000 new jobs that economists consider necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force.
The dollar fell on foreign exchange markets yesterday, and stock and Treasury bond prices rose sharply, indications that investors have concluded that the Federal Reserve is now less likely to raise interest rates soon.
The unemployment rate declined slightly in January, to 5.6 percent from 5.7 percent in December, the bureau said. The jobless rate has fallen from a peak of 6.3 percent in June.
The bureau lowered its prior estimate of the number of jobs created since last August, to 229,000 from 278,000. But it also raised its estimate of the number of new jobs in December, to 16,000 from the meager 1,000 that briefly served as a symbol of a jobless recovery.
''We're creating jobs,'' said Nigel Gault, chief domestic economist at Global Insight, an economic research firm. ''We're just not creating very many.''
The numbers provided a murky enough picture of the job market's strength that officials across the political spectrum found support for their views.
N. Gregory Mankiw, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said that ''112,000 jobs is a significant increase,'' adding that with the economy expanding, job growth should pick up. ''We want to see more jobs created. We expect it will happen in coming months.''
Yet Democrats noted that the pace of job growth so far has done little to dent the net loss of 2.3 million jobs in the last three years. ''This historically would be an anemic month of job growth for any recovery,'' said Gene Sperling, a top economic aide to President Bill Clinton who has been advising several of the Democratic candidates on economic policy. ''But when it's following three consecutive years of job losses it is particularly troubling.''
Campaigning in Virginia and Tennessee, Senator John Edwards, the North Carolina Democrat who is seeking his party's presidential nomination, blamed the administration, saying it was encouraging an exodus of jobs to China through its tax and trade policies.
He argued that the deficits in the nation's current account and its budget were inhibiting investment that could otherwise lead to job growth.
''This economic policy is great for corporate bottom lines, but it is bad for our workers and spits in the face of our values,'' Mr. Edwards said in a statement.
In light of the government's report last week that the economy expanded by 4 percent in the final quarter of 2003, economists struggled to explain the tepid pace of job growth.
''We're in expansion phase; employment is the only piston that doesn't seem to be firing,'' said Richard Yamarone, director of economic research at Argus Research. ''We've seen stellar statistics in all the indicators except this one. This is the one fly in the ointment.''
While most recent indicators of economic activity point to a continuing robust expansion, since September the economy has added only about 73,000 jobs a month, on average. The average weekly wages of rank-and-file workers -- who account for about four-fifths of the work force -- increased by only 1.7 percent in January from a year earlier, losing ground to inflation.
There are still 716,000 fewer jobs than when the economic recovery officially began in November 2001. Compared with past recoveries, the economy is almost eight million jobs short of what economists expect more than two years into a period of growth, said Steven Roach, chief economist of Morgan Stanley, in a recent note to investors.
The 76,000 jobs added by retailers last month represented more than half of the overall job gain, and followed an unexpected loss of 41,000 retailing jobs in December. Mr. Gault at Global Insight said that the turnaround might just be a seasonal aberration: stores did not hire as many sales clerks as usual for the holiday season and so did not have to lay off as many in January.
There was little job growth outside of retailing. The construction, education, and leisure and hospitality sectors added a total of 65,000 jobs. But 22,000 positions were lost in professional and business services, and cash-short states cut employment in the government sector by 13,000. Payrolls of temporary employment services, which recorded solid gains last year, shrank by 21,000 jobs. And manufacturing continued its 42-month decline, shedding 11,000 jobs.
Some economists remain concerned that without better news on the job front, the recovery could falter, as financially stretched consumers run out of money to fuel growth. ''The worry is that if we don't start to create jobs more substantially in the first half of the year, then the recovery in the second half of the year will be at risk,'' Mr. Gault said. ''In the first half, people will get tax refunds, so that will boost spending. But after that, consumer spending will be dependent on employment.''
And job uncertainty still weighs heavily on consumers' minds. ''Most consumers expect the unemployment rate to decline in the year ahead but are still apprehensive about the employment situation, due to the loss of jobs because of global competition,'' said Richard T. Curtin, director of consumer surveys at the University of Michigan. ''It will take substantial improvement of employment levels before this view is changed.''
There are some indications that more vigorous job growth could lie ahead.
Jeffrey A. Joerres, chairman and chief executive of Manpower Inc., which supplies temporary workers, noted that productivity growth in the fourth quarter fell below the pace of economic growth, an indication that employers will need more workers to sustain expansion. Until recently, the recovery has been marked by surging productivity, with employers extracting ever more output from their workers.
As in prior months, economists' difficulty in sorting out the job picture was compounded by large discrepancies between the Bureau of Labor Statistics' two samplings of the labor market -- a survey of 400,000 businesses used to measure job creation and a survey of 60,000 households used to calculate the unemployment rate.
Economists, including those at the bureau, regard the payroll survey as a better indicator of employment growth, because of its broader sample size. But unlike the household survey, it does not capture the self-employed -- a group that tends to grow in weak labor markets. And some critics say it does not adequately survey new businesses, though the bureau disputes this.
So even as employment measured by the payroll survey inched up modestly, the household survey recorded a jump of 496,000 jobs in January. Since the trough of the recession in November 2001, it has measured 2.2 million new jobs, compared with the drop of 716,000 jobs in the payroll survey.
In a statement, Kathleen P. Utgoff, commissioner of the bureau, acknowledged that the agency did not fully understand the reasons for the discrepancy.
''B.L.S. continues to investigate a number of possible explanations,'' she said.
