A group of Chinese immigrants harvesting shellfish on the treacherous tidal flats of Morecambe Bay in northwest England were cut off Thursday night by a sprinting tide that trapped and killed at least 19 of them.
The case raised immediate questions of whether ''snakehead'' organizers of illegal immigrants were behind the labor gang, who appeared to get no warning of the dangers. The tides in Morecambe Bay race across thousands of acres of flats faster than a person can run. Channels fill, creating islands that then disappear beneath the frigid, churning waters that surge in from the Irish Sea.
''Nineteen people are dead, and nobody deserves to die in these circumstances,'' said Julia Hodson, the assistant chief constable of Lancashire, at a news conference broadcast nationally.
A large array of emergency rescue craft, including helicopters, hovercraft and boats, was pressed into service through the night as 14 survivors suffering from exhaustion and hypothermia were plucked from the incoming tide that surrounded them on a vast landscape that rapidly disappeared beneath the icy waters.
The Chinese were working as a group digging cockles, mollusks that are popular in European restaurants and a $15 million industry in the region just south of the Lake District of Cumbria.
Ms. Hodson said most of the dead and survivors were ''mainland Chinese nationals.'' With the help of the Chinese Embassy in London, she said, nine survivors had been identified as ''current asylum seekers'' and nine others of the group were either unknown to immigration officials or had asked for asylum during questioning. She said the investigation so far had failed to determine whether the Chinese were illegal workers, whether they had obtained the required permits to harvest cockles, whether they were working for a single employer or for themselves, and whether the case was related to earlier arrests of illegal cockle diggers in Morecambe Bay.
A number of local officials called for tighter supervision of industries where migrant workers and illegal immigrants can be exploited. Britain, like much of the rest of Western Europe, is bracing for a new influx of workers from its poorer neighbors to the north and east when 10 nations join the European Union in May, eliminating restrictions on travel.
Illegal immigration from Asia is a separate problem and has drawn increasing public attention since June 2000 when 58 Chinese suffocated in a tractor-trailer that was smuggling them into the country.
A dry summer had reduced the cockle population in coastal Britain and driven up the price, making the dangerous collection work between tides more lucrative.
''The cockles which were on the beach were worth a great deal of money, but very tragically I would imagine that those poor people who lost their lives were making very little of that money, and were probably victims of exploitation,'' said Geraldine Smith, the local member of Parliament. Speaking to the BBC, she said that lax regulation over the cockle picking in the region was a ''tragedy waiting to happen.''
In a crackdown in August, the police arrested 37 Chinese cockle harvesters, 18 of whom face deportation for rejected asylum applications.
