When the Nets walked into Continental Arena on Friday night, they discovered that Coach Lawrence Frank had hung signs on each locker reading, ''It Doesn't Stop.''
Then, moments before the game, he launched into a speech about World War II and the Battle of Midway, comparing the Nets to the Japanese in an attempt to keep them from becoming overconfident.
Finally, as if players needed any more motivational material, Frank referred to the classic bouts between Muhammad Ali and Joe Frazier.
All this was for a garden-variety game against the team with the worst record in the league, the Orlando Magic, sans Tracy McGrady. Frank is treating the regular season as if it were the playoffs, and the Nets are treating it as seriously as their coach. They squashed the Magic, 120-99, for their seventh victory in a row and the sixth since Frank took over as coach.
''It doesn't stop,'' Jason Kidd said. ''That's our motto. The honeymoon is over with. Coach Frank has settled in, taken control of the reins and is doing a wonderful job. He told us a story tonight about World War II, the Battle of Midway.''
Kidd added: ''Of course, he gave us the Cliffs notes version. You're talking about athletes here.''
The last time Frank was a head coach, his team was in the Catholic Youth Organization. He is the first coach to win his first six games by double figures, and he needs three more victories to match the league record for the best start by a coach.
The 33-year-old Frank has won with such ease that he still does not appear to have any wrinkles. After preaching defense since his promotion and Byron Scott's firing on Jan. 26 , Frank watched the Nets break through on offense Friday, posting a season high for points. ''We knew we could score,'' Lucious Harris said. ''I didn't know we could score like that.''
The Nets (28-20) shot 60 percent for most of the game because they moved the ball to find the easiest shot available. They racked up 41 assists, the most for any team in an N.B.A. game this season. Everyone who logged more than three minutes had at least one assist except Jason Collins, the starting center, who bruised his left big toe and is day to day.
''He was being selfish,'' Kidd said. ''We call him the black hole now.''
The Nets were in a laughing mood after the game, probably because they couldn't miss during it. Richard Jefferson hit all six shots he attempted. Kerry Kittles made 6 of his first 7. Kidd made 6 of his last 7.
''Forty-one assists should say it all,'' Kenyon Martin said. ''Guys were sharing the ball and getting easy baskets. We came out and treated this game like Tracy was playing.''
The Nets spent most of their time preparing to defend McGrady but learned just before tip-off that he was sitting out because of back spasms. Concerned that the team would soften up, Frank broke out his most inspirational history lessons.
When the Nets fell behind early on, Jefferson noticed that they were not switching the right way to defend the Magic's pick-and-roll. He sought out Frank, and they quickly made a change, clamping down on Juwan Howard, who scored 17 of his 24 points in the first half. ''Coach is always open, so we can make adjustments like that,'' Jefferson said.
The Nets were ahead by 28 points early in the second half, and they reached 100 points by the end of the third quarter for the first time in three years. They beat Orlando (13-39) on the fast break and stomped them in the paint.
Despite a migraine, Martin scored 18 points to go with 15 rebounds, and Kidd added 18 points and 13 assists.
Even those who underachieved earlier this season are thriving under Frank. Aaron Williams had 17 points in relief of Collins, Rodney Rogers added 10, and Zoran Planinic, a rookie, had 7 assists, winning an endorsement from Kidd, who asked Frank to give Planinic extra time.
So far, Frank is receiving all sorts of help. Since he took over, he has faced Philadelphia without Allen Iverson, New Orleans without Baron Davis and Orlando without McGrady. He can tie a record if he wins the next three games; two are at home and the last one is at Cleveland.
When he sauntered into the interview room for his postgame news conference, the 5-foot-8 Frank saw that the regular lectern had been removed. In its place was a substantially shorter desk.
''This is easier,'' Frank said. ''People complained because they weren't able to see me over the podium before. I feel much better now.''
All at once, he is lowering the lectern and raising the bar.
BASKETBALL
