For those who want a souvenir of cultural wreckage, ''Decasia: The State of Decay,'' Bill Morrison's 67-minute montage of decomposing nitrate film, has just been released on DVD. Already a cult classic, the movie is a time capsule of the postmodern obsession with decrepitude. What a space saver! Just pop this disc in the player and you'll have all the putrefaction you could ask for. Watch the Master Narratives Crumble! Entropy Now! Pomo's Greatest Hits!
The movie was originally shown, in November 2001, as the visual accompaniment to a symphony by Michael Gordon. In effect the ''sight track'' to a musical score, ''Decasia'' (Plexifilm) orchestrates a medley of burns, blots, water spots, scratches and figures that melt as voluptuously as Dali's clocks. Mr. Gordon's music is throbbing, industrial, precarious: an overture to an epilogue.
Watching the film you gain the impression that decay is itself decaying, sinking into obsolescence before your eyes. Sarah Boxer picked up on that metaphysical theme in her review of the movie in The New York Times in 2002. ''There is a new order coming,'' Ms. Boxer observed. ''What will it be?'' What comes after the ravages of time, warfare, vandalism, indifference and disgust?
For the answer, change discs.
''A Constructive Madness,'' an hourlong documentary directed by Tom Ball and Brian Neff, from a script by Jeffrey Kipnis, is also available on DVD (information can be found at www.aconstructivemadness.com). One of several vivid architecture movies screened last year at the Museum of Modern Art, it documents Frank Gehry's design of the Lewis House, an $82 million folly that ended up on the shelf of unbuilt brainstorms.
Mr. Kipnis, surely the most adventurous architecture curator we have in this country (he's based at the University of Ohio, in Columbus), contends that the Lewis House was the incubator for the voluptuous, curving forms with which Mr. Gehry has been associated in the public mind since the completion of the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, in 1997. I'm not convinced that this is accurate. Fluidity had already entered Mr. Gehry's vocabulary by the time he exhibited lamp designs modeled after fish and snakes in the early 1980's..
But never mind. In ''A Constructive Madness,'' his first film, Mr. Kipnis reveals something far more important than the genealogy of forms. He documents the birth of a concept that has led Mr. Gehry to the position of leadership he holds in the profession.
Narrated by Jeremy Irons in what appears to be a parody of BBC pompousness, this is a personal, semisatirical look at architecture behind closed doors, including the deceptively composed facade of Mr. Gehry himself. The film doesn't claim to show what makes genius tick. Mr. Kipnis relies heavily on metaphor and analogy: ocean waves, birds in flight and, above all, classical music. The film is nearly as symphonic as ''Decasia.''
Mr. Gehry would be quick to deny that he is any kind of philosopher. He sets great store by expertise. Yet he is hardly the first artist in history to have found an intuitive path to places that philosophers, scientists, doctors and other specialists are helping to carve out and interpret. This movie shows us Mr. Gehry and a small group of supporters (including Mr. Kipnis) feeling their way toward what Ulrich Beck, the German sociologist, has termed ''the second modernity.'' This concept holds out hope of deliverance from indefinite decay.
Mr. Beck's term refers to a process of social and political change that is occurring in response to economic globalization. In his view many of our institutions are indeed crumbling away, as the exchange of capital becomes increasingly less subject to controls by cities, states and nations. Familiar laments about privatization and the decline of the public realm are symptoms of globalization. So is the intellectual impoverishment of cultural institutions at the mercy of market pressures.
Under the direction of Thomas Krens, the Guggenheim Museum has become a blazing symbol for that impoverishment. I don't feel bad saying this, because I believe that Mr. Krens enjoys being a blaze. Moreover, ''A Constructive Madness'' shows him in a more modulated light. Along with Peter Lewis, the client, and the architect Philip Johnson, Mr. Krens represents the crazy stew of personality, publicity and power without which architecture seldom happens.
If you want to know why the Guggenheim in Bilbao and the new Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles are important projects, you should familiarize yourself with Mr. Beck's concept of ''rooted cosmopolitanism,'' a key idea within the larger framework of the second modernity. You can enjoy these buildings perfectly well without dipping into Beck (though ''Conversations with Ulrich Beck,'' just published by Polity, is a good read for beginners). But I have found this concept essential to understanding why some buildings vibrate in the mind.
A visitor to Bilbao or Disney Hall enters into the framework of history. In this framework large urban centers, past and present, are seen to possess more in common with one another than with the host nations in which they happen to be situated. There is power as well as enlightenment in this realization.
Though the experience may settle in the mind, it arrives through the body: through the physical act of moving in and around spaces that are attuned to changing times. In them, individuals can perceive themselves occupying what I can describe only as a threshold condition between a street and a horizon.
New Yorkers got a preview of this sensation a few weeks ago, when Santiago Calatrava unveiled his design for the World Trade Center transportation hub. The warm reception that greeted the design was due only partly to its intrinsic merits. The project also satisfied a set of emotional expections. The ancient urban cycle from destruction to creation. The blossoming of an aesthetic that transcends postmodern decay. Above all, the vision of a new link between ground zero and the larger cosmopolitan world.
One day, perhaps, neuroscience will explain why some buildings seem to reach far beyond their physical dimensions. But you do not need the explanation to experience the effect. It turns out that bodies, buildings, streets and cities are still useful for certain things in the global age of digital information. We are only beginning to uncover how they work.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
