THE word wafted across the stillness of the night as though it had broken loose from someone else's dream. In the early-hour quiet of Midwood, Brooklyn, it seemed so completely out of context, this word that few want to hear and no one ever wants to say.
Help!
It came from the lips of a young woman in pajamas, perched on the front-porch roof of a house set supernaturally aglow by the fresh fire consuming the place her family called home. In her arms she held her daughter, also in pajamas and just 3.
Help! Help!
Suddenly, a stranger emerged from the Brooklyn Avenue freeze-frame. He called up: Throw the baby! I will catch her! Hurry! Throw the baby.
The woman, Nicole Walkes, hesitated. She was 19 years old, and new to adulthood. Behind her, a fire that would kill her own mother; before her, a stranger urging her to part with her baby, her Tiara. She kept hesitating, and he kept calling up.
I promise! I will catch the baby!
On the words of a stranger, the young mother tossed her toddler into the cold night air.
The stranger's name is Alberto Wickehem, and he says that he has ''excellent'' hands. He played a lot of football in his day, first at Midwood High School and then for a couple of semiprofessional teams. ''I had my game on,'' the former halfback says.
It has been more than a decade now since he last played, but no matter: he still has that solid build, and he still has the hands. What's more, this stretch of Brooklyn is home field to him. He has lived in Midwood for most of the last 29 years, ever since he moved here from Costa Rica at the age of 10.
''They know me,'' he says of his neighborhood.
One evening last week, he left Midwood to work his usual shift as a maintenance worker in a 50-story office building in Lower Manhattan. As the lawyers and stockbrokers leave the building, he comes in -- to strip and wax their floors, shampoo their carpets, clean their restrooms, take out their garbage.
He punched out at 12:21 a.m. and caught a ride with his friend, Horacio, back to a street corner in Midwood. He walked through the sleep of Brooklyn Avenue to the second-floor apartment he shares with his brother Eduardo. He showered, grabbed a roast beef hero, and plopped down to watch his favorite sports program.
''That's my thing,'' he says.
When he heard words that were not emanating from his television, he figured that neighbors were quarreling. He heard the words again -- Help! Help! -- and looked out his front window to see flames roiling in the house across the street. He hustled outside in his shorts, slippers and a long-sleeve T-shirt.
SEEING the woman and child on the roof, he ran to the foot of the burning house: close enough to feel the heat pressing against his body, to smell things melting, to worry about his own safety. He thought of his children -- Alicia, 10, and Alberto Jr., 8 -- who are living with his ex-wife in Trenton, and he stretched out his hands.
''Listen,'' he told the crying young mother. ''The fire's on the second floor now. Throw the baby to me.''
The clock was winding down. The game was almost over. The play had to be made.
Because of the bushes along the house, Ms. Walkes could not just drop Tiara; she would have to toss hr several feet out and a dozen feet down. But Mr. Wickehem felt the brashness known to good athletes.
''I had confidence that I would catch the baby,'' he says.
In the minutes, hours and days to come, so much would happen.
Firefighters, as many as 175, would spend four hours reining in the four-alarm blaze. Investigators would determine that an overloaded electrical cord had caused the fire. A demolition team would raze the damaged house, leaving a dirt lot dotted with charred wood.
And young Tiara would be in attendance at Calvary and St. Cyprian's Episcopal Church for the funeral of her grandmother, Beverley Joseph Walkes, a native of Barbados who had spent her last moments rousing others to safety.
But none of this was known yet to the mother on the roof or to the man on the ground. The child sailed through the Midwood air and landed safely in the arms of an old football player, who would say later that he cradled his catch as though she were his own.
About New York
