Nancy Cantor, the chancellor of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, will become the next chancellor and president of Syracuse University, the university announced yesterday.
She will succeed Kenneth A. Shaw, 65, known as Buzz, who will step down on Aug. 1 after 13 years in those positions. During his tenure, he put the university on a firmer financial footing and emphasized student learning.
With 38,000 students and a $1.2 billion budget, the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, where Dr. Cantor has been chancellor since 2001, is about twice the size of Syracuse, which has 18,000 students and a $715 million budget.
Like many other state universities, Urbana-Champaign has been subject to budget cuts. Last year, Illinois legislators voted to curb tuition increases at public campuses by freezing tuition for students at the level it was when they entered as freshmen.
Dr. Cantor, 51, a psychologist, said the financial issues were not a factor in her decision to move. She said she was attracted by the ''real opportunity to build Syracuse'' and by the opportunity to return to her home state.
''This institution has been on a steep trajectory,'' she said of Syracuse. ''There is a real commitment to undergraduate education in the fullest sense. The arts are very important here. And there's a real sense of serving the public good.''
She said she hoped to build on all of those foundations and to continue to increase Syracuse's research funding.
Dr. Cantor, who grew up in New York City, has moved back and forth between public and private education. She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College and earned a Ph.D. at Stanford. She taught at Princeton before moving to the University of Michigan as dean of the graduate school and then provost and executive vice president.
Syracuse has undergone a resurgence under Dr. Shaw. When he arrived in 1991, it faced a $38 million deficit and a record-low enrollment. He cut about 600 jobs and began to try to improve student learning and fund-raising.
The Syracuse endowment was $657 million last year, up from $180 million in 1991; annual fund-raising last year was $70 million, up from $30 million in 1991, and admissions have become more selective. In 1990, fewer than a quarter of entering freshmen were in the top 10 percent of their high school classes; this year, that figure was 41 percent.
Dr. Shaw said he would take a year's leave of absence and then return to teaching and other responsibilities at Syracuse.
