In its fiscal 2005 budget, the Bush administration proposes to encourage Americans to save more by creating two private savings accounts. These new entitlements may be worthwhile, but they are also expensive. Congress should not approve them unless the president also agrees to Social Security reform.
The new accounts, called the Retirement Savings Account and the Lifetime Savings Account, would allow Americans to save for retirement or for major purchases, like a home or a college education. Both accounts would set a maximum contribution of $5,000 per year, allow earnings to build tax-free and permit tax-free withdrawals after a specified age, number of years or for a particular purpose. Most important, these tax benefits would be available without the income limits that apply now to I.R.A.'s.
Encouraging middle- and high-wage workers, who would be the most likely users of these accounts, to save more for retirement is good policy -- but only if accompanied by an effort to slow the growth of Social Security benefits. The key to this politically sensitive issue is to recognize that, unlike low-wage workers, middle- and high-wage earners generally go into retirement with personal savings (and in most cases pension income) that supplement their Social Security benefits. By linking reduced Social Security benefits with increased tax incentives for personal savings, it's possible to provide most workers with the same level of total retirement income at a lower cost to the government.
After retirement, Social Security benefits are adjusted annually for all recipients based on changes in prices to protect against inflation, a process known as price indexing. The initial level of benefits at the date of retirement, however, is based on individual workers' average career wages, adjusted upwards by the rate of the national wage increase during their career, a process called wage indexing.
Over the last 50 years, annual wages have grown more than 1 percent faster than prices in the United States. That means that wage indexing typically results in initial Social Security benefits 25 percent to 40 percent higher than a worker would have received under price indexing. In the aggregate, an immediate switch from wage to price indexing would eliminate Social Security's long-term deficit.
So why doesn't the United States move from wage to price indexing of initial Social Security benefits, as countries like Britain do?
The answer is that wage indexing of initial benefits protects what is called the replacement ratio -- the percentage of working wages ''replaced'' by Social Security in retirement. (If you made $50,000 a year on average in your career, and upon retirement got an annual Social Security benefit of $20,000, your replacement ratio would be 40 percent.) This replacement ratio is critical to low-wage workers, who typically depend primarily on Social Security for retirement income because they often have little in the way of personal savings or private retirement plans.
The solution is to maintain wage indexing of initial Social Security benefits for low-wage workers, while gradually introducing price indexing for middle- and high-wage workers. In 2012, for example, we could maintain wage indexing for all retiring workers with average career earnings of $25,000 per year or less. At the same time, we could have price indexing for all retiring workers with average career earnings of $113,000 per year or more. All workers between $25,000 and $113,000 per year would receive a mix of price and wage indexing based on a proportional formula.
Over the next 75 years, this partial move from wage to price indexing of initial benefits would greatly reduce the long-term deficit of the Social Security trust fund and extend the solvency of the system by decades. Of course, this change would mean slower growth of initial benefits for middle and high earners, although their monthly benefits would still be growing -- by thousands of dollars over the course of decades -- because of price indexing.
Yet these workers could maintain the same level of benefits if they contributed only 1 percent more of their wages to a new I.R.A. like the one president has proposed. The earnings on these yearly contributions, if invested in a balanced portfolio of stocks and bonds, would very likely make up for the slower growth of these workers' initial Social Security benefits.
In fact, Congress should do more to encourage workers to contribute more to their retirement accounts. The government could match contributions to these accounts, for example, or offer a tax deduction for part of such contributions.
Such a plan wouldn't have to be expensive to have an impact, according to estimates of Watson Wyatt, one of the world's largest actuarial firms. Matching 50 percent of contributions by all workers with annual incomes of $50,000 or lower, for example, and offering higher-wage workers tax deductions of up to $1,000 per year or 1 percent of their annual earnings, whichever is lower, would cost $10 billion to $20 billion per year. This is less than 10 percent of the annual increase in the net accrued liabilities of the Social Security system, which rose by more than $200 billion last year.
The savings plans in the president's budget present Congress with a rare opportunity to take up two related issues -- personal savings and Social Security -- that are too often addressed separately. For Democrats, this proposal would protect Social Security benefits for low-wage workers; for Republicans, it would promote personal savings accounts. And for most Americans, this proposal would offer a reasonable retirement income at a cost the country can afford.
Op-Ed Contributor Robert C. Pozen is a visiting professor at Harvard Law School.
