It began, like so many office controversies, with an e-mail message.
Responding to a note seeking someone to adopt a puppy, a partner in the London office of the law firm of Dewey Ballantine wrote, ''Don't let them go to a Chinese restaurant.''
Some of the firm's associates found the message offensive and said so; dozens of Asian-American law student associations and bar associations have criticized it as well. Senior partners at the firm almost immediately sent out a firmwide apology. So did the author of the message.
The firm had already put its lawyers through sensitivity training in the wake of a skit performed at a dinner last year when lawyers mocked stereotypical Asian accents to the tune of ''Hello, Dolly,'' singing that they were ''so solly'' that the firm was closing its Hong Kong office. The firm no longer even holds that annual dinner.
''Somebody made a mistake, and they've apologized,'' said Morton A. Pierce, a cochairman at the firm, who added that the partner would be disciplined. ''And we keep apologizing.''
It is rare but not unheard-of for dog to appear on the menu in a restaurant in China, and dog is even less likely to be offered by Chinese restaurants in other parts of the world. The message was offensive, associates at the firm say, because it seemed to mock Chinese people.
''People say, 'Oh, you're just being oversensitive,' but I think it's a symptom of something underlying,'' said Karen Y. Tu, a second-year law student at Columbia who is co-chairwoman of the Asian Pacific American Law Students Association. She later said: ''What is going to change this environment? What is going to make it easier? What is going to make Asian-Americans comfortable about going back to Dewey?''
The incident shows that lawyers, who handle lawsuits filed over discriminatory treatment and all manner of other disputes, send e-mail messages that can lead to accusations of racism, too. And when they do, the firms they work for are subject to the same forms of protest as those messages wend their way around the world.
This week, a group of Asian-American bar associations and 36 Asian-American law student organizations, which had learned about the e-mail message from an article in The New York Law Journal or had seen it on Web sites like gawker.com, sent a letter to the firm asking ''what proactive steps you intend to take to prevent the recurrence of such a racial incident at your firm.''
It is not clear, Mr. Pierce said, what the firm should do other than keep apologizing. ''I wish that there were some way that we could convince them very easily and quickly that this was truly aberrational with respect to our culture,'' he said. ''But clearly that's not going to happen.''
A few associates at the firm said they were thinking of leaving to work elsewhere but added that they had already decided to move on before this particular e-mail message was sent. One executive recruiter, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said that his firm had noted an increase in résumés from Dewey Ballantine associates over the last several months but noted that the trend predated the recent e-mail message.
Senior partners at Dewey Ballantine met with Asian-American associates on Thursday afternoon to talk about the incident. The message, Mr. Pierce said, was simple: ''This isn't Dewey Ballantine; this isn't who we are; this isn't the firm that they joined. It's not emblematic or symptomatic of who we are.''
The firm will hold a special round of sensitivity training in its London office, in addition to its twice-yearly firmwide training, Mr. Pierce said.
''There is no defense in these situations,'' said Roger Cramton, a law professor at Cornell. He added that law professors have had to rethink the examples they use to illustrate legal issues in classes. ''This is such a politically correct world.''
Several Asian-American lawyers and law students said that the problem was not the e-mail message itself but the fact that the partner who sent it did not stop to think first.
''What scares the rest of us is, is it pervasive at law firms generally or corporations generally that Asians can be mocked with impunity?'' said Andrew Thomas Hahn, a partner at Seyfarth Shaw in New York and president of the Asian American Bar Association of New York. At law firms generally, Asians worry that they may be stereotyped as passive and are steered out of certain areas of practice, he said.
Ms. Tu, the law student, said that Asian-American law students at Columbia were meeting to discuss how to respond. One possible step, she said, would be boycotting Dewey Ballantine during the fall recruiting season -- something that might happen informally anyway, she added: ''Not as a statement, but because they don't want to work in that environment.''
Ms. Tu said that working at big firms can already be difficult for nonwhite lawyers given their small numbers. Of 572 lawyers at Dewey Ballantine, 41 are Asian-Americans, according to the firm.
Few people had suggestions on what the law firm could do to assuage concerned Asian-Americans within and outside the firm. John C. Liu, a member of the New York City Council who has received complaints about the e-mail message, was an exception: ''I would like to see them take up a case involving bias against Asian-Americans pro bono,'' Mr. Liu said. ''And I have one or two specific cases that I would like to see them take up.''
