After a bargaining session that lasted less than two hours, the president of the New York City teachers' union furiously denounced the Bloomberg administration's opening contract proposal as an insult, saying ''they have smacked teachers in the face'' and warning that talks were headed to a dead end.
In its opening gambit, the administration put forward an eight-page contract that would eliminate work rules and other provisions that for more than 40 years have given teachers a large say in how the city schools are run.
''It's a total kick in the teeth,'' the union president, Randi Weingarten, said. ''They know we're a strong union and they know we'll reject it.''
The administration's proposal, which was presented by the labor commissioner, James F. Hanley, came in the form of a broad outline that would give city education officials the widest latitude in managing the schools. It ends virtually all seniority rights except in the case of layoffs or reassignments resulting from changes in school staffing needs.
The proposal would allow the city to pay higher salaries to teachers in shortage areas like math and science, to teachers who agree to work in ''hard-to-staff schools,'' and to those ''who demonstrate the ability to positively impact student performance.'' The city offered no raises, saying only that its streamlined contract would result in savings that could be used to increase pay.
The two sides will meet again next week for the union, the United Federation of Teachers, to present revised demands, but Ms. Weingarten and other officials suggested that an impasse was all but certain.
Ms. Weingarten charged that the city had violated state labor law by discarding the existing contract, which expired on May 31, and drawing up a new proposal ''out of whole cloth.'' She also said the city was trying to torpedo the negotiations so Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg could blame the city's 80,000 public school teachers for the failures of his education policies.
''I think that he has decided that he can't improve the schools, so why not try and create the teachers as a scapegoat,'' Ms. Weingarten said. In taking a hard-line stance with its opening proposal, the administration seemed to be betting that public sentiment would go against the union and its attachment to an overly complicated contract. But the city's proposal also cut out some contract provisions, like class size limits, popular with parents and community groups.
The Bloomberg administration made no effort to explain its position. ''Simply put, we gave them our initial set of proposals,'' Commissioner Hanley said when he emerged from a meeting after the contract talks. ''We had an exchange of ideas and views and other than that we have nothing further to say.''
Mr. Hanley declined to respond to Ms. Weingarten's charges, saying: ''That may be her characterization.'' He added, ''We negotiate at the table. It's the first session. We gave them our demands and that's it.''
In fact, though, it was the second session. The union first presented its demands at an opening meeting in September but talks then stalled for five months while the administration formulated its response.
Mr. Bloomberg has long made it clear that he views the teachers' contract as an obstacle to effective management. And in a move to outflank him, Ms. Weingarten, ahead of the September meeting, publicly offered to experiment with a streamlined contract in up to 150 schools. But the administration is pushing for a citywide deal.
Ms. Weingarten complained that the administration had failed to respond to her offer on a streamlined contract and ignored her offer in a speech last month to speed up the dismissal of incompetent teachers, a process that can now drag on for years. Instead, the city proposed its own speedy dismissal process.
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein and his top aides were in Crotonville, N.Y., yesterday for a retreat. Mr. Klein's press secretary, Jerry Russo, said the chancellor would not comment on the contract talks. The school system's top lawyer, Chad Vignola, and chief labor official, Dan Weisberg, both of whom attended yesterday's negotiating session, also would not comment, Mr. Russo said.
Eva S. Moskowitz, the chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee, praised the city's proposal and said more managerial discretion was needed to improve schools. ''To me this is historic, it's long overdue, it's necessary,'' Ms. Moskowitz said. ''We need to find a way to pay teachers more and we need to find a way to offer them better working conditions, but we can't have the contract that we have had for 42 years.''
