No doubt even many longtime fans of the remarkable early music ensemble Les Arts Florissants don't know the origin of the group's name. The Paris-based group and its founding artistic director, William Christie, provided an answer for a full house at Alice Tully Hall on Thursday night.
The beguiling program offered two chamber operas by the 17th-century French composer Marc-Antoine Charpentier: ''La Descente d'Orphée aux Enfers,'' a retelling of the Orpheus and Euridice legend, and ''Les Arts Florissants.''
The second one, which translates as ''The Flourishing Arts,'' is an allegorical 1686 opera in five short scenes written as a shameless paean to Louis XIV. Shortly after founding the ensemble in 1971, Mr. Christie borrowed the evocative title for his ensemble, and since then it has appeared on countless concert bills, programs and top-selling CD covers. On this night both works, presented in semistaged productions that were a triumph of the less-is-more approach, received dynamic and involving performances. The program is being repeated tonight.
The Paris-born Charpentier spent five formative years of his young adulthood studying in Rome, where he assimilated the Italian penchant for opulent lyricism and vivid drama into the refined French style. Mr. Christie brings a keen understanding of the French Baroque to his work. Yet stylistic insight is not finally what makes his performances distinctive. Indeed, you can quibble with some of his ideas, especially in music from later eras. I am no fan of his hyperpaced 1996 recordings of Mozart's ''Zauberflöte'' with Les Arts Florissants.
The hallmark of his work is something basic. He likes to recruit younger singers and instrumentalists who are willing to learn and to commit. Then by example, inspiration, concerted effort and sheer determination he gets them to put everything on the line in vividly characterized and risk-taking performances.
Look below the charming surface of the story, such as it is, to ''Les Arts Florissants,'' and you see Charpentier the savvy operator and insightful psychologist at work. The singers take the roles of various Arts -- Music, Poetry, Painting and Architecture -- and in an idyllic setting try to out-do each other with testimonials to how wonderfully the arts have flourished under Louis's benevolent reign. Alas, some agitated stirring in the lower strings and raucous bursts of winds signal that trouble is afoot. Sure enough, Discord appears with a chorus of gnashing Furies in tow. But Peace calls for calm and -- no surprise -- wins out.
If the opera seems simplistic, there are multilayered subtleties in Charpentier's music. Even when the Arts sing of beauty and joy, you sense strands of dissonance and jagged rhythms below the surface waiting to break out. The subtext suggests that Peace and the Arts are precious things that must be protected. And Mr. Christie's troupe conveyed the complexity in their rich, assured yet wonderfully spontaneous performances.
As staged by Vincent Boussard, the women, dressed in white gowns streaked with sunny pastels, cavorted with the men, wearing tuxedos with the shirt collars opened and their coats slung over their shoulders to provide a jolt of male swagger. When Discord arrived, Painting (the young, short-haired high tenor Cyril Auvity) fled the scene and tried to hide among the flutists. At the end when Peace was restored, the Arts sat contentedly before their music stands, writing, drawing, thinking, each absorbed in work, as the blissful music faded away.
Historians are not sure why Charpentier ended his version of the Orpheus story with the scene in which Pluto relents and allows the fearless Orpheus to leave Hades and return to earth with his beloved Euridice. The trouble on the way home is left to another night.
Perhaps Charpentier meant to complete the work. As is, the opera certainly ends on an emotional upbeat, which may have been what the composer's aristocratic audience preferred. The high tenor Paul Agnew gave an impassioned performance as Orphée, especially in the long stretches of arioso and melodically heightened recitative accompanied only by continuo organ and three soulful cellos. And the robust bass João Fernandes made a strapping Pluto. You were not surprised that he succumbed to Orphée's plaintive song. How could he not when the performance and music were so enchanting?
OPERA REVIEW
