In late December, when his campaign was still on life support, a subdued and introspective John Kerry unwound on his bus in Iowa and spoke candidly about the race he was in, and what it might look like if he were not.
Whom would he support? he was asked.
''Gephardt,'' Mr. Kerry said, without hesitation.
On Friday, Mr. Gephardt repaid the compliment. In a banquet hall outside Detroit filled with teachers and union plumbers and motorcyclists and veterans, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri stood next to Senator Kerry of Massachusetts and pronounced him the Democrats' best hope in November.
''I'm here today adding my voice to all of yours,'' said Mr. Gephardt, who left the race after placing a distant fourth in the Iowa caucuses. ''I've known and worked with John Kerry for a long time. And when you campaign with and against someone you even learn more about him. We want and need this man to be the next president of the United States.''
For Mr. Kerry, Friday was a tour de force, as he campaigned with just about every important elected Democrat in Michigan, among them Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm, Senators Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow, and Representative John D. Dingell, the longest-serving member of Congress.
In the morning, he stood at Second Ebenezer Baptist Church in Detroit with more than 50 black clergymen behind him. There, before giving a standard stump speech, Mr. Kerry apologized for missing an N.A.A.C.P. candidates' forum on Thursday night that only the Rev. Al Sharpton attended. Mr. Kerry said he had to campaign instead in Maine, which holds its caucuses on Sunday, ''to pay them the same kind of respect I pay you by being here today.''
''I just want to tell you head-on, because that's the kind of president you deserve, and that's the kind of person I am,'' Mr. Kerry said.
In fact, Mr. Kerry had left Maine in early afternoon and spent the evening raising money in New York.
Here in Flint, a redoubt of the auto industry that has been battered by job losses over the years, Mr. Kerry toured a community college where students learn manufacturing skills.
''The whole problem here is trade, trade, trade. That's all it is,'' said Laurie Moncrieff, the head of a tool and die company in nearby Grand Blanc. She said the North American Free Trade Agreement needed the heightened environmental and labor standards that Democrats like Mr. Gephardt support. ''Nobody's followed through on that -- not Clinton, not Bush,'' she said.
''I will,'' Mr. Kerry assured her, before speaking to several hundred people and jetting off to Nashville.
In suburban Warren, Mich., where he and Mr. Dingell endorsed Mr. Kerry, Mr. Gephardt said he had urged the many industrial unions that had supported him to throw their weight behind Mr. Kerry.
At one point, Mr. Gephardt smiled benignly as Mr. Kerry began his speech with a trademark Gephardt line, saying that he had news for President Bush: ''Like father, like son -- one term and you're done.''
Mr. Gephardt's appearance was poignant in another way: Only 200 people attended.
One of them was Kevin Sullivan, vice president of Plumbers Local 98, who recently joined the Kerry bandwagon. ''My first pick was Dick Gephardt,'' he said. ''He came from a labor background, his family and all. But I knew even back then he was unelectable.''
One reason the crowd was small may have been that the race in Michigan is anticlimactic: Mr. Kerry is leading his nearest rival, Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, in statewide polls by ratios upwards of 4 to 1. Dr. Dean has retreated, digging in to a last stand at the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17.
Mr. Gephardt questioned Dr. Dean's strategy. ''This is kind of like the baseball playoffs,'' he told reporters. ''You got to get some wins.''
Indeed. On stage, Mr. Gephardt surrendered the microphone to Mr. Kerry, who told the crowd, ''Politics is a tough business.'' He noted that he and Mr. Gephardt had never exchanged sharp words during the campaign, though he did not mention that their aides had sometimes seemed to work in concert against rivals like Dr. Dean.
Turning to Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kerry said, ''I understand how difficult it is, because I've lost before in my life, to turn around, and come back, and just pick up the pieces and recognize that the whole deal is bigger than your individual hopes, your individual ambitions, aspirations, and particularly the investment of time.''
Moments earlier, as the two men waited to be introduced, Mr. Kerry, his back to a reporter, had whispered something to Mr. Gephardt.
''This is not hard, this is easy,'' Mr. Gephardt replied. ''I believe in you.''
Mr. Kerry said something else, and Mr. Gephardt smiled. ''That would've been hard,'' he said.
Mr. Kerry spoke again, and Mr. Gephardt said, ''We'll all be there with you.'' Then they strode into the hall to the tune of U2's ''Beautiful Day.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
