It has been more than nine months since Funny Cide won anything important on the racetrack, a dry spell that dimmed his once brilliantly bright star. That doesn't make his Kentucky Derby and Preakness victories any less special or his common-horse-makes-good story any less inspiring. It does mean the time is right to prove he is back on track.
That could happen today at Gulfstream Park, where Funny Cide is among eight horses entered in the $500,000 Donn Handicap, the first major race of 2004 for older horses. A victory would halt Funny Cide's string of disappointing performances, which began when he finished third in the June 7 Belmont Stakes, ending his bid to become racing's 12th Triple Crown winner.
After a ninth-place finish in the Breeders' Cup Classic in October, he was freshened up, and he returned with a solid victory in an allowance race at Gulfstream on Jan. 10. He has since turned in three solid workouts.
''It looks like the old Funny Cide is back, and bigger and stronger than ever,'' said Jack Knowlton, who heads Sackatoga Stable, the syndicate that owns the horse. ''There's been a big change from his being a 3-year-old to a 4-year-old. He's put on weight, and by all appearances he looks like he's ready for a successful 4-year-old campaign.''
The mood had been less upbeat in the Funny Cide camp after the poor performance in the Breeders' Cup, his third straight loss. That came after hopes for a productive summer and a triumphant return to his birthplace for the Travers Stakes at Saratoga were dashed by some minor setbacks.
But the kinks seemed well behind him when he made his 4-year-old debut last month at Gulfstream. Though facing modest competition in the seven-furlong race, he won with some style, drawing off in the stretch while under a hand ride from Jose Santos.
''That race worked out just right for us,'' the trainer Barclay Tagg said. ''We gave him an easy race and the distance wasn't too long. We got something under his belt and got him ready for the Donn. It worked out perfectly.''
The Donn is the next step in what Tagg and Knowlton hope can be a campaign that carries Funny Cide back to the top of the sport. The Donn is a difficult test against a good field that includes the 2003 Breeders' Cup Classic runner-up, Medaglia d'Oro. With a more consistent record than Funny Cide, superior speed figures and the cachet of being in the stable of the trainer Bobby Frankel, Medaglia d'Oro will most likely be the betting favorite.
''This race will be a good barometer for our horse,'' Knowlton said. ''Off what he showed us last spring in the Triple Crown races, off his prep race here and with his works since that, he's shown us he belongs in Grade I company. Hopefully, in the Donn, he'll confirm that fact is true.''
The trainer Allen Jerkens, who got to the Hall of Fame by knocking off superstars like Secretariat and Kelso, will challenge Medaglia d'Oro and Funny Cide with two capable handicap horses, Bowman's Band and Puzzlement. Seattle Fitz, coming off a victory in the Aqueduct Handicap, is another contender.
The racing spotlight will shift west to Santa Anita tomorrow when Action This Day, the Breeders' Cup Juvenile winner, kicks off his 3-year-old campaign in the $75,000 Sham Stakes. With several more important races to come for his 2-year-old champion, the trainer Richard Mandella has hinted that Action This Day may not be primed for his very best.
''He ain't cranked for his life yet, but he's ready to run,'' Mandella said.
HORSE RACING
