Everyone knows that in Washington, connections matter. So when Representative Billy Tauzin, one of the most influential Republicans on Capitol Hill, signaled that he would retire this year, it did not come as a surprise that some of the city's most powerful trade associations began a bidding war for his services.
But now the courtship of Mr. Tauzin centers on a reported $2 million offer to head the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America, the drug industry trade group that had billions at stake in the Medicare prescription drug legislation, which Mr. Tauzin helped shepherd on Capitol Hill.
In a city where members of Congress routinely retire to become lobbyists, Democrats, consumer groups -- and even some Republicans, speaking privately -- say Mr. Tauzin is crossing a line.
''If you want to know the price of selling seniors down the river,'' Representative Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader of the House, told reporters this week, ''it's approximately about $2 million a year, if you want to hire the manager of the bill on the floor of the House of Representatives.''
Neither the drug industry trade group, Pharma, nor Mr. Tauzin's office would confirm that figure -- or even that negotiations are under way -- though neither did they deny it.
Mr. Tauzin, a Louisianian who last month turned down a lucrative offer to run the Motion Picture Association of America, the Hollywood industry trade group, is not granting interviews. His spokesman, Ken Johnson, said only that a lawyer was handling the job search, and that no contract had been signed.
''The only people bellyaching are a handful of Democratic leaders who would like to turn this into a campaign issue,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''They voted against the bill and now they're trying to throw mud on the wall to see if it sticks.''
But it is clear that the talks have become serious. Last week, the Louisiana congressman announced he would no longer be involved in any health matters on Capitol Hill. This week, he resigned his position as chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, a signal that he could leave Congress even before his term expires.
The list of former senators and representatives who lobby their former colleagues is a long one; Bob Dole, the former Senate majority leader, and Robert Livingston, the former chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, are two of the best-known. But most retiring lawmakers wait until they are nearly out of office to look for new jobs; Mr. Tauzin has shaken things up in part because he has nearly a year left in his term.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark, the Democratic candidate for president, called Mr. Tauzin's actions ''unconscionable and wrong.'' Public Citizen's Congress Watch, a watchdog group, has asked the House ethics committee for an investigation.
Yet Mr. Tauzin is not the only government official involved in the Medicare bill to make a very public transition into the private sector. In December, Thomas A. Scully, the government official who ran Medicare for President Bush, announced that he was leaving the government to join Alston &amp; Bird, a law firm that represents hospitals, drug manufacturers and other companies in the health care industry.
Mr. Scully received a waiver from federal ethics rules that permitted him to negotiate with potential employers while he helped write the Medicare law. In Mr. Tauzin's case, Mr. Johnson said, there were no job discussions while the Medicare bill was pending before Congress.
''Everything that has been done has been done according to the letter of the law,'' Mr. Johnson said.
Yet some say that it is not so much the letter, but the spirit that Mr. Tauzin should worry about. ''Everybody believes that Billy's a great guy,'' said one senior House Republican aide, ''but they're questioning his judgment on this one, because of the appearance.''
A former Democrat who quickly rose up the Republican ranks when he switched parties, the gregarious Mr. Tauzin is one of the best-liked lawmakers on Capitol Hill. Should he accept the Pharma job, he will have much to offer. Once he leaves Congress, he will retain lifetime floor privileges in the House and, even more important, lifetime privileges to the members-only House gym.
''There are rules and very strong norms against former members going on the floor and actually lobbying,'' said Norm Ornstein, a Congressional expert at the American Enterprise Institute. ''But if you can get where others can't, you don't have to say anything necessarily. It gives you a major advantage.''
Washington Talk
