As the final flounces are hand-stitched into $5,000 gowns that will be paraded down the runways during Fashion Week in New York, a different class of clothes is bound for department stores around the country.
New lines from Calvin Klein, Polo/Ralph Lauren and Jones New York, full of frothy print dresses, polka-dot blouses and elegant pink trouser suits, are not for gawky runway models but for married women juggling children and also for other shoppers well past college age. The prices: blouses for $75, loose-fitting linen jackets for $125, and a black leather motorcycle jacket for $399.
Less glamorous than couture, yes. Less expensive, of course. All three companies say these new lines represent a significant shift of focus, away from teenagers and toward an older shopper who is looking for stylish, midprice clothing. It is the competition for these shoppers that will help determine the financial health of the three giant fashion companies that produced these lines when sales are tallied in the next few months.
Even the marketing campaigns shun waifs in torn jeans. Claudia Schiffer, who first became popular as a model in the early 1990's, is featured in the Jones ads and Calvin Klein has chosen Amber Valetta for its campaign. (''After all,'' said an executive connected with the Calvin Klein line, ''Amber Valetta is not a kid -- she's 32.'')
All of these lines -- plus the smaller new Realities line by Liz Claiborne, also just released, and a new Michael line by Michael Kors for this fall -- are being wedged into the segment the industry calls ''better sportswear,'' cheaper than both ''bridge'' and ''designer,'' the top of the line, which is carried by only the fanciest stores. (A new Oscar de la Renta line, announced this week, will be priced lower still.)
Bruce J. Klatsky, chief executive of Philips-Van Heusen, which owns Calvin Klein, said he expected that the new Klein department store clothes could end up with annual sales of $1.2 billion to $1.4 billion within five years. Sources inside Polo/Ralph Lauren have projected $800 million in Lauren retail sales the first year alone. Jones, a division of the Jones Apparel Group, is hoping to sell $400 million in the coming year.
Although all three companies have experience in midprice clothing, executives from each said that these new lines represent unparalleled efforts to recapture the market. Increasingly, analysts say, shoppers have turned to stores like Banana Republic and Ann Taylor for this kind of clothing and, more recently, to more stylish offerings from discount stores like Target and Kohl's.
For Calvin Klein, the new line is perhaps the most significant step in the renovation of the company under its new owners. In October, Mr. Klatsky disclosed some heavy losses at Klein: $20 million to $25 million a year on the couture collection, $10 million to $15 million on its retail operations and an additional $50 million on overhead, which included everything from samples to limousine service. Mr. Klatsky has vowed to get the spending under control but he is careful about promising immediate financial rewards from the new collection. Analysts said that Calvin Klein's previous attempt at a department store collection, the CK line, now defunct, was not a great success.
For Jones and Polo/Ralph Lauren, these lines are a final result of a nasty feud between the companies that spilled over last summer. Jones had produced a Lauren line for department stores for about seven years but executives at Polo/Ralph Lauren grumbled audibly about what they perceived as increasingly poor quality. Last summer, Polo contended that the contract with Jones gave it the right to repossess the Lauren license when another of Polo's lines fell below minimum sales.
To the surprise of many analysts, Peter Bonaparth, Jones' chief executive, threw the Lauren line back to Polo in the middle of negotiations. (Each side filed a lawsuit; they are still pending.) The share price of each company suffered during the feud. The performance of their new lines is being closely watched by analysts, who first want to see if Jones can replace the $548 million the Lauren license brought in. Analysts also want to see whether there is still room for growth in the mature Lauren name.
For all three companies, these lines represent a gamble on department stores -- an area of retailing that may be diminishing, analysts and social historians say, but one that still accounts for an estimated $32 billion in clothing sales every year. Mr. Klatsky says department stores are suffering, in part, because of the void in stylish midprice clothing.
''This segment of the department store business hasn't done well, and for us, that represents an opportunity,'' he said.
Hal Upbin, the chief executive of Kellwood, the giant clothing producer who will make the new O Oscar line for Oscar de la Renta, agreed. ''Why is everybody running after department stores now?'' Mr. Upbin asked. ''Because they're the only ones that get these prices.''
But Mr. Klatsky argued that the new lines alone would not give the department stores new life. ''These three brands are not the panacea for all that ails department stores; I wouldn't be so cavalier to say that,'' Mr. Klatsky said this week. ''But what these product launches will do is provide profits for us and for the stores that buy them.''
Last summer, when the agreement with Jones ruptured, Lauren employees had to hustle to produce Lauren, its revamped line. Some analysts and competitors questioned whether the company could produce the line in time. It appears the Lauren organization has prevailed: the clothes are being shipped on time -- and the retailers say they are pleased.
''Mr. Lauren doesn't believe that perfectionism and getting a line out on time are mutually exclusive,'' said Nancy Murray, the company's chief spokeswoman, adding that upgrading quality is a large part of the strategy. Some of the fabrics came from Italy, and most of the line has been manufactured in Asia. The clothes feature details like inverted pleats on the pockets and carefully matching plaids.
''Ralph is the most competitive man I've ever met,'' said Kim Roy, the president of the Lauren division, who previously led the Ann Taylor stores and also was a group president at Liz Claiborne. ''The team rallied -- it was all hands on deck.''
Klein's better line, bearing only Calvin Klein on its labels, is produced under Klein's supervision through a cooperative venture of Kellwood and a recently formed company called GAV. At an informal showing last week, Andrew Grossman, the chief executive at GAV, placed each outfit on a table in his showroom, lovingly pointing out the unusual circular stitching on the back of one jacket, the pin-tucks on a sky-blue linen blouse on another.
For Mr. Grossman, Lauren is the one to beat. ''I don't think we compete against Jones,'' he said. ''And we have more fashion than Ralph. He has four or five different labels he has to feed. We're really the first after the couture.''
Last fall, when most of the lines were announced, analysts wondered aloud if there would be space for all of them. Michael Gould, the chief executive of Bloomingdale's, briefly annoyed some of his oldest suppliers -- like Ralph Lauren -- by saying publicly he would not make any decisions until he saw the clothes. Other retailers were equally circumspect.
But now the orders are in and the clothes are arriving. The merchants seem to be making room to show off the three major new lines.
''Oh, yes, we ordered from them all,'' said Frank Doroff, executive vice president and a general merchandise manager at Bloomingdale's, which has ordered the Calvin line for 15 stores. The redone Lauren line, he said, ''added sophisticated, and added quality, and is very reflective of Ralph Lauren; we are very happy to see the line return to its roots.''
''We put it in virtually all our stores, and we bought it in all sizes.''
Very superficially, the lines resemble each other: the materials are silky, stretchy and colorful, with colors like tiger lily and lotus (reflecting the vibrancy of last fall's fashion shows). The shapes are similar: tight-fitting, sleeveless chiffon dresses; tight pants; and feminine blouses. Yet retailers and, of course, the designers themselves, say they are as different as Ralph and Calvin and Jones.
Mr. Doroff said Jones Signature, which was designed to sell for 20 percent less than either Lauren or Calvin, was very marketable. ''We'll sell to a different customer -- it combines casual and career. It's very sensible and it will ring the registers.''
At Jones, Susan Metzger, who is the group president in charge of Signature, defined the look. ''It's what she wears to work when she's not wearing a suit. This is not about a double-breasted jacket. It's about three-quarter sleeves and capri pants; relaxed career.''
Ms. Metzger went on to distinguish Jones' offerings from that of its competitors. ''We're very feminine,'' she said. ''What Ralph Lauren stands for is menswear for women -- we don't dress women in a shirt and tie. Calvin is also very tailored.''
Not surprisingly, the Lauren executives bridled at Ms. Metzger's description of their lines. Unlike Jones, which stresses casual career dressing, said Ms. Roy, Lauren's president, ''we offer the full lifestyle, from black-tie events to go-to-work to polished casual for the weekends.''
''And we're very feminine,'' she added.
