When Luke Donald joined the PGA Tour, he had enviable credentials. He won the 1999 N.C.A.A. championship, he was college golf's player of the year in 1999, and he was a two-time Big Ten Conference individual champion while at Northwestern.
But Donald quickly learned that the PGA Tour was a different world.
So while he has enjoyed success, he has also begun working with a sports psychologist.
''I was one of the best college players for four years, and coming out and getting beaten every week by a lot of good players can destroy your self-confidence,'' said Donald, a 26-year-old Englishman. ''I just needed someone to tell me that I really am as good as I can be.''
On Friday, Donald was very good. Shooting a seven-under-par 65 at Pebble Beach Golf Links, Donald held a one-stroke lead heading into the third round of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am. Donald was 10-under par for the tournament (134) after a 65, one stroke ahead of Vijay Singh (68), Ken Duke (68), J. J. Henry (70) and Tom Pernice Jr. (68).
Donald could have easily shot 64, but he three-putted from 12 feet for bogey at No. 18, admitting that he was looking ahead. That is something that Donald will have to avoid this weekend, but he has already proved that he can win on Tour.
In 2002, Donald won the Southern Farm Bureau Classic, one of only two rookies to win on Tour that year.
Last year, however, Donald fell to No. 90 on the money list, and he felt that his game took a backward step. With a new attitude and more determination, Donald is already showing that this year might be his best.
''I wasn't very pleased with my year last year,'' Donald said. ''I set high goals for myself this year. I would love to finish in the top 30 on the money list. That was my major goal for this year.''
Donald, who is eligible to earn a spot on the European Ryder Cup team, admits that playing in the Ryder Cup is something that is on his mind.
''I would love to play the Ryder Cup,'' he said. ''I'm still very proud to be British. This is where I live, but England will always be my home.''
The weather was nearly perfect again at Pebble Beach, with bright sunshine and little wind, and players took advantage. Donald's round included eight birdies and one bogey, and he said he enjoyed the experience.
''Obviously, the views are breathtaking,'' Donald said. ''I think that's the major appeal of Pebble Beach. It's just a marvelous piece of land. I wouldn't say it's one of my top-10 golf courses in the world. I think if you take away some of the scenery, some of the holes aren't probably as strong as people think. But I think it's a great course.''
This was the first time that Donald had ever held a 36-hole lead in a PGA Tour event, but thanks to his victory in 2002, he did not sound intimidated. And he looked forward to his Saturday round at Poppy Hills Golf Course, hoping it would set him up for another victory.
''I feel in control of my game right now,'' Donald said. ''The last couple of days, golf seems easy to me.''
CHIP SHOTS
PHIL MICKELSON, who already has a victory this year, was in contention at eight under, tied for sixth place with ROBERT GAMEZ and ARRON OLBERHOLSER, two strokes off the lead. . . . Among other notables, MIKE WEIR was well back, tied for 64th place at one under. . . . The defending champion, DAVIS LOVE III, was three over.
GOLF
