When the Knicks swung the deal to acquire Stephon Marbury, the immediate effect on Michael Doleac was his confinement to the injured list. Speculation arose that he might also be the next player banished from the Knicks.
He spent five games on the injured list, then played three minutes in his first game back and none in the second. The Knicks were searching for athletic players to fit alongside Marbury, and though the 6-foot-11 Doleac hardly fit the image, he eventually found a niche in the rotation with his fundamentally sound style.
Doleac sets picks for Marbury, as Kurt Thomas does, and is skilled at hitting jumpers when he is left open by defenses pursuing Marbury. Doleac has gone from averaging 4.1 points a game and 42.7 percent shooting before Marbury's arrival to 8.6 points and 53.9 percent shooting in the last 11 games. After being buried without a role, his playing time increased to 19.5 minutes in the 11 games since Lenny Wilkens became the coach.
It was enough that even early in the run, Marbury said: ''Doleac has been unbelievable. That guy is working his way to an extension.''
As the Knicks prepare for a stretch of four games in five days beginning at Miami on Saturday afternoon, players like Doleac and Penny Hardaway have proved to be valuable complements.
''We didn't know how the changes would affect the team,'' Doleac said. ''Everyone just went into it with a positive mind-set and it's worked out great for me. I went from completely out of the rotation, on the injured list, to being back in the game, playing 25 minutes, getting looks, rebounding, having fun. It's been a great change for me, just in the amount of fun I'm having playing the game.''
Doleac, in his sixth season, has gained the confidence of Marbury and Wilkens. In the fourth quarter of the Knicks' 97-90 victory over Indiana on Tuesday, Doleac scored 7 of his 11 points and made 3 of 4 shots as Wilkens kept him on the floor during the most crucial stretch.
''I remember in Orlando he had some good skills,'' Wilkens said, referring to Doleac's first three seasons in the N.B.A. ''I felt like in some certain situations he could help a team because he could make a 15-foot jump shot. But I also think he's a better low-post player than people think.''
Wilkens said he thought the Knicks made a great pickup when they signed Doleac as a free agent in August 2002. But it is his play since Wilkens's arrival that convinced him that Doleac could be trusted at key moments.
''Because he's smart, he plays screen-and-roll really well; he's not afraid to rotate out to the corner like he has to,'' Wilkens said. ''And as I started seeing that, that's when I knew we had to have him on the floor. Because not only can he defend some, he can score.''
REBOUNDS
One player who has not found a spot in LENNY WILKENS's plans is FRANK WILLIAMS. He has not played in the last two games and in 4 of the 11 games since Wilkens took over. ''As long as there is some reason, as long as there is an explanation for what's going on, you have no problem with it,'' Williams said. ''He did talk to me briefly the other day, basically saying be patient, wait your turn and it will come.'' Williams said that he was ignoring the Feb. 19 trading deadline and trying to enjoy himself, adding: ''These past two years have been funny years. But at the same time I've been enjoying it, enjoying every minute of it. I wouldn't change anything, from the past year up to now.''
BASKETBALL
