The beginning of a new legislative year is one of those moments when hope briefly triumphs over experience. The first round of reality easily dashes such hope, but in Albany this year, there are some small signs of progress. Politicians from both parties are talking about fixing the broken budget process. Whether they do more than talk is something that voters should be watching very closely. This is an election year, and it's time to start shedding the talker-slackers in New York's do-little Legislature.
The State Senate has already adopted its budget reform package, as it has been doing early in the last few sessions. The next step now is for the Assembly to pass its own bill, possibly next week. Recognizing that any Assembly budget reform bill will almost certainly be different than the Senate's, the Senate leader, Joseph Bruno, has also suggested forming a conference committee. If Mr. Bruno and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver agree on such a committee, it will be big news in Albany. There are so few of these enlightened operations that most people have to dust off the rulebooks to remember how a conference committee really works. It should have the authority to hammer out a package that makes the state budget more open and efficient.
The draft now being circulated of the Assembly's budget reform bill has many good additions to the Senate package. It would require that the huge off-budget expenses, like the state authorities and health care, come under the budget umbrella, and it proposes an independent budget office to establish reasonable estimates on the state's revenues.
The Senate bill requires the state comptroller to establish the figures. The point is to get one set of estimates to start the budget debate, instead of having each leader come in with a different figure.
These soggy numbers contribute to the fact that New York's state budget has been late every year for the last two decades. Another problem is that the deadline of April 1 is too early -- it's before the estimates of tax revenue from April 15. The Legislature should move that date back a bit, but only as part of a larger package of reforms.
Real budget reform, like any real reform in Albany, will be difficult. There are ways that New York's sneaky state leaders can derail even their own best ideas. But now is still the moment to hope for something better in this election year.
Fixing Albany: Editorials in this series remain online at nytimes.com/albany.
Fixing Albany
