The Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, which is celebrating its 20th season, glanced into its past on Thursday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Most of the program will be repeated tonight.
The principal attraction was ''The Phantom Project: Still/Here Looking On,'' a fascinating but somewhat ungainly revision of ''Still/Here,'' a 1994 production to which Mr. Jones has added a commentary on his choreographic development. There were also two shorter and more satisfying offerings: ''The Gift/No God Logic,'' created in 1987 by Zane, the company's co-founder, who died in 1988, and Mr. Jones's ''There Were . . . ,'' a 2002 revision of a piece from 1993.
In 1994 ''Still/Here'' raised eyebrows because Mr. Jones based his dancers' movements on observations from workshops he had directed for people with life-threatening illnesses. Some audiences and critics found this in bad taste, but the real problem was choreographic sprawl.
Sprawl bedevils ''The Phantom Project: Still/Here Looking On,'' too. Video images of participants in Mr. Jones's original workshops are occasionally projected on a scrim. Their taped voices and onstage comments by Mr. Jones and his cast are also heard describing feelings ranging from resignation to defiance.
The remarks of the people battling illness inspired Mr. Jones to invent movements expressing the tone of their statements, yet seldom literally imitating anything described in them. He also has his company dance choreographic fragments evoking works on many subjects he created since 1973.
Music composed and arranged by Kenneth Frazelle for the first part of the work is performed live by an ensemble headed by the jazz vocalist Cassandra Wilson, whose sighing smoky voice sings lyrics expressing the feelings of the people in Mr. Jones's workshops. Daniel Bernard Roumain rearranged the music for the work's prologue. The final section blends an electronic score by Vernon Reid with live music for electric guitar played by Mr. Reid.
The program's other dances were more concise. In Zane's ''The Gift/No God Logic'' austere steps became gradually more elaborate.
''There Were . . . '' began and ended with audible gasps by the dancers, and Mr. Jones recited a text about people, now departed, who ''must have gone somewhere.'' Liz Prince's costumes, some white, some pink, gave the production an airy look. The accompanying score, John Cage's ''Six Melodies for Violin and Keyboard,'' combined delicate string melodies with piano sounds. The choreography, too, was often delicate, and there were moments when groups appeared to be playing gentle children's games or assembling for courtly dances from long ago.
DANCE REVIEW
