In his speech at Georgetown University on Thursday in defense of American intelligence gathering, George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, claimed a clear, unequivocal victory against the black market nuclear proliferation network run by the Pakistani scientist A. Q. Khan.
''Malaysian authorities have shut down one of the network's largest plants,'' Mr. Tenet said.
He was referring to the Scomi Precision Engineering installation here in Shah Alam, which made centrifuge components found on a ship seized last October on its way to Libya. His assertion was categorical.
Then he repeated it during the question and answer period after the speech, saying that ''the Malaysian government has closed the facility.''
But he appears to have been mistaken.
''It's business as usual,'' said Rohaida Ali Badaruddin, director of communications for the plant's parent, the Scomi Group, as she led a group of reporters, mostly Malaysian, through the clean, modern, air-conditioned facility on Friday afternoon. ''We are still doing our manufacturing,'' she said, ''milling, turning, cutting.''
An American intelligence official said Friday that Mr. Tenet's claim was a result of an editing error.
The intelligence official said Malaysian authorities had indeed shut down the production of centrifuges within the Scomi facility. ''That part of the plant that was producing centrifuge parts is not now doing it,'' the official said, adding that the error had been made by those who drafted Mr. Tenet's speech and did not reflect faulty intelligence.
Malaysian authorities said on Friday that they had taken no actions to shut down the plant, and plant officials said that nothing had been shut down, that it had reduced the number of employees because the contract for the centrifuge components had been filled last August.
There was also Mr. Tenet's description of the plant as one of the nuclear network's largest. That, too, seems as if it might have been inaccurate -- unless the network itself was not very substantial.
At its peak, Scomi Precision Engineering, a two-year-old company, had 40 employees and less than $10 million in sales.
The parts seized on their way to Libya were ''not very sophisticated, not very complicated,'' said Che Lokman Che Omar, the factory manager. ''I have made more difficult parts many times before.''
Many of the parts produced at the plant are ''dual use'' items, which means they have legitimate uses as well as illegal ones. If someone came along today and wanted parts like the ones halted on the way to Libya, the company could make them, Mr. Che Omar and Ms. Badaruddin agreed. And it might not have any reason to be suspicious.
Company officials were certainly not suspicious the first time around.
In 2001 a Dubai company, General Technical Industries, approached Scomi Group, a chemical, oil and gas trading and manufacturing company, with an order for 14 centrifuge components. The Dubai company was represented by a Sri Lanka native who lives here, B. S. A. Tahir. He told Scomi that the parts were for an oil-and-gas-company client of his, Scomi officials said.
Scomi was expanding and decided to use this opportunity to set up Scomi Precision Engineering to manufacture high-precision machine components, Ms. Badaruddin said.
Scomi and General Technical Industries signed a two-year contract, worth about $3.5 million, in December 2001, and operations began at a 33,000-square-foot site in the huge industrial park in this city some 15 miles north of Kuala Lumpur. The plant bought modern milling, turning and tooling machines from Britain, Japan, France and Taiwan.
It also needed the raw materials, and bought aluminum from a German company, Bikar Metalle, through its Singapore subsidiary Bikar Metal Asia, Scomi officials said.
As the investigation into the nuclear network has expanded, and Scomi's involvement has become publicly known, the Malaysian government has sought to shift the focus to its archrival Singapore. On Thursday, government officials told local journalists of Bikar Metal Asia's role in procuring raw materials, and on Friday the Singaporean connection was splashed on the front page of The New Straits Times, a major Malay daily controlled by the ruling party.
In Singapore on Friday, the managing director of Bikar Metal Asia, Thorsten Heise, confirmed that his company had sold aluminum tubes to Scomi Precision Engineering. But he said Bikar had had no idea what they were going to be used for.
Scomi officials, likewise, said they had had no idea where the components they were making were going to end up.
The last shipment to General Technical was last August, two months before the seizure of the ship and the start of the investigation. The company invited reporters to tour the plant to show that it had nothing to hide, Ms. Badaruddin said. The invitation was striking for its rarity in a region where corporate and public officials are usually unconcerned about public accountability.
It was in November that the C.I.A. notified Malaysian intelligence about the seizure of the parts headed to Libya, the Malaysian police chief said on Wednesday.
But no investigators contacted the company until Malaysian officials did so two weeks ago, Mr. Che Omar, the plant manager, said. No one from the C.I.A. or any other American entity has been to the plant or talked to company officials, he said.
