A bomb exploded inside a crowded subway train during the morning rush on Friday, killing at least 39 people and wounding more than 130. No one claimed responsibility for the bombing though senior government officials, including President Vladimir V. Putin, said they suspected that it was the latest in a series of terrorist attacks linked to the war in Chechnya.
The bomb, said to have been hidden in a backpack or bag, ravaged the second car of the train as it left the Avtozavodskaya station in southeast Moscow and headed toward the city's center at 8:45 a.m. The blast shattered the train's windows, rent its metal seats and bars and hurled bodies and body parts from the train.
Hundreds of passengers, some of them bloodied and dazed, had to stagger hundreds of yards through smoke-filled tunnels to reach safety. As they emerged, they described a scene of fear, confusion and carnage deep beneath the heart of the Russian capital.
''I saw five bodies near the tracks and some metal parts,'' said Anna Kolmykova, 51, who was riding two or three cars behind the one where the bomb went off. Police officers who happened to be in her car helped escort the survivors out.
''Those officers warned us about the bodies and pieces of metal so that we would not stumble,'' she said, her face smeared with black soot.
As is typical in such attacks, no one came forward to take responsibility, and it was not immediately clear if the explosives had been left on the train or if the blast was the work of a suicide bomber.
Mr. Putin, appearing with President Ilham Aliyev of Azerbaijan at the close of a previously scheduled visit, responded indirectly, as he did on Dec. 9 when a suicide bomber killed herself and five others in front of the National Hotel, only a few hundred feet from the Kremlin.
Mr. Putin called for an intensified international effort to combat terrorism. ''It is the plague of the 21st century,'' he said in televised remarks.
Russia has endured a wave of terrorist bombings stemming from the long, devastating war in Chechnya, but never before has so deadly an attack struck the city's subway.
In his remarks, Mr. Putin blamed that wave of terror on Aslan Maskhadov, the separatist leader who served as the president of Chechnya from 1997 until the outbreak of the second war there in 1999.
Still, it is not clear who placed the bomb on the train, or whether it was a suicide attack. But it was clearly intended to inflict maximum bloodshed and exploit the darkest fears of Muscovites. The Metro, as the subway is called, is the world's busiest, with more than eight million passengers a day, normally a source of city pride.
''This makes me feel just awful,'' said Ilya Blokhin, 31, a doctor who was aboard the train. ''If they are starting to blow up Metro trains, what is next?''
Mr. Maskhadov, the Chechen leader, has denied ordering attacks, and his chief envoy, Akhmed Zakayev, denounced the one on Friday in a telephone interview from London. Mr. Zakayev said Mr. Maskhadov could not control those in Chechnya who would organize attacks.
''These actions in Moscow against civilians are in no way of benefit to us,'' he said.
As he has before, Mr. Putin ruled out any talks with Chechen separatists, despite calls from Mr. Zakayev and others for a negotiated settlement. ''Russia does not negotiate with terrorists,'' Mr. Putin said. ''Russia eliminates them.''
Mr. Putin's remarks -- at once determined, but also indirect -- appeared to have been intended to minimize any political damage from the continued violence and fear that gnaws at the country.
Mr. Putin, who rose to power as the second war in Chechnya unfolded, is seeking re-election on March 14. While he is universally expected to win, he finds himself presiding over a conflict that continues to exact a deadly toll far beyond the battered Chechen region, which is in the Caucasus area of southern Russia.
With the bombing on Friday, there have been 13 terrorist attacks in the last year, most of them suicide bombings. More than 260 people have died in the attacks, including at least 62 in Moscow.
Irina M. Khakamada, a former member of Russia's Parliament who has mounted a quixotic presidential campaign, said the Kremlin's military and political efforts in Chechnya, including a referendum and a presidential election in the region last year, had proved ineffective at ending the violence.
''The peace process that is under way is not guaranteeing people's security,'' she said in a radio interview on Ekho Moskvy.
As they have after each of the terrorist attacks here, officials announced that they had increased security at airports and at subway and railroad stations across Moscow and in other major cities, including St. Petersburg. But there appears to be little the authorities can do to halt the attacks, especially those carried out by bombers willing to die.
According to officials, witnesses reported seeing a man and a woman who appeared to be from the Caucasus, carrying suspicious bags. It is not clear whether the bombing was a suicide attack, but the authorities later released a composite sketch of the man, suggesting that he was not among those killed.
Some politicians called for tougher measures. Dmitry O. Rogozin, the new deputy speaker of parliament and a leader of the nationalist party Motherland, called for a state of emergency and suggested that next month's election be postponed. Without referring to Chechens directly, he blamed ''an ethnic criminal community'' with loyalists in Moscow.
''The enemy is here, inside,'' he told the Interfax news agency.
Officials warned that the death toll could still rise. By Friday night more than 110 people remained hospitalized, some with grave injuries. At Sklifosovsky Hospital, the city's main critical care center, a typed list of 36 of the wounded hung on the front door.
The bomb struck on the Zamoskvoretskaya Line, also known as the Green Line, which courses through the city center from northwest to southeast. At rush hour the subway is always packed, with passengers jostling shoulder to shoulder.
The force of the bomb -- estimated at the equivalent of 11 pounds of dynamite -- shredded bodies, complicating the grim task of counting the dead, let alone identifying them.
The survivors were evacuated from the stations between which the wrecked train was stopped, Avtozavodskaya and Paveletskaya, pouring out into public squares choked with ambulances and rescue workers. Ms. Kolmykova described passengers trudging out in darkness with their clothes and hair scorched, but said there had been little panic.
The bombing, though, struck a deep chord in her that went beyond simple fear. She said she wanted to emigrate to Italy, which she had visited recently, because Russia had become a country where normal, peaceful life was out of reach.
''I feel so offended for us, for our country,'' she said. ''I want to emigrate not only because of fear. It is a complex of things. Just look at our pensioners. My mother is 77, she is sick and she has to beg for the medicines that she needs and that were prescribed. And in Italy I saw 90-year-olds happy, laughing and dancing.''
