Describing his assignment covering Howard Dean's presidential campaign, a correspondent for the Knight-Ridder newspaper chain, Tom Fitzgerald, likened it to ''ghoul patrol.''
''It's like you're a group of sick people, on the sidewalk, as some guy's up on the roof, waiting to jump: 'Oh, my God! When's it going to happen?' '' Mr. Fitzgerald said as the campaign bus, only half-filled, rumbled through the snow-covered streets here on Thursday night.
Even though Mr. Fitzgerald said he believed Dr. Dean could pull off a resurrection, he added, ''You're just waiting to hear the splatter.''
What once had the spirit of a rock 'n' roll tour now has one more of a funeral procession that has lost its way, reporters with Dr. Dean said.
Until three weeks ago -- when Dr. Dean began to lose steam in Iowa -- they were with the man to beat, had a ticket to covering the fall race against President Bush and, in the event of a Dean victory, a possible assignment in the White House. Those hopes are on life support.
It is doubtful that many of Dr. Dean's more passionate supporters will lament the fates of the reporters covering the candidate, since they frequently blame them for many of his troubles. Dr. Dean's campaign, which regularly exhorts the faithful to ignore the pundits, writes off dire news media sentiment as, in the words of one senior strategist, ''a trailing indicator, not a leading one.''
Still, the fortunes of Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, and the journalists assigned to him are intertwined in ways that go beyond dashed dreams of book contracts and plum assignments to affect the Dean campaign, analysts said, in ways that could make a comeback extremely difficult.
''He has to change his story line and the only way he can do that is to win something, and, of course, that's the rub,'' said Bill Carrick, a strategist for Representative Richard A. Gephardt, who left the race after placing fourth in Iowa. ''It's very hard to win something when you've got the smell of loser about you, and you get less coverage, and the coverage you get is that you are in deep, deep, deep trouble.''
One example of the twinned fates can be found in the lot of Felix Schein, an MSNBC reporter following Dr. Dean's campaign since August. Before Iowa, when MSNBC would present its lineup of political stories, he said, ''I was always first. The day after Iowa, I was second.'' These days, Mr. Schein said, he is at times not even in the lineup, which focuses more on Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts or Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
Bad as that is for Mr. Schein, it also has an impact on Dr. Dean, who gets less television exposure.
Newspaper reporters also said they had suddenly found they no longer have such an easy time getting onto the front page.
Thursday was an exception. Dr. Dean made big news with an e-mail message to supporters saying that his campaign had to win in Wisconsin on Feb. 17 to continue. That helped with fund-raising, but raised questions about his overall prospects.
Roy Neel, Dr. Dean's new campaign manager -- who came aboard after Dr. Dean's loss in New Hampshire -- called the coverage ''too horse-racy.'' He added, ''If your message and what you're talking about is getting drowned out by these other things, it makes it tough.''
Reporters on the bus disagreed, noting that similar complaints were not made during the second half of 2003, when the campaign seemed thrilled with a run of articles that promoted its leading status and financial heft. ''When it was widely reported over the summer that they were the front-runners in the race, they took advantage of that to raise additional money and to build out their organization,'' said Glen Johnson, a political correspondent with The Boston Globe. ''It waxes and wanes for everybody.''
Mr. Johnson is one of a dwindling number of reporters traveling with Dr. Dean. Before the Iowa caucuses, the campaign media entourage had so many journalists that two buses could hardly accommodate them all. Now reporters on his single bus are happy to have two seats to themselves. On a Thursday trip from Detroit to here, a second, 27-seat press plane held fewer than a dozen passengers. On Friday night the media entourage left here on one plane.
Most network television correspondents are gone -- Dan Harris, of ABC News, Major Garrett, of Fox News Channel, and Candy Crowley, the senior CNN political correspondent -- with only producers traveling on the bus. The Associated Press does not have a full-time correspondent with the campaign -- dispatching, instead, local reporters to campaign events -- robbing Dr. Dean, at least for now, of a regular conduit to the wire service's many subscribers.
If that sort of diminished coverage continues, analysts and experts said, the Dean campaign could face still more trouble, especially since it has not been able to afford any national advertising for more than a week. The campaign said it would start running ads here early next week.
''An individual is trying to move several millions of people in the direction he wants them to go,'' said Bill Kovach, chairman of the Committee of Concerned Journalists and a former Washington bureau chief of The New York Times. ''You can't do that if you don't have a megaphone that reaches several millions of people. Every time you lose a megaphone you're losing part of your opportunity.''
Mandy Grunwald, a media strategist for Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who dropped out earlier this week, said she could attest to that. ''It's devastating,'' she said. ''Once they pull your reporters and your cameras, you're done, it becomes self-fulfilling. They're saying you're not a choice.''
Dr. Dean is not nearly at that point. He is still traveling with roughly 25 reporters, including one from The New York Times, down from a peak of roughly 50 before Iowa. At an upscale coffee shop here on Friday, Dr. Dean's press entourage matched, or slightly outnumbered, the number of voters.
All the same, at times it seems Dr. Dean's staff would just as soon see the press go away. Grim metaphors are everywhere. Describing how it felt to return to the Dean campaign after its big defeats, John F. Harris of The Washington Post said, ''It's like when you meet somebody who had a death in the family. Are you supposed to say something, acknowledge it, or pretend it's normal?''
And the jokes can be relentless.
Offering one of his favorites, Rick Pearson, a political correspondent with The Chicago Tribune, said, ''I was half toying with keeping a fork in my pocket and a thermometer -- or a jar of jam, for when he's toast.''
Such dark humor became so intense during a round of cards on the campaign plane on Wednesday night -- somebody, for instance, folded ''faster than Governor Dean'' -- that a campaign spokesman, Jay Carson, laid down a new rule: ''No gallows humor within 15 feet of me,'' he said, only half jokingly.
Striking an upbeat note, he added, ''Over the course of a couple of weeks everyone's opinion of something can change, drastically. One can only imagine the gallows humor on John Kerry's bus in early January.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NEWS MEDIA
