A federal judge in California ruled yesterday that the chemicals used to execute inmates by lethal injection there and in many other states do not cause undue suffering.
One of the three chemicals involved, pancuronium bromide, has been challenged in at least nine cases in the last several months. The decision yesterday was the first in these cases to rule on whether use of the drug was humane.
Defense lawyers argue that the chemical may mask the inmate's suffering. It paralyzes the skeletal muscles but does not affect the brain or nerves. A person injected with it is conscious but cannot move or speak. It is possible, defense lawyers say, that an inmate could remain awake as he suffocates.
In the decision yesterday, the judge, Jeremy Fogel, of Federal District Court in San Jose, Calif., ruled that the chemical, marketed as Pavulon, had a legitimate purpose in executions.
In California and about 30 other states, pancuronium bromide is the second drug in a three-chemical sequence. The first is sodium pentothal, a so-called ultra-short-acting barbiturate. It can be effective for only minutes. In surgery, it is used to induce rather than maintain anesthesia. Doctors like it because patients who have immediate complications awaken quickly enough to be saved.
The third is potassium chloride, which stops the heart and causes excruciating pain if the prisoner is conscious.
All three chemicals are administered by prison workers who generally have no medical training. Doctors may not take part in executions under most codes of medical ethics.
Veterinarians typically use a single lethal dose of a longer-acting barbiturate called sodium pentobarbital in animal euthanasia.
Lawyers for the inmate who challenged the chemicals in California, Kevin Cooper, argued that pancuronium bromide ''prevents movement and thus prevents observers from knowing whether the condemned person is experiencing great pain.''
Judge Fogel accepted an unnamed government expert's assessment that the initial injection of sodium pentothal made the possibility that an inmate would remain awake as he suffocated extremely unlikely. There is, he wrote, citing the expert, ''only approximately a 0.00006 percent probability that a condemned inmate given the dose would be conscious, and able to experience pain, after a period of five minutes.''
Lawyers for Mr. Cooper said several states ban veterinary use of pancuronium bromide. ''The lethal injection they intend to use has been banned in the euthanasia of animals,'' said Lanny J. Davis, a lawyer at Orrick, Herrington &amp; Sutcliffe.
A spokesman for the California attorney general's office, Nathan Barankin, said Judge Fogel's ruling was legally correct.
Other courts that have considered recent challenges to the use of the chemical focused on a technical question about the procedural form in which the challenge must be brought. The Supreme Court will soon rule on the procedural point.
Deborah W. Denno, a law professor at Fordham University who published a study of the chemicals in lethal injections in 2002, said Judge Fogel's ruling was open to question. ''The drug seems to have no other purpose than to keep a person still,'' Professor Denno said.
Mr. Cooper is scheduled to be executed on Tuesday. He was convicted in 1985 of murdering a married couple, their 10-year-old daughter and their daughter's 11-year-old friend. On Jan. 30, Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger declined to grant clemency.
