The telecommunications equipment maker Ericsson surprised markets on Friday by reporting its first quarterly profit since 2001, and said that worldwide demand for its products may grow in 2004.
The company, which is based in Stockholm, reported a slim net profit of 142 million Swedish kronor ($19.4 million) for the fourth quarter, after a loss of 8.3 billion kronor in the period a year ago. The company posted a fourth-quarter pretax profit, which does not include restructuring and one-time items, of 5.5 billion kronor, a turnaround from a 2.1 billion kronor loss in the 2003 period.
For the full year, Ericsson narrowed its net loss to 10.84 billion kronor, from 19 billion kronor in 2002.
Profit in the fourth quarter was predominantly a result of cost-cutting, as sales slipped 1 percent from a year ago, to 36.23 billion kronor. Still, fourth-quarter sales were up 29 percent from the third quarter of 2003. Gross profit margins improved to 41.6 percent in the fourth quarter from 32.6 percent a year earlier.
The mobile phone operators who are Ericsson's main customers are starting to reinvest in infrastructure, after cutting costs themselves for most of 2003.
''We believe the market has stabilized,'' Carl-Henric Svanberg, Ericsson's president and chief executive, said in a conference call on the results. The mobile systems market in 2004, he said, ''will be in line with or show slight growth, compared to 2003.'' Ericsson is the latest technology company to report stronger-than-expected earnings in the fourth quarter, as the industry slowly recovers from a three-year slump.
Strong fourth-quarter earnings indicate that Mr. Svanberg, who joined in April 2003, is turning the company around, analysts and investors said. Mr. Svanberg is in the midst of cutting 14,000 jobs, and has overseen the shrinking of other costs.
''The history of Ericsson having disappointing management has been put to rest,'' said Robert Sellar, head of global telecommunications investing at Aberdeen Asset Managers.
Even though demand for telecommunications equipment is picking up, some investors said they saw trouble on the horizon for Ericsson and its peers, because there were too many competitors.
''All the management at telecommunications companies say they see the market growing only slightly, but most say they can grow faster than the market,'' Cesar Zeitouni, fund manager at IT Asset Management in Paris, said. ''How can they all do it?''
The results sent Ericsson's shares to a 12-month high. Shares closed up more than 11 percent on the Stockholm exchange.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
