Prime Minister Ariel Sharon may seek to move settlers from the Gaza Strip to settlements in the West Bank under his plan for ''unilateral disengagement'' from the Palestinians, officials in his office said Friday.
The idea underscores the fact that Mr. Sharon envisions a swap of sorts, giving up most of the Gaza Strip but holding on to large chunks of the West Bank.
Mr. Sharon argues that, with Tel Aviv in sight of some West Bank towns, Israelis would be in danger if Israel turned over the West Bank, which, like Gaza, Israel occupied in the Arab-Israeli war of 1967.
Palestinian officials contend that they could not build a viable state in Gaza and a West Bank broken up by blocs of Israeli settlements.
Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, said any proposal to move settlers from Gaza to the West Bank ''undermines the basic foundation of peace.'' He added, ''The settlements in the West Bank are as much an obstacle to peace as the settlements in Gaza.''
The Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported Friday that Mr. Sharon would seek American approval to expand West Bank settlements that he will argue Israel is sure to annex as part of any eventual peace deal.
Successive American administrations have resisted Israeli settlement in the West Bank and Gaza as impeding peace. Under the road map, the peace initiative sponsored by the Bush administration, Israel is supposed to halt settlement growth, while the Palestinians are supposed to begin dismantling militant groups.
The peace initiative calls for a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza in 2005, defined by borders negotiated between the two sides.
But no substantive negotiations are under way, and Mr. Sharon argues that the Palestinian leadership has not proved a credible partner in bilateral arrangements or talks. Palestinian officials say Mr. Sharon is seeking to avoid negotiations for fear of having to yield too much territory.
Mr. Sharon says he will pursue his unilateral plan only once he judges that the road map has failed. His associates say his plan could go into action over the summer.
Ehud Olmert, the vice prime minister, said he told Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on Thursday that Mr. Sharon's plan would not replace a deal creating a Palestinian state.
Instead, he told Israel Radio, ''We see this as part of the implementation of the understanding acceptable to both us and the Americans.'' He called it a ''station along the way'' to a final agreement.
Mr. Sharon proposes evacuating up to 17 of the 20 Gaza settlements, as well as some isolated West Bank settlements. According to this plan, the barrier Israel is now building against West Bank Palestinians would separate the two populations.
About 7,500 Israeli settlers live in fortified enclaves in the Gaza Strip, among more than 1.2 million Palestinians. In the West Bank, about 230,000 settlers live in 125 settlements, among more than two million Palestinians.
