To unravel our intelligence failures in Iraq, it helps to look back at what was once one of the most secret and scary chapters in U.S.-Soviet relations. An intelligence failure risked nuclear war in the 1980's -- but this was a mistake by the K.G.B.
In 1981, we now know, the K.G.B. chairman said at a secret conference that President Ronald Reagan was planning to launch a nuclear strike against the Soviet Union. The Soviets became consumed with the U.S. threat, just as the Bush administration became obsessed with the Iraq threat. The K.G.B. ordered all its offices in NATO countries to seek evidence of Mr. Reagan's plans for a pre-emptive nuclear strike, and they code-named the effort RYAN.
Once K.G.B. officers knew what Moscow wanted, they found ''evidence'' everywhere of Mr. Reagan's secret plans for a nuclear strike -- confirming Moscow's worst fears.
Then NATO held a nuclear launching exercise in November 1983, playing into the Soviet alarm. The K.G.B. mistakenly reported to Moscow that NATO was on an actual alert. The Soviets put their own forces on alert and braced for a nuclear attack.
It was ''one of the worst nuclear scares since the Cuban missile crisis -- and Washington didn't even know it until after it was over,'' James Risen and Milt Bearden write in their terrific book about the spy wars, ''The Main Enemy.''
The parallels between our Iraq intelligence mess and RYAN are telling. When a country's capital is in the grip of hard-line ideologues who demand a certain kind of intelligence, they'll get it. The result is an intelligence failure. And, more fundamentally, it's a political failure by the top leaders themselves.
So to me, the administration's recent effort to blame the intelligence community for the Iraq mess is as misleading as the drive to war itself. Nothing the C.I.A. did was as harmful as the way administration officials systematically misled Americans about the incomplete and often contradictory mountain of intelligence.
For example, in September 2002 the Defense Intelligence Agency issued a still-classified report saying ''there is no reliable information'' on whether Iraq had chemical weapons. Yet in the same month Donald Rumsfeld was telling a House committee the opposite: ''We do know that the Iraqi regime currently has chemical and biological weapons of mass destruction, and we do know they are currently pursuing nuclear weapons.''
I've been canvassing people in the intelligence community, and one person at D.I.A. tells me: ''I never saw anything that justified the idea that Saddam was an immediate threat, or that we knew with certainty what he had. Everything I saw was laced with 'possibles' and 'probables'; in fact, what I saw about those aluminum tubes, for instance, seemed to me to leave the impression that they probably were not nuclear-related.''
Lt. Col. Dale Davis, a former Marine counterintelligence officer now at the Virginia Military Institute, says he hears from his former intelligence colleagues that top officials ''cherry-picked the intel for the most damning, and often least reliable, tidbits and produced alarming conclusions -- the 45-minute chemical attack scenario, the African uranium and the Al Qaeda connection. The C.I.A. never supported these assertions.''
Another person with long experience in military intelligence put it this way: ''Everyone knew from the start that there was no smoking gun and the assessment was based on speculation, anecdote and outdated information, not current evidence. We didn't have the 'humint' [human intelligence] capability to confirm anything one way or the other.''
The administration could have been truthful, saying that the intelligence about W.M.D. was incomplete but alarming -- and that in any case Saddam was a monster. Instead, officials from the president down warned us that unless we went to war, we risked a mushroom cloud at home.
That was worse than an intelligence failure. That was dishonesty.
Here's an update on Srey Mom, one of the teenage girls whose freedom I purchased in Cambodia. After fleeing her village and returning to the brothel, Srey Mom met this week with my interpreter and aid workers. She agreed to try again to start over, and she has moved to Phnom Penh. She is living with a family and will learn to be either a hairdresser or a model (details can be found at nytimes.com/kristofresponds). So maybe fairy-tale endings are possible.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com
