The American military has learned from people close to Iraq's most powerful spiritual leader that accounts of an assassination attempt against him on Thursday were ''a fabrication,'' a senior military official said Friday.
Contradictory reports about a possible attack on the cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, in the southern holy city of Najaf continued to circulate throughout the country.
The American official said the military had no further information on how reports of an attack began. Early indications of an attack came from the spokesman for a prominent politician and from security guards for the ayatollah, the reclusive leader of Iraq's 15 million Shiites.
The official added, though, that the American military did not have ''eyes on the ground to say definitely what happened.'' The politician, Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an independent Shiite member of the Iraqi Governing Council, said in a telephone interview on Friday that he could not confirm or deny reports of an assassination attempt. On Thursday night, his spokesman, Ali al-Shapoot, told The New York Times that there had been an attack on the ayatollah, who is calling for immediate direct elections in Iraq against the wishes of the Bush administration.
Some security officials for Ayatollah Sistani also told news organizations on Thursday night that there had been an attempt on the ayatollah's life. Radio Sawa, a regional station operated by the American government, reported earlier in the day that threats had been made against him, and that the cleric had moved to a safe location. The radio report was possibly the first public mention of a threat of some kind.
Dr. Rubaie, a neurologist, said Friday that ''an incident'' had taken place on Thursday morning that involved Ayatollah Sistani. When Dr. Rubaie went to the cleric's small home in Najaf in the afternoon, he said, the ayatollah appeared ''fit'' and ''not shaken.''
''There was a heightened sense of security at his house,'' Dr. Rubaie said, adding that a small metal gate had been erected at the entrance to the narrow alleyway leading to the ayatollah's home.
The mouth of the alleyway, just blocks from the golden-domed Shrine of Ali, one of the holiest pilgrimage sites for Shiites, is usually watched by a couple of plainclothes guards. Ayatollah Sistani, 73, rarely leaves his home. He occasionally receives worshipers, politicians and other religious leaders.
A reporter for The Associated Press who visited the alleyway on Friday noted that there was nothing unusual there. When asked how he had learned about the incident, Mr. Rubaie said he did not want to answer and abruptly cut off the telephone interview.
There appeared to be some confusion on Friday among Ayatollah Sistani's representatives as to what had happened the previous day. Nooraddin Mousawi, the brother of the ayatollah's representative in Baghdad, said in an interview on Friday that the Baghdad office could not confirm or deny whether there had been an attack and was awaiting word from Najaf. Later, the office in Najaf released a statement saying that ''there was absolutely no truth in these reports,'' Reuters reported.
Hamid al-Kaffaf, the ayatollah's representative in Lebanon, told Al Jazeera, the Arab-language television network, that no one from the ayatollah's office had confirmed the assassination attempt. He said the ayatollah had increased security precautions in the last two weeks because his office had received ''confused information'' that there might be attacks on him.
He added that the people spreading rumors of the attack were trying to interfere with the imminent visit of a United Nations team to assess the feasibility of direct elections for a transitional national assembly. Ayatollah Sistani has called for such elections by June 30, the date for the transfer of sovereignty, but said he might back down from his demands if the United Nations team says holding quick elections is impossible.
Dr. Rubaie said the ayatollah's office might be playing down the incident ''so he will not be the focus for future attempts.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE AYATOLLAH
